                                                          Mr Parkinson
C W P Newell
Director, Casework
                                                          Mr Enzor                            CPS
                                                          For information.
                                                                                              Headquarters
                                                          CWPN                                50 Ludgate Hill
                                                          10 .1.00                            London EC4M 7EX

                                                                               Direct Line:   0207 796 8553
                                                                               Switchboard:   0207 796 8000
 r                                                                               Facsimile:   0207 796 8G80
     The Honourable Mr Justice Hooper                                               DX No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
     Royal Courts o f Justice
     Strand
     London
     WC2A 2LL

                                                                         10 January 2000
 L                                                 J




     R v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

     In response to the letter o f 7 January 2000 from Mr James Lewis, I enclose a copy o f the Joint
     Opinion o f Mr Garetli Williams QC (as he then was) and Mr Peter Birts QC, dated 6 August
     1990, concerning the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster. On behalf of the Crown
     Prosecution Service, I am content to waive any privilege that attaches to the Joint Opinion, to
     enable you to disclose it to the parties in the current prosecution o f Messrs Duckenfield and
     Murray under such conditions as you may think appropriate.

     I note from Mr Lewis’ letter that you may wish to redact the Joint Opinion. I do not make
     any proposals in this context, save only to suggest that you may care to refer in particular to
     paragraphs 69-77 inclusive and 92-94 inclusive.

     I have consulted Lord Williams QC about my intention to disclose the Joint Opinion to you
     and he is content with that course o f action. For the avoidance o f any doubt, I should
     emphasise that I consulted Lord Williams in his capacity as a member of the Bar and joint
     author o f the Opinion, rather than in his present capacity as HM Attorney General. As a
     matter o f courtesy, I shall also ensure that Mr Peter Birts QC is informed o f the disclosure.

     I have not written separately to Mr Lewis, nor to those representing Messrs Duckenfield and
     Murray.



                     y
     C W P NEWELL
07/01 '00 16:27 FAX                    CPS CASEWORK DIR              @002




                                          RE:



                      THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALT. fiTanrmi DISASTER




                                    JOINT OPINION




                            Crown Prosecution Service
                                 Headquarters
                            4/12 Queen Annes Gate
                                   London
07/01    00 16:27 FAX [               CPS CASEWORK DIR                     @003




                                   JOINT OPINION
                                           I


         Introduction                       !

         1.    On 15th April 1989 the worst disaster in British football

        history occurred inside the Hillsborough Stadium at Sheffield

        where Liverpool were playing Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup

        semi-final. 95 people died and over 400 were injured as a

        result of gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens

        immediately behind the goal at the western (Leppings Lane) end
        of the ground.

               We are instructed to advise whether there exists

        sufficient evidence to justify bringing criminal proceedings

        against any of the organisations or individuals concerned.



        2.    We have been provided with the Interim Report of the

        Inquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor published in August 1989

        ("the Taylor Report") and the report to the Director of Public

        Prosecutions of the criminal investigation carried out by the

        West Midlands Police ("the West Midlands Report").



        3.    Our views were sought at an early stage on the scope of

        the investigation and the format of the report, and the

    material which has been placed before us is very extensive, in

    addition to the reports mentioned, we have been provided with

    the bulk of the documentation placed before Lord Justice

    Taylor's Inquiry, the full transcript of the evidence given at
    the Inquiry, and a large quantity ;of visual evidence in the
    form of photographs and video film.


                                        1
07/01 '00 16:27 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                      @004




             We have also visited Hillsbbrough stadium and have had

       the opportunity of seeing for ourselves the physical

       characteristics of the ground whjich played such an important
       part in the disaster.



       4*   Throughout our consideration of this case we have kept

       constantly in mind the appalling scale of the tragedy for the

       bereaved and. those injured, some of whom suffered devastating

      psychological injuries from which they are unlikely to

       recover. We have borne in mind, too, the strong feelings of

       anger and bitterness which the disaster has provoked within

       the Liverpool community and elsewhere, and the important role

      in the pursuit of justice which criminal proceedings are

      perceived to have by those aggrieved*



      5.    In the light of the prominent part played by the South

      Yorkshire Police in the disaster, we have reminded ourselves

      in particular that police officers are in no different

      category to others in a criminal investigation. We should say

      that we are fully satisfied that' that has- been the approach of

      the West Midlands Police, who have conducted a meticulous

      investigation in which no stone has been left unturned.



      6.    Given the serious nature of jthe criminal liability under

      consideration, however, it is essential that the available

      material should be examined in ah entirely dispassionate
      manner. This we have tried to do
 uu ie:j7 rAX                 CPS CASEWORK DIR                       ®
                                     '
                                     I
                                     I

The facts
7,     A notable feature of the disaster is the absence of

conflict of fact as to what happened at Hillsborough. This

consistency of evidence was remarked on by the Taylor Inquiry

(see the Taylor Report para 113). Further, the criminal

investigation, for all its thoroughness, has not significantly

added to or contradicted Lord Justice Taylor's findings. In

our judgment, therefore, the Taylor analysis of the facts is

as firm a base as any from which to approach the questxon of

criminal liability and where necessary we shall make reference

in this Opinion to the Report an<p its Appendices.



finntmarv

8.     At 2.52 pm on 15th April 1989 one of the exit gates at the

 Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough Stadium was opened on

 the instruction of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the

 Commander responsible for policing the match. The purpose was

 to relieve unprecedented overcrowding and crushing at the

 turnstiles caused by a build up of supporters arriving after

 2,30 pm for the semi-final due to kick off at 3 pm. In the

 ensuing 5 minutes, some 2,000 supporters passed through the

 gate and entered the tunnel under the West stand giving access

 to the central pens of the terrace. Those pens were already

 overfull because of the physical layout of the terrace and the

 uncontrolled way in which supporters were allowed to enter

 them. Gross overcrowding and crushing occurred. Moreover, the

     intense pressure exerted by the additional influx caused the

     collapse of a crush barrier situated near the front of pen 3.
07/01   00 16:27 FAX [               CPS CASEWORK DIR                    ® 006


                                          i
                                          I
                                          I
        Supporters wex'© hurled down into the front of the pen and

        crushed up against the low wall and the perimeter wire fence

        above it. Many died from suffocation and crushing injuries;

        some were trampled on. The crushing was not immediately

        recognised, partly because those trampled upon were not

        visible behind the wall/ partly because police operational

        orders prohibited officers on the perimeter track from opening

        the perimeter gates without permission from a senior officer,

        and partly because the crushing and distress was not expected.

        The response of the police was therefore slow. Even when the

        nature and extent of the emergency was appreciated and the

        perimeter gates were opened, the small number of gates and the
                                        i
        height of the fence itself made rescue and evacuation a

        hopelessly difficult task.
             The build up outside the ground which led to the opening

        of the exit gate was due to the layout, numbers, designation

        and marking of the turnstile entrances at the Leppings Lane

        end, and to a loss of police control of the crowd as
        supporters became desperate to get in before the kick-off.



        9.   It will be clear from the above summary that the disaster

        had three separate causative elements which need to be

        examined: the layout of the ground; the opening of the exit

        gate; and the build up outside the ground.




                                           i
07/01   00 16:27 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                      ® 007




        The layout of the around

        10.   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club ("the Club") was formed

        in 1867 and moved to the Hillsborough ground In 1899. in the

        90 years that elapsed before the disaster it was successfully

        used for numerous sporting events, including FA Cup semi­

        finals, international matches and 3 World Cup matches. Very

        large crowds were accommodated, the record being over 72,000

        in 1934. Significant changes were made to the layout of the
                                         I
        ground over the years and these need to be understood.



        11.   The present South stand was built in 1913, the Spion Kop

        (at the Eastern end) was added in 1914, and the West stand was

        built in 1965. Before then the Leppings Lane end was entirely

        terraced. Until fairly recently, not only were there no

        perimeter fences between the terraces and the pitch, there

        were relatively few crush barriers on the terraces themselves.

        The plan at Appendix 4 to the Taylor Report shows the

        arrangement of the barriers at the Leppings Lane end.



        12.   Before 1979 there were continuous barriers along the

        front, with two intermittent rows of barriers behind (coloured

        black on the plan). There were no "radial" barriers, that is
                                            j


        fences running at right angles to the crush barriers from back

        to front of the terrace so as to iform pens. The perimeter

        fences were installed in 1977 as a response to the hooliganism

        and pitch invasions of the 1970s.




                                       5
07/01   00 16:27 FAX                 CPS CASEWORK DIR                     ® 008




        13.    In 1978 Dr Eas-twood, a highjly experienced civil and

        structural engineer and a principal of the firm of Eastwood

        and Partners who had been advising the Club on minor matters

        since the 1950s, was formally retained to act on the Club’s

        behalf in its dealings with the local authority, then the

        South Yorkshire County Council, but which later became the

        Sheffield City Council ("the Council"). The Safety of Sports

        Ground Act 1975 had recently been passed and it was necessary

        for the Club to take expert advice if it was to receive a

        Safety Certificate under the Act from the Council. Dr Eastwood

        advised that further barriers should be installed in order to

        comply with the Home Office "Green Guide" then in force and

        the additional barriers shown and marked blue on the plan at

        Appendix 4 were installed in 1979.



        14.   The Council set up an Officer Working Party consisting of

        representatives of the police, the fire services, and the

        Council1s building surveyors' division and legal and

        administration department and, as a result of inspections and

        consultations with the Club and Dr Eastwood, a Safety

        Certificate was issued for the ground in 1979.



        15.   In 1981, on the occasion of the semi-final between

        Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers, a serious

        crushing incident at the Leppings Lane end led to further

        changes to the layout of the terrace. Late arrivals who surged

        forward when a goal was scored at the Kop end caused the

        crushing of several supporters at the front of-the terrace.


                                         6
/01 '00 16:27 FAX ([             CPS CASEWORK DIR                     0009




   There were injuries but no deaths. This incident, the further

    significance of which will be returned to, prompted the police

    to suggest that it had been caused by the sideways movement,

    of supporters to positions behind the goal, and that the

    installation of radial fences would prevent such movement as

    well as providing segregation of supporters of opposing teams

    who could thus be accommodated on the same terrace«



    16.   The police view was accepted by the Club and the Officer

    Working Party, and the two radial fences shown pale green in

    Appendix 4 were installed in 1981. The terrace was thereby

    divided into three pens, with neither forward nor sideways

    movement by supporters being possible once a pen became full.

    The fences had gates at the top end to be locked once the pens

    had filled up.



    17.    Further changes to the layout in 1985 and 1986 resulted

    in the addition of two more radial fences, the consequential

    removal of some posts and rails, and the removal of a barrier

    at the top of the terrace near the entrance tunnel, Barrier

    144. The result of the addition of the central radial fence

    was to divide the pen immediately behind the goal into the two

    pens 3 and 4. These were to be the scene of the disaster in

    April 1989-


    18.    All these changes were discussed between the police, the

    Club and Dr Eastwood, and the Officer Working Party approved

    the removal of Barrier 144 in August 1986, by which time Mr


                                      7!
        07/01   00 16:28 FAX                 CPS CASEWORK DIR                          ®010




                                                 I
                Bownes had become the Licensing Cj>£ficer responsible for the

                Safety Certificate on behalf of the Council-



                19.    Alterations to the turnstiles and concourse of the

                Leppings Lane entrance were also made at this time in the

                interests of segregation. To this end Dr Eastwood had

                suggested a plan for separate access to the North stand, to

                each end of the West stand, and ,to each of the three central

                pens by means of separate banks of turnstiles. This plan was

                not adopted for financial reasons, but it seems that separate

                entrances would have enabled the numbers of supporters

                entering each of the pens to be monitored by mechanical or
I
  i
                computerised counting at the turnstiles. As it was, there was

                no numerical monitoring or other means of limiting the numbers

                of supporters entering the penned areas, including the popular

■               pens 3 and 4 immediately behind| the goal.



                 20-    The effect was that these preas were likely to attract

1               more than their proper share of the 10,100 supporters allowed
ITT


                 into the Leppings Lane end under the Safety Certificate and

 ’’             there was no physical way of preventing this. All had to be

    1           left to visual monitoring by       trie police and the Club stewards

                 as the supporters took their places inside the ground.

'"
 iI
  «                                            '    I
                 21.             The police had requested the removal of Barrier 144 in

 :S             pen 3 for two reasons: first, to assist the flow of supporters

-n              into the pens and, secondly,       to assist evacuation through the

                  tunnel in an emergency. Unhappily, as later events showed, the


                                                    ,8

    1      •
      07/01 '00 16:28 FAX                  CPS CASEWORK DIR                    g)011




            first: purpose was all too successfully achieved. A further
 1                                            i
            consequence, however, unappreciated at the time, was to

            increase the capacity of pen 3.


            22.     The Safety Certificate should have been amended to take

            account of -these changes, which the Club notified to the

            Council in accordance with its statutory obligations. Equally

             importantly, it should have contained maximum figures for

             individual pens.


             23.    The Certificate was not amended and maximum figures were

             not inserted partly because Mr Bownes, as Chief Licensing

             Officer responsible for 32 other licensing systems, was

             overworked, and partly because Dr Eastwood thought that the

             maximum stated capacity for the Leppings Lane end need not be

             altered providing the police could ensure even distribution of

             the supporters throughout the terrace by leaving the radial

             gates open. The Taylor Report found that the insertion of

             proper maximum figures into the' Safety Certificate might have

             prompted the Club and the police to find some way of limiting

 J           the numbers entering pens 3 and 4- One way would have been the

 ~|          adoption of Dr Eastwood's plan for separate turnstile

              entrances mentioned above.
 "I
 j
              24.    The Taylor Report concluded that the fact that the Safety
. J           Certificate was not amended and individual pen capacities not

              reviewed could not be laid solely at Dr Eastwood’s door. The

              Council was ultimately responsible for the Certificate.


                                                 9
07/01   00 16:28 FAX                  CPS CASEWORK DIR                      ®oi2




         25 -  Entry to pens 3 and 4 wasivia the tunnel running from
                                        i
         the concourse area behind turnstiles A-G, underneath the west

         stand and out into the terrace (see Appendices 1 and 3 to the

         Taylor Report). The effect of the changes to the layout of the

         Leppings Lane terrace, all of whidh were purportedly licensed

         under the Safety Certificate, was that the only means of

         controlling the numbers entering those pens was by cordoning

         off the tunnel access.



         26.    Moreover, it was the policy of the police at semi-finals

         (but not at League matches) .to allow free movement of

         supporters between pens prior to the kick off, when the radial

         gates would be closed and locked. Unless steps were taken to

         control the numbers entering the tunnel access, therefore,

         pens 3 and 4 were liable to become grossly overcrowded at all

         times. The police had accepted de facto responsibility for

         monitoring the pens and their policy of "letting the fans find

         their own level", was severely criticised in the Taylor Report

         (see paras 172 to 183).



         The opening of the exit gate
         27.    as   already stated, the exit gate (Gate C) was opened at

         2.52 pm on the day of the disaster following an instruction

         from Mr Duckenfield. Gate C is situated almost immediately

         opposite the tunnel (see Appendix 1 to the Taylor Report) and

         no steps had been taken to cordon off the tunnel or to divert

         the influx away to the sides of the West stand. The result was


                                            10
07/01   00 16:28 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                      0 013




        that the supporters effectively had nowhere to go but the

        already overcrowded pens 3 and 4,



        28.    As the supporters entered the tunnel some were swept off

        their feet, accelerated by a 1 in 6 downward gradient in the

        tunnel itself. A huge crush built up in pens 3 and 4 and some

        supporters tried to escape on to the pitch. Others climbed
                                          i

        over the radial fences to the side pens where, ironically,

        there was still plenty of room- Later some began to be hauled

        up out of the pens to safety in the West stand.



         29.    The match kicked off just before 3 pm. The evidence

         before the Taylor Inquiry satisfied that tribunal that it was

         the near goal for Liverpool at 3.04 pm that caused a powerful

         surge forward in pen 3, the force of which caused a crush

         barrier at the front of the pen, barrier 124a , to collapse.

         This in turn hurled supporters down against the wall and to

         their deaths, putting yet more pressure on those already

         suffocating at the perimeter wire at the front. The collapse

         of this barrier appears to have been a major factor in the

         deaths, since there were far fewer deaths in pen 4 where no

         barrier collapsed.


         30.   The Taylor Report found that a further contributory cause

         of the collapse of barrier 124A was the removal of barrier 144

         in 1986 already referred to. The absence of the latter
         barrier, in the exceptional conditions prevailing, meant that

         the supporters met no retarding structure as they emerged from


                                          11
00 16:28 FAX         I      CPS CASEWORK DIR                      [gj


                                  |


the tunnel into pen 3, and that'there was unbroken diagonal

pressure from the mouth of the tunnel down to barrier 124A.

 Further, as the plan at Appendix 4 to the Taylor Report shows,

barrier 124A was vulnerable to downward pressure as a result

 of the removal of the barrier immediately above it - one of

 the alterations consequential to the installation of the two

 additional radial fences. The Taylor Report's conclusions are

 supported on- this point by the evidence of Inspector Bullas

 (see para 234) and by a concession made by Dr Eastwood.



 31.    The Taylor Report's findings on the timing of the

 collapse of barrier 124A and its probable cause and effects

 are supported by the BBC video tape and the evidence of the

 supporters near to the barrier itself. They are reinforced by

 the probability that, had the barrier collapsed earlier, the
                                I
 police on the track would have appreciated that this

 catastrophe had occurred and would have taken rescue action

 much earlier.


 32.    Me have viewed the evidence and we are impressed by it.

 With respect, we share the opinion of the Taylor Report that

 this is what occurred. The collapse of barrier 124A was, of

 course, a major factor in the causation of the deaths.



  33.   The Taylor Report also found, on the basis of expert

  evidence which is before us, that barrier 124A, although

  corroded, had been tested by Dr Eastwood in July 1988 and had

  passed the loading tests specified in the Green Guide.
'00 16:28 FAX         I      CPS CASEWORK DIR                     @015


                                   1

 Although the corrosion played a part in the collapse, the

 effective cause, the Report found, was the excessive and

 unanticipated pressure to which it was exposed at the time of

 the forward surge mentioned above. The Green Guide made no

 specific reference to testing for corrosion as a cause of

 deterioration.


  34.   The crushing in pens 3 and' 4 was not recognised either by

  the police officers in the control box in the South West

  corner of the ground (see Appendix 1), or by the officers
  detailed to the perimeter track, for several minutes after the

  first signs of distress appeared, resulting in time being lost

  before rescue efforts began. It is plain also, from our

  reading of the statements, that the crushing and distress was

  not recognised by nearby civilians, by many (but not all) of

  the broadcasters and press, nor by stewards of the Club.

  Having seen the video evidence, we can readily understand how

  this situation arose- The truth is that no-one was expecting

  to happen what in fact happened.


  35.    There was no effective leadership until the arrival of

  Chief Superintendent Nesbit just after 3pm and it was not

  until 3.06pm that Mr Duckenfield appreciated that there had

   been a major disaster rather than the pitch invasion that he

   had assumed. The ambulance service was called at 3.06pm but no

   request for cutting gear or the fire brigade was made until

   3.13pm. The Taylor Report concluded, however, that it is
07/01   00 16:28 FAX {              CPS CASEWORK DIR                     @016




        unlikely (although possible) that these services could have

        saved lives had they been called promptly. We agree.

                                         I
        36.    The evacuation of the supporters and those injured was

        achieved mainly through the perimeter gates. These were not

        designed as exits and those to pens 3 and 4 were narrower than

        provided by the Green guide. The Taylor report concluded,

        however, that even if their width had complied with the Green

         Guide, the gates would have been wholly inadequate to relieve

         the pressure and release spectators swiftly. The Guide was

         silent as to any recommended number of such gates and it is

         clear that their use for large scale evacuation was not

         intended or anticipated.


         37.   The opening of gate C, which precipitated the disaster,

         was made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at

         the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm. The

         perimeter gates to the ground (see Appendix 1) were open from

         the outset, and severe congestion and crushing developed at

         the turnstiles, the number and capacity of which were

         inadequate to cope in time with the large numbers. The

         crushing worsened as kick-off time approached and supporters

          realised they would be late into the ground. The police lost

          control of the crowd and the crush became unmanageable and

          dangerous, with many fearing for their lives. The kick-off was

          not postponed because it had been agreed with the Club that

          this course would only be taken if there was a major cause of

          delay such as an accident on the motorway or fog. Mr


                                           14
07/01 100 16:28 FAX                 CPS CASEWORK DIR                       gjc




      Duckenfield gave inconsistent evidence to the Inquiry about

      his decision on this point and trie Report concluded that the

      kick-off could and should have been postponed.


      38-     The request to open gate C was made by Superintendent

      Marshall, the Commander in Leppings Lane, who told Mr

      Duckenfield by radio that someone would be killed if the gate

      was not opened. There is a very considerable body of evidence

       to show that Mr Marshall's view was correct and that Mr

       Duckenfield had no alternative but to agree to the opening of

       the gate.


       39.    However, neither Mr Duckenfield nor any other police

       officer took any steps to deal with the consequences of the

       opening of the gate. In particular, the tunnel was not closed

       off. This action, which had been taken in 1988 by serial
       police officers apparently on their own initiative, could and

        should have been carried out by a small number of police
        forming a cordon and directing supporters to the unfilled wing

        pens. Mr Duckenfield did order police serials to go to the

        concourse to monitor an influx when another gate, gate A, was

        opened a little earlier, because he feared a pitch invasion

        from the North stand where there was no perimeter fence.


        40.    The Taylor Report concluded that Mr Duckenfield ■s failure

        to give a similar order on the opening of gate C was -a
        blunder of the first magnitude-. Plainly,         error was the
         immediate, or proximate, cause of the crushing   in   pens   3 and 4
                              CPS CASEWORK DIR                   @ 018




and the pressure which led to the collapse of the barrier in

pen 3.


41.    But it was not of course the sole cause. In addition to
the. layout characteristics of the terrace described earlier,

the other main cause was the build up outside the ground w hich

led to the need to open the gate. This itself was due to a

combination of factors to which reference must now be made.



W h*   Hnild UP   outside the qiround
42.     The first factor contributing to the build up outside the

ground was the layout of the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the

narrowness of the neck or forebourt at the bend in the Lane

 itself where, coming from the North, it turns to the South-

 West and crosses the river (see Appendix 1). Not only were the

 turnstiles not in a straight iine, affording adequate space

 for the formation of orderly queues, therefore, but the

 waiting area itself was extremely confined. Next, there was

 the designation and marking of the turnstiles, with the 10,100

 ticket-holders for the West terrace all being required to

 enter through turnstiles A-G at entrance "B", although the

 three blocks of turnstiles serving the Leppings Lane entrance

 were confusingly lettered "A,C,B". In addition, the colour

 coding on the turnstile walls was too low to be seen through a

 crowd. The Taylor Report found these to be factors

 contributing to the delay in the turnstile operation-
00 !6:29 FAX l]      |       CPS CASEWORK DIR                     g|019
                                   I

                                  I
                                  I
43.    However, the turnstile operation itself was slow because

there were only seven turnstiles to admit the 10,100 ticket-

holders, an average of 1450 through each. This is to be

compared with the 60 turnstiles at the Penistone Road end

which served 29,800, a little under 500 per stile. The Green

Guide provided that in general no more than 750 could be

admitted in one hour. The Club, taking into account that it

was an all-ticket match with no cash passing, reckoned this

could be increased to 1000 per Ifour. However, as Lord Justice

Taylor observed, even at this higher rate it would have taken

almost lh hours to admit all those with terrace tickets; at

750 per hour it would have taken 2 hours. The Taylor Report

concluded that the police and the Club should have foreseen

 that the turnstiles and the waiting area would be under strain

 to admit all the Liverpool supporters in time.


 44.    Many supporters arrived after 2.30 pm, the request on the

 ticket being simply "to take up position 15 minutes before

 kick off". Some arrived without tickets and tried to get in by

 paying cash, others by trying to go over or under the paddle

 of the turnstile or by sliding through with a ticket-holder.

 All these activities slowed the admission rate and contributed

 to the frustration of the crowd as kick-off approached-



 45.     There is no question on the evidence that many of the

  supporters had been drinking and some were abusive as a
  result. Probably few offered violence and the Taylor Report

  acquitted the majority of being affected by drink, finding
07/01 '00 16:29 FAX (              CPS CASEWORK DIR                     @020




        ■that some police had overestimated this factor in their

        evidence. Having read the relevant statements, it seems to us

        that drink and unruliness of the supporters certainly

        contributed to the pushing from the back and was a factor in

        making supporters less amenable to police requests to move

        back. In some cases, too, drunk supporters tried to force

        themselves in at the turastileJ, causing fighting with other

        supporters and scuffles with the police trying to prevent

        their entry. This minority contributed to the loss of control

        of the crowd by police in our view.



        46.   Nevertheless,r the main factor
                                         i   in this loss of control was

        a failure of police strategy in not planning properly for the

        crush likely to be caused by a large concentration of arrivals

        from 2.30 pm onwards, and in failing to stem the flow of

        supporters or filter them towards the turnstiles from some

        position outside the perimeter gates. Such action had been

        successfully carried out in 1988, as numerous witnesses have

        confirmed. The Taylor Report concluded that a combination of

        controlled filtering and a postponed kick-off would probably

        haver obviated the need to open the gate.



        AppprtJnnmfint of responsibility

        47.    The layout of the ground as it stood on the day of the

        disaster was the responsibility of four organisations, and

        some of the individuals acting on their behalf, namely the

        Club, Eastwood and Partners, the Council and the police.
        However, none of them foresaw that the progressive alterations


                                         18
        07/01 '00 16:29 FAX               CPS CASEWORK DIR                       @021




                made to the ground from about 1977 onwards in the interests of
m                                         '    \
j               safety and good order would come to constitute, in effect, a

                death trap for supporters entering, pens 3 and 4. This was
J               principally because no-one foresaw that up to 2000 supporters

                would be allowed to enter these pens at a time when they were
                                  ‘             r
                already overcrowded, and when spreading out to the side to

                absorb the extra numbers would be impossible. Plainly, no-one
                                               ij

                foresaw any circumstances akin |to the opening of gate C, nor

                the unprecedented crushing outside the ground which made that

                action necessary on the day of the disaster. That said, all

                four organisations share some responsibility for the lack of

                safe maximum capacities, the lack of controlled entry to the

                pens and the absence of any proper system of monitoring, as

                they must for the departures from the Green Guide and the

                inadequacy of the Safety Certificate. The police must take the

                main responsibility for the policy of letting the fans find
L               their own level although, as the lengthy exploration of the
                                                i                   ■

                borders of their duties at the Inquiry demonstrates, the Club

                must share some responsibility for the way in which supporters

                were allowed to fill the pens at semi-final matches.



                48.            It may be argued that the 1981 crushing incident already

^               mentioned ought to have alerted the police and the Club to the

                dangers of admitting large numbers of supporters via the

(
I               tunnel access to the West terrace, where they were; capable of
    i

                being crushed against the perimeter fence, and that knowledge

                of this incident increased the responsibility on the police

                and the Club for affording safe access to the West terrace. We


                                                19




    .1
00 16:29 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR




consider -that this is not so, because the response of the

police in 1981, accepted by the Other parties involved, was to

instal the radial fences with the aim of preventing the

inwards movement of supporters to the area behind the goal,

and until the disaster it was assumed that this was a correct

response. Whether it was correct: or not, the incident in our

view has no direct bearing on the disaster eight years later

and does not add to the potential criminal responsibility of

the police and the Club.


49.    The opening of gate C was the responsibility of Mr

Duckenfield and, as already noted, his decision was correct in

the circumstances. However, the failure to give any order to

 accommodate the influx was a serious error which must in our

view be Mr Duckenfield1s responsibility and his alone. Mr
                                  |
 Duckenfield had been promoted to Chief Superintendent of F

 Division only three weeks before the match, and it is          ,^

 reasonable to ask whether he was competent to take charge of a

 match of this importance. However, there is no evidence to

 suggest that those responsible for his promotion so erred in

 appointing him as to share responsibility for errors made by

 him on the day.

                                 i                   1
 50.   The fact that the tunnel was cordoned off in 1988 by a

 handful of junior police officers apparently on their own

 initiative — an action that almost certainly would have

 averted the disaster a year later - is one of the most
 unfortunate aspects of the case, and at first sight the
'00 16:29 FAX (             CPS CASEWORK DIR




operational organisation of the police might seem responsible

for failing to incorporate this tactic in its match planning.

However, Mr Duckenfield's dispatch of a serial to deal with
the opening of gate A demonstrates to our mind that it was

within his power to accommodate the opening of gate C, and the

blame for his not doing so cannot in our view be laid

 elsewhere.


 51. The build up outside the ground was again the
 responsibility of the four organisations identified above.

 Given the restrictions of space attendant on the geography of

 Leppings Lane itself, the layout of the turnstiles and their

 numbers, designation and marking was primarily a matter for

 the police and the Club. But the Council was also partly

 responsible for ensuring that there was safe ingress to the

 ground (see Chapter 5 of the Green Guide)-



 52.   Allowing for the policing difficulties to which the

 layout and slow admission rate of the turnstiles gave rise,

 the loss of police control, andjin particular the failure to

 follow the filtering tactics employed in 1988, was solely a

 police responsibility. The responsibility was, however, a

 collective one and cannot be attributed to any individual

 officer.



 Criminal Offences
 00 16:29 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR




53.    Me turn to consider whether any criminal offence is

'disclosed against any of the organisations or individuals

 identified or referred to above.



 (1) Manslaughter
 54. The police authority, the Cl|b and the Council are In law

 all corporations of one kind or another (see Halsbury’s Laws

 of England. 4th ed. Vol 9 at paras 1201-3) so an important

 first question is whether a corporation can be indicted for

 manslaughter-


 55.    This question was considered at length by Professor J.C.

 Smith in relation to the shipping company's liability for the

  sinking of the tterald of Free Enterprise in an Opinion dated

  25th November 1987. We have had the advantage of seeing that

  Opinion, which concluded that the company in that case could

  be properly indicted for manslaughter by gross negligence or

  recklessness, assuming it could be proved that one or more of

  the directing minds of the company caused the deaths, and did

  so with the fault required by the definition of manslaughter,

  in due course proceedings were begun against the company and

  Others and on 5th June 1990 Turner J, sitting at the Central

  Criminal Court, dismissed a motion to quash the indictment

  against the company, holding t!*t both on the authorities and

  on principle a corporation is capable of committing

  manslaughter. We have seen a note of the Reserved Judgment,

  which includes a full consideration of the authorities, and in

   our respectful view it represents a correct view of the law.
07/01 '00 16:29 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                       @025




       56.    We accordingly advise that each of the corporations

       mentioned above could properly be indicted for manslaughter if

        it could be proved that one or more of the directing minds of

        the corporation concerned committed manslaughter as that

        offence is currently defined.



        (2) Definition of manslaughter
        57.   Involuntary manslaughter is committed when a person

        causes the death of another either (1) intending to do an act

        which, whether he knows it or not, is unlawful and dangerous

        in that it is likely to cause direct personal injury ("an

        unlawful and dangerous act”), or (2) intending to do an act

        which creates an obvious and serious risk of causing personal

        injury (a) not giving thought to the possibility of such risk,

        or (b) having recognised that there was some risk involved,

        nonetheless going on to take it ("recklessness" as defined by

        Lord Diplock In R v Lawrence [1982] AC 510).



        58.    To amount to manslaughter a person's conduct need not be

        the only cause of the death, but it must be a substantial

        cause in that it contributed significantly to the result.

        Whether it did so contribute is generally a question of fact

        for the jury: Paqett (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 279, 287-91.



        59.    It may also be that manslaughter is committed if the

        person causing the death intends to d o .an act, or omits to do
         an act where there is a duty to do so, being grossly negligent


                                         23
07/01 ’00 16:30 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                       @026




       whether death or serious personal injury results ( gross

       negligence"): see eg Smith and Hogan, Criminal Law, 6th ed

        (1988) at p 345. The law is at present uncertain whether gross

       negligence still exists as a separate head of liability, two

        recent authorities having held that the earlier cases where

        manslaughter is defined in terms of negligence should not be

        followed and that Lord Diplock's test should be applied

        universally.                     !


        60.   In sevmour (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 211, Watkins LJ, giving

        the judgment of the Court of Appeal in a reckless driving

        case, said:
               "...we are of the view that it is no longer necessary or

               helpful to make reference to compensation and negligence.

               The Lawrence direction on recklessness is comprehensive
                                         |
               and of general application to all offences, including

               manslaughter involving the driving Of motor vehicles

               recklessly and should be given to juries without in any

               way being diluted. Whether a driver at the material time

               was conscious of the risk he was running or gave no

               thought to its existence, is a matter which affects-

               punishment for which purposes the judge will have to

               decide, if he can, giving; the benefit of doubt to the

               convicted person, in which state of mind that person had

               driven at the material time.




                                          24
07/01   00 16:30 FAX 0                  CPS CASEWORK DIR                        @027




        6J..   in        f^henk Kwan v R (1985) 82 Cr App Rep 18 Lord

        Roskill, giving the opinion of the Privy council, said at p

        25:
               "Their Lordships are of the view that the present state

               of the relevant law in England and Wales... is clear. The

               model direction suggested in Lawrence and held in Seymour

               equally applicable to cases of motor manslaughter

               requires, first, that the vehicle was in fact being

               driven in such a manner as to create an obvious and

               serious risk of causing physical injury to another and

               secondly that the defendant so drove either without

               having given any thought to the possibility of there

               being such a risk or having recognised that there was

               such a risk nevertheless took it.
                    In principle their Lordships see no reason why a
                                         I
               comparable direction should not have been given in the

               present case as regards that part of the case which

               concerned the alleged navigation of the Fly.in<3 Goldfinch

               by Kong and indeed as regards the alleged navigation of

               ■the FIvino Flg*tT|'ift*‘f0 by the' other two defendants • Did
               their respective acts of navigation create an obvious and

               serious risk of causing physical damage to some other

               ship and thus to other persons who might have been
               travelling in the area of 'the collision at the material

                time? If so did any of the defendants... so navigate
                                              j
                either without having given any thought to the
                possibility of that risk or, while recognising that the

                risk existed, take that risk?"


                                              25
00 16:30 FAX          I       CPS CASEWORK DIR                       @028




At p 26, Lord Roskill said:
                                    i
        "Their Lordships... respectively agree with the-comment

        made by Watkins LJ --. in Seymour.11



 62.    However, as pointed out by Smith and Hogan (6th ed (1988)

 at p 353), while the clear implication from Kong Cheuk Kwan is

 that there is no longer any separate test of gross negligence
                                                      S
 in manslaughter, it may be that the courts would not be

 prepared to exclude it altogether in an appropriate case. Some

 support for this view is found in Goodfellow (1986) 83 Cr App

 Rep 23, where Lord Lane LCJ said that the question in Kong

 Cheuk Kwan was whether the defendant was "guilty of

 recklessness (or gross negligence)"-


 63.    we consider it right in the circumstances of Hillsborough

 to approach the evidence on the basis that the gross

 negligence test is sufficient to establish the offence of

 manslaughter and we propose to advise accordingly.



  (3) Neglect bv police
  64.   When gross negligence or manslaughter by neglect is

  alleged against the police, however, authority indicates a

  more detailed test of liability. In R v West London C o r o n e r Vs

  Court,   ex o Gray [1988] QB 467, allegations were made against

  police following the death of a man while in police custody

  concerning the use of force against him and failure to summon

  an ambulance promptly when he became unconscious. The

  coroner's directions to the jury as to unlawful killing were


                                     26
07/01   00 16:30 FAX                  CPS CASEWORK DIR                      @029




        quashed by the Divisional Court, which held that a coroner

         directing a jury on manslaughter comprising unlawful killing

         alleged to have occurred because of neglect by police was

         required to direct them as follows:
                (1) that they had to be satisfied of four ingredients,

                namely (a ) tha-t the police! were under a duty to have

                regard to the health and welfare of the deceased, (b)

                that in the circumstances there was a failure to do what

                should have been done for the health and welfare of the

                deceased, (c) that the failure amounted to a substantial

                cause of death, and (d) that the failure amounted to

                recklessnes s;
                (2) that the test of "recklessness1' was whether a police

                officsr, having regard to his duty, was indifferent to an

                obvious and serious risk to the health arid welfare of the

                deceased or, recognising that risk to be present,

                deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing about it;

                {3) that a failure to appreciate that there was such a

                risk was not by itself sufficient to amount to

                recklessness; and
                (4) that the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful

                killing if they could attribute the unlawful conduct to a

                single police officer.



          65.    Plainly those directions are those to be given in any

          criminal prosecution of a police officer where omission to act

          is alleged to have caused death. In our view they have ,a




                                             27
07/01   00 16:30 FAX [                  CPS CASEWORK DIR                   @030




         dirsct bssriHQ on our consideration of ths evidence in this

         case.



         (4) Culpable misfeasance
         66.     We turn next to consider the common law offence of

         culpable misfeasance or miscondpct in public office. We are
                                        I
         satisfied that this offence axiists, and that it is committed

         where a public officer, such as a police officer, wilfully

         neglects to perform a duty which he is bound to perform by

         common law or statute. But the neglect has to be wilful, not

         merely inadvertent, and must be culpable in the sense that it
                                               i
         is without reasonable excuse or justification. The element of

         culpability is not restricted to corruption or dishonesty,

         however, but must be of such a degree that the misconduct is

         calculated to injure the public interest: R v Dy-thani [1979] 2

         QB 722.


         67.     Even if the words "likely to" are substituted for

          "calculated" in this definition, as we think they might be, it

          is clear that this little known offence is a difficult one to

          prove to the satisfaction of a jury.



          E v i d e n c e to support manslaughter

          68.    We consider in turn the possible liability of (i) the

          Club, (ii) Eastwood and Partners, (iii) the Council and (iv)

          the police, it will be convenient to consider the evidence

          first against the four organisations, and secondly in relation



                                               j

                                                   28
'00 16:30 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                     |j




 to the individuals who acted on jbehalf of the organisations

 concerned.
                                   i

 (i) The Club
 69.    The Club's responsibility for the crushing and deaths

 lies in its responsibility for (1) the layout of the inside of

 the ground as a result of the alterations to the west terrace
                                                        i-V
 and (2) the layout, number, designation and marking of the

 turnstiles in Leppings Lane. Whilst, on our factual analysis

 of the disaster, these two factors might be regarded as

  substantial causes of the deaths in that they contributed

  significantly to the result, it is clear not only that they

  were not the sole causes, or even the major causes, but that

  the Club's actions and omissions only partly contributed to

  them. As already observed (see para 47 above), the layout of

  the ground was the responsibility of the four organisations

  and in varying degrees. The Club not only relied on its own

  consultant engineer Dr Eastwood, but it responded to the

  suggestions and advice of the police in important respects.

  The Council played its part.


  70.    For the purposes of the criminal law, where it is

  axiomatic that a case against each defendant must be given

  totally separate consideration, we consider that there is no

  sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case that the

  Club caused the deaths.
         07/01 '00 16:30 FAX                       CPS CASEWORK DIR                            @032




               71.               in case we are wrong in that conclusion, we have
]              considered whether the requisite intention for manslaughter

               could be proved against the Club. It seems to us. however,

J              that the evidence does not begin to showeither                recklessness

^              or gross negligence on its part.
                                                         i
                                                  l
1              72.    It follows that there is in our view nosufficient
                evidence to support a charge of .manslaughter against either

3              the Club or any of its officials.



1               {     ) Faatufiad and Partners
 T              73.    Since Dr Eastwood was the principal of the firm, it is

                his acti o n s and omissions alone that fall to be considered. As

 3              consultant      to the Club h e too was r esponsible for the layout
    _           of the inside      of t h e groun d and the ,layout and o p e r a t i o n of


\
                 the turnstiles. However, his advice formed par t o n l y of             the

                 sequence      of events that led t o the structural c o ndition of t h e

                 ground    as i t was i mmediately before the disaster and b y no
. ]              r a t i o n a l yardstick could h is advice   be said to hav e caused the

.-               deaths.    There are two f urther factors i n his case, moreover.

    j            First, his advice in relation to the forming of separate

-T               turnstile entrances to the North stand, each end of the West

                    stand and each of the central plans, not acted on for

1]               financial reasons, would if adopted have led to numerical

L                monitoring of the central pens, and might well have led to the

    gJ           insertion of maximum figures for those pens               in compliance with

                    the Safety Certificate. Second, so far as the Safety




                                                          30




 J,
00 16:30 FAX         I      CPS CASEWORK DIR                      @033




Certificate is concerned, this was the ultimate responsibility

of the Council.
                                  i




74.    There is no evidence that Dr Eastwood caused the deaths.

Nor is there any evidence that he was either reckless or

grossly negligent- We have no hesitation, therefore, in

concluding that there is no evidence to support a charge of

manslaughter against Dr Eastwood or indeed against Eastwood

and Partners.



(iii) The Council
75.    The Council bears responsibility for the Safety

Certificate, which should have been amended to provide for the

alterations and for the insertion of maximum figures for the

pens. The Council was also responsible for ensuring compliance

with the Green Guide in the respects detailed above, as well

as in some other respects. There were departures from the

Green Guide, some more important then others- Of course, it

does not follow that the disaster would not have happened even

if the Safety Certificate had been amended, since compliance

depended on the Club and Dr Eastwood. In common with the Club

and Dr Eastwood, however, the Council's errors only partly

contributed to the ground conditions identified above as

causes of the deaths and on any; view were too remote to amount

 to a prima facie case of manslaughter. There is no evidence of

 recklessness or gross negligence on their part.




                                 31
00 16:31 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                       0




 76.   There is accordingly no evidence to support a charge of

manslaughter against Mr Bownes.



 77.    It is unnecessary to consider the liability of the

 Sheffield District Council for the errors of its predecessor,

 the South Yorkshire County Council, though we would assume

 such liability to have been inherited on the reorganisation.



 (iv) The police
 78.   The main responsibility for the disaster at Hillsborough

 rests on the police in the respects identified above and

 clearly set out in the Taylor Report. As an organisation they

 were partly responsible for the layout of the Inside of the

 ground. They were responsible for the policy, heavily

 criticised in the Taylor Report, whereby supporters were left

 "to find their own level" and not monitored as they entered

 the pens in semi-final matches*. They were also partly

 responsible for the Leppings Lane turnstiles and, together

 with the Club, should have foreseen the difficulties of

 admission of such large numbers. There was a serious failure

 of policing in Leppings Lane, due in part to a failure to

 follow filtering tactics used effectively in 1988.



 79.    These errors too, however, can only be viewed as part of

 a complex sequence of events, many of which were outside the

 control of the police- The layout of the ground, both inside

 and out, was the main responsibility of the Club as advised by

 Dr Eastwood, with the Council and the Officer working Party
     07/01   00 16:31 FAS                CPS CASEWORK DIR                       @035
si
]            superintending the alterations to the West terrace. Likewise,

             the contents of the Safety Certificate were not the main

             responsibility of the police. The difficulties inherent in the

             policing of Leppings Lane, which were partly geographical, and

             the arrival of supporters in very large numbers after 2.30 pm

             were not and could not be under'police control. Finally, the

             unruly behaviour of a minority of them, although no doubt

              foreseeable, created added difficulties.



             80.    Once responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-

             off and to cordon off the access tunnel is confined to Mr

             Duckenfield, as we consider it should be (see para 48 above),

              the conclusion becomes inescapable in our view that the police

              as an organisation cannot be said to have caused the deaths by

              their strategy and operational errors.



              81.   We have examined the structure of the police command,

              both on the day of the disaster itself and in previous years.

              We have considered the operational orders for 1988 and 1989

              and police practice at Hillsborough, inside and outside the

              ground, as detailed in the Taylor Report. We have also

              considered the interviews of Mr Marshall and Mr Murray*

              However, there seems to us to be no evidence that in making

              what were undoubtedly errors of Judgment and practice, the

              police organisation, or any individual within it, acted

              recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner either on the day

              of the disaster or beforehand.




                                               33
07/01 '00 16:31 FAS                CPS CASEWORK DIR                      @036




        82.   We accordingly find no basis on which to advise a charge
                                         i
        of corporate manslaughter against: any directing mind within

        the police organisation.         ,

                                         i

        Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
                                       i
        83. Mr Duckenfield was heavily criticised in the Taylor

        Report for failing to cordon oflf the access tunnel, and his

        decision not to postpone the kick-off was regarded as a bad

        error of judgment. We think both of these criticisms are

        entirely justified. Moreover, as the operational commander of

        the match, he was ultimately responsible for the policing both

        within and outside the ground. He was personally slow to

        recognise the crushing or signs of distress in the central

        pens which were going on before his eyes. He failed to notice

        the gross imbalance of filling between those pens and the

        outer wings which the video shows so clearly. His
        preoccupation with the possibility of a pitch invasion caused

        him to delay putting the Major Disaster Plan into operation.



        84.   Yet Mr Duckenfield had under his command officers with

        considerable experience of policing the match and the ground

        who also made operational erroris or failed to react as they

        should have done. It is unnecessary to set out here the chain

        of police command; suffice it to say that in the senior

        positions were officers who had successfully policed

        Hillsborough in previous years, particularly in 1988, when the

        operation was regarded as successful. Under them were other

        experienced inspectors and sector commanders. If the


                                        34
                                         I
                                         i
07/01 '00 16:31 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                       @037




        operational orders or police intelligence was inadequate, as

        seems likely, it was not the fault of Mr Duckenfield who

        inherited a ready made match plan compiled by others and tried

        -to follow it. The slowness of his response to the disaster,

        while much to be regretted, was doubtless due in part to his

        lack of experience of -this particular match.
                                        I

        85.    Mr Duckenfield, who declined to be interviewed for the

        purposes of the criminal investigation, would no doubt argue

        that none of these errors caused the deaths because of the

        interposition of the many other factors already rehearsed. It

        seems to us that that argument would be likely to succeed in

        relation to many of the criticisms. However, there is a case

        to be made in our view that his failure both to postpone the

        kick-off and to take no action to close the tunnel after the

         opening of gate C was a substantial cause of the deaths, in

         that it significantly contributed to the crowd pressure which

         led to the crushing and the collapse of barrier 124A.



         86.   If that is so, it is necessary to consider whether there

         is evidence that Mr Duckenfielcl, when failing so to act, had

         the requisite intention to support a charge of manslaughter.



         87.   Clearly there was no unlawful and dangerous act on his

         part or intended by him which would found the first head of

         liability in involuntary manslaughter. But in failing to

         postpone the kick-off, or to order the closure of the tunnel

         after the opening of gate C, or both, did he intend an act


                                          35
07/01   00 16:31 FAX                 CPS CASEWORK DIR                      ® 038




         which created an obvious and serious risk of causing personal

         injury, either not giving thought to the possibility of such

         risk, or having recognised that there was some risk involved,

         nonetheless go on to take it?



         88,    We consider that there are' difficulties in proving that

         he intended to do an act which created an obvious and serious

         risk of causing personal injury. In the first place there was

         no "act" as such, but an omission or omissions to act which

         contributed to a rapidly developing state of affairs ending in

         serious risk of injury. But was it an obvious risk at the

         time? We think not. The complexity of the disaster as now

         known to those who have analysed it in hindsight demonstrates

         that there must be grave doubt as to whether the omissions

         created a risk which was obvious to anyone at the time. The

         considerations here are, of course, wholly different from the

         driving cases or the collision at sea in the Kong Cheuk Kwan

         case



         89.    We conclude, therefore, that there is insufficient

         evidence on which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr

         Duckenfield. Nor is there evidence that he was grossly

         negligent in failing to act as mentioned above. We bear in

         mind particularly the judgment of the Divisional Court in the

         West London Coroner's Court casefthe requirements of which are

         not in our view satisfied.




                                           36
07/01 '00 16:31 FAX (                 CPS CASEWORK DIR                   @039




         90.   It follows, and we have come to the clear conclusion,
                                             i
         that there is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was wilfully

        neglectful of his duty or was culpable so as to have committed

         the offence of culpable misfeasance.



         91.   We conclude that there is,no sufficient evidence of any

         criminal offence having been committed by Mr Duckenfield.



         P olice Const a b l e s S mith and Illingworth

         92.   We note the complaints made against these two officers

         who were stationed on the perimeter track at gates 3 and 4

         respectively and we have considered the interviews of both.

         There is conflicting evidence in the case of each as to how he

         reacted and when each gate was opened (see the West Midlands

         Report Part vil at pp 252 to 259) and in the case of Smith

         there is substantial doubt as to whether he pushed spectators,

         including the complainant Hendry and an unidentified boy, back

         into the crowd and if so when, ie whether before or after he

         had appreciated the true nature of the disaster.



         93.   There is no evidence before us that either of these

         officers was guilty of manslaughter or culpable misfeasance,

         and we advise that the allegations made against them be

         investigated further and if appropriate pursued in

         disciplinary proceedings.




                                             37
    07/01   00 16:31 FAX                CPS CASEWORK DIR                    @040




             94.    The balance of allegations against the other officers

             mentioned in the West Midlands Report must likewise be a

             matter for disciplinary proceedings.



             95.    We therefore find no sufficent evidence to support

             criminal proceedings of any kind against those persons

             mentioned in the West Midlands Report whom we have not found

             it necessary to identify in this Opinion.




                                                                Pa
             Farrar's Building,                    GARETH WILLIAMS PC
             Temple EC4Y 7BD
                                                   PETER BIRTS PC
             ^ August 1990




                                              38




4
               VV\    (A

         J




(yvv   \fb~c-«J&r3^        b l   It
                                nfel.




U ]^                       k -          4   ^ .          ^   , o S


                                                  l<ru




               < Jb




         ^ 2 - .   r2 - « = s


                                                                     CJL^e


     liW v   vsx^r^-A


 q   U    Se^ -
  2^ .
'j<                 n -o                             ^                  I e W-x-v

                     ta iTX.           We        VO«—                        |»-£-o't




          v^V              ^                                         1s t           ?SP.            TL-a— j



          <V > - ^ fyeAV           \        f                   be            — ~- <-» -

                     i|            1            I               V           . *•               -- &'—^-~                 ^
                -              —   U>/i         Urv                             ^

                -v/ , 2~e*ou^uv e                                      aaB|

             g L ,.                    OO^-Vn-^^

                - <a-^A jU L                \ v-^ c. L O T -X ^ -W *

                    - ^o               W----Cue.                                                0-le*-^®-

                -                           fc * V         « ~ ^ - v                u

                                                            t-r^U             /         .’ .                  —     \f




                , |^ > ^ c                       +UJ,               T.C51.-rt~*~U                            JotLw.
                          VI                Jjj^ ^                            W - -- \              *■


                -      O f5y                7 K\ UVs-V-^- u — T                                       u --
                                        uxnU         A aI              tl^e                      yUf W"




         (✓£"          ^kc^tc                                                ] -'wX)-€_
                                                                             )

         .Cj o g ^ L                                     C- j        |//v-"'^            &~l/        — W     £-*—
C W P Newell
Director, Casework.                                                                                    CPS
                                                                                                       Headquarters
                                                                                                       50 Ludgate HiU
                                                                                                       London EC4M TEX


                                                                                        Direct Line:   0171-273 1226
                                                                                        Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
                                                                                          Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
                                                                                             d x No:   300850 Ludgate EC4




 L                                                 J




                      Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
                                                                                              Reference




                                                                                                                tel       <n£    .
   A i       A
             (

                                                                                                          £X          v/'-*•hi
                                                                                                          %~o




                  X       L       O'—


                      ^ A —C_           fZ^VsJ/j


                 jL                             ^-|-0 L-V^jncXl

             lU w
                                        [ U      J   j z   \     ^



             iL       x
                              r
                          <• 1 )0 cX>o S -£-^* ^ ^                   ’
                          . To          W rrtU             (J                             ^
                          , vSU^j/          W - s < ^                ( ’-< *— / ^ ‘H )    ^               *-*
                                            -    ^ P c A j C_
                                            —*
                          . u      ^    w                            U      *,U*A        W - — *-*                    .


                           ,S     U w U              a—                      ^

                                                 \jl            A * n c^L*> s^— Z>




CODE 18 77
                                                                          Private Prosecutions




                  cases where the defendant was cautioned for the offence, but the caution
                  was wrongly given in that the criteria for a caution had not been met or
                  in that the decision to caution was one that no reasonable person could
                  have taken;

                  cases where the defendant was cautioned for the offence and the caution
                  was given on the basis of false information about the offence or the
                  defendant provided or procured by the defendant.


          DPP consent cases

7.28      For some offences, the private prosecutor needs the consent of the DPP to the
          prosecution. If the proposed prosecution passes both the Code tests, the CPS will
          then take over the prosecution. If the proposed prosecution fails either test,
          consent to prosecute will not be given.


           Disclosure issues

7.29       This part of this Chapter explains how the rules on disclosure apply in connection
           with private prosecutions. Two different rules about disclosure are involved:

           •       rules about CPS disclosure of material to third parties; and

           •       rules about the duty of a prosecutor to disclose unused material.


           Rules about CPS disclosure of material to third parties

7.30        A private prosecutor, or an intending private prosecutor, or a defendant in a
            private prosecution, will sometimes ask you to disclose documents or information.
            The rules about CPS disclosure of material to third parties direct the way the CP
            deals with this kind of request. This section of this Chapter summarises the
            position.

 7.31       The right to bring a private prosecution does not confer on an intending private
            prosecutor a right to obtain documents from the CPS : R -v- DPP, ex parte Hallas
            (1988) 87 Cr App 340. Nor would a defendant have a right to obtain documents
            from the CPS. Once there has been a committal, the Crown Court may grant the
            private prosecutor a witness summons to secure the production of relevant
            material from the police in order that the private prosecutor should be able to
            comply with his obligation of disclosure to the defence: R -v- Gregory awsey
             [19891 Crim LR 152. There is no reason in principle why such a summons
             should not be granted after committal or transfer in respect of materia he     y
             the CPS; and no reason why a magistrates’ court should not grant a witness order
             to secure the production of m a te r ia l relevant to a summary trial.




                                                                                         18.07.97
  Prosecution Manual
                                                                                                         o
Private Prosecutions




7.32        The decision whether to give voluntary disclosure of documents or information
            held by the CPS (eg, the names and addresses of witnesses) will be governed by
            the principles set out in Policy Circular No. 25 of 1992; in addition, prosecutors
            may need to consult Volume 1, Chapter 14 (CPS Staff as Witnesses) of this
            Manual which contains advice about making witness statements and providing
             information about the reasons for decisions. The general rule is that the CPS
             should give disclosure whenever it is in the interests of justice for it to do so.

 7.33          Any voluntary disclosure should be even-handed between the parties. Therefore,
               i f y o u give voluntary disclosure to the private prosecutor at his or her request,
               you should copy the same documents or information to the defendant; and vice
               versa.

 7.34          Where the CPS does not possess either originals or copies of the witness
               statements or other documents requested, you should refer the enquirer_to the
               person or body who does or who might possess what is sought (usually, this will
               be the police). That will be the end of CPS involvement. You must not, for
               example, mediate with the police on behalf of an enquirer, and have no power to
               direct the police as to what the police should do. That d o e s not of course,
               prevent you from advising the police on a point of disclosure if asked to do so.


               Rules about a prosecutor’s duty to disclose unused material

  7.35          If the CPS takes over a private prosecution, you have the usual prosecutor s duty
                to disclose unused material to the defence. Where the CPS has not taken over a
                private prosecution, the private prosecutor is under that duty.

  7.36          Difficulties for the CPS will arise where the CPS has not taken over a private
                prosecution, but is aware of the private prosecution, and is aware that material
                evidence or information exists but the private prosecutor does not possess it. I he
                CPS may not be able to disclose this information - either because the CPS is not
                in possession of it, or because the rules of public interest immunity or the
                guidelines in Chapter 15 of Volume 1 prevent disclosure. If the CPS is, or can
                be, in possession of the material you must do one of two things.

                 •      notify the private prosecutor and the defendant of the existence of the
                        material, and supply it on request if it is right for you to do so (see
                        paragraphs 7.30 to 7.34 above); or

                 •      if the material is too sensitive for the first course of action to be
                         appropriate, the CPS must take over the private prosecution.

   7.37          In any case in which you are aware of unused material which has not been
                 disclosed to the defendant, and which you cannot ensure is disclosed, and which
                 would tend to exonerate the defendant or materially assist in his defence, the C
                 must take over the private prosecution.




                                                                                    Prosecution Manual
    18.07.97
                        CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

                                      Casework Directorate
                                         United House
                                           Piccadilly
                                             York
                                           Y O l 9PQ

                                    Facsimile
                                      DX: 65204 York 6


Attention of           Mr C Newell
Fax No                 8650
From                   Chris Enzor
Tel
Date & Time           10/08/99 15:15
No. of Pages


MESSAGE

(Please note the phone and fax numbers which changed recently)

HILLSBOROUGH - CONFIDENTIAL MATERIAL
I quote the entire contents of a letter from ACC Daines:
“Confidential Hillsborough Matters
I refer to our telephone conversation of 4 August 1999, on the above subject. You will
recall that we discussed a report of a conversation which is alleged to have occurred
in April 1989 between two eminent people.
I would be obliged to receive your advice on whether I should disclose the records of
this matter to the defence and/or prosecution”.
Clearly there has been telephone contact. The file does not reveal the contents of that
contact. Unfortunately, George Croston is away from the office at the moment.
You have a bundle of documents which includes copies o f all the material in our
possession which relates to this matter. In my view, the only document which falls to
be considered for disclosure is the report                    in question. All the other
documents flow from it. With the possible exception o f the police file note of 9 May
1990, all the other documents can fairly be said to be akin to reports sent from the
police to the DPP, in the sense that there is a strong public interest in retaining
freedom of communication between police forces and the DPP (see Archbold
paragraph 12-41). As to the file note o f 9 May 1990, this is a note of the conversation
between the Acting Chief Constable and the Force’s solicitor. Surely there must be a
similar public interest in the non-disclosure o f this document on similar grounds. In


      This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                                  Unauthorised use may be unlawful
any event, I doubt that it contains anything o f relevance given that everything flows
from               s report in the first instance.
You asked whether the Taylor Report was critical of the police. I have checked it (ie.
the Interim Report) very quickly and confirm that the Report does indeed criticise the
police. Others were criticised too, such as Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Note
that the Interim Report covered the aspects o f the Inquiry which interest us. I
understand that the Final Report dealt with broader issues, such as safety in sports
grounds more generally.
You ask what was the nature of the abuse argument.
I have trawled through George’s notes of the hearing as best I can. I can find no
reference to a challenge to the findings o f the Taylor Inquiry. However, the defence
would not be prevented from challenging those findings at the Crown Court.
The abuse argument at the committal proceedings was based around:
       •      press coverage since the disaster;
       •      oppression - decision to prosecute 10 years on;
       •      DPP advice was consistent with Taylor findings;
       •      inquest verdict of accidental death;
       •      judicial review o f inquest failed;
       •      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny did not consider that there was new
               material;
       •      the evidence is the same now as it was in 1990;
       •      some witnesses have died, recollections o f others will have failed, some
               cannot be traced.

I hope this is helpful.
I shall be at the SFO tomorrow in the morning, and in Ludgate Hill in the early
afternoon.

Chris Enzor




   This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                               Unauthorised use may be unlawful
C W P Newell
                                                                                              513
Irector, Casework
                                                                                              CPS
                                                                                              Headquarters
                                                                                              50 Ludgate HiU
                                          CONFIDENTIAL                                        London EC4M 7EX

                                                                               Direct Line:   0207 796 8553
                                                                               Switchboard:   0207 796 8000
r                                               1                                Facsimile:   0207 796 8680
       David Seymour Esq                                                           DX No:     300850 Ludgate EC4
       Legal Secretary
       The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
       Attorney General’s Chambers
       9 Buckingham Gate
       London SW1E 6JP
L                                                 j                          9 August 1999




       HILLSBOROUGH

       I write following our telephone conversation this morning. I am very grateful to the
       Attorney General for agreeing to see me at such short notice.

       I attach a bundle of papers which concludes with a recent internal discussion paper by
       George Croston, one of my Prosecution Team Leaders, who has responsibility for
       dealing with Hillsborough. It was under cover o f this discussion paper that the
               was drawn to my attention last Thursday, 5 August. The                    itself is
       the first document in the bundle and it is this document alone, I believe, that gives rise
       to the current issue about disclosure.

       The sensitivities are clear. Counsel who originally advised the then Director is now
       the judge currently dealing with the private prosecution. I have not discussed the
       matter with David Calvert-Smith, because he was previously instructed to represent
       Mr Duckenfield in relation to the private prosecution.

       I have little doubt in my mind that the                   should be disclosed to the
       prosecutor and that the prosecutor should in turn disclose it to the defendants. I
       should be happy to expand on this in consultation with the Attorney.

       I am more troubled by the handling - in relation both to the judge, who may well have
       forgotten about his earlier involvement with this matter, and to Sir Geoffrey Dear,
       who (as far as I know) has no knowledge o f the                 and has therefore never
       had the opportunity to comment on it.

       I am sorry that time does not allow me to write at any greater length. I am anxious to
       bring these papers with me when I accompany the Director to see the Attorney this
       afternoon. I trust that there is enough here to enable you to brief the Attorney
f-




     adequately, but o f course I shall be happy to speak to you again as soon as you have
     had a chance to read the papers.




     C W P NEWELL
       HILLSBOROUGH - CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS SURROUNDING
                       REPORT OF


Date            Item
12 April 1990   Report b
9 May 1990      Police file note by Assistant Chief Constable
4 July 1990     Letter: R Wells, Chief Constable, to DPP (Alan Green)
9 July 1990     Letter: DPP to R Wells
18 July 1990    Letter: Hammond Suddards to R Wells
23 July 1990    Letter: R Wells to DPP
27 July 1990    Opinion o f Anthony Hooper QC
23 July 1997    Minute: C Enzor to D Sharpling
30 July 1997    Minute: D Sharpling (recipient unknown)
7 August 1997   Letter: D Sharpling to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
4 August 1999   Discussion paper: G Croston
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                  Ref:
        From:                                                     Station/Dept:
        To:         Chief Constable                               Date:
                                                                                  12 April 1990



                SUBJECT:     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989


                    I have to report that on Tuesday, 18 April 1989, having been
                    cancelled from a                                    at _____________
                                   , I was deputed to work a duty of 9.00 am to 5.00 pm
                    driving the black Staff Granada motor vehicle.  My initial duty was
                    to attend at the Police Headquarters, Sheffield, and to be at the
                    disposal of Lord Justice Taylor and the officers from West Midlands
                    who were coming up to conduct enquiries into the Hillsborough
                    Disaster.

                    Together with the other Staff car, I attended at the Midland Train
                    Station to collect Lord Justice Taylor, and conveyed him to the
                    Police Headquarters for a meeting with the Chief Constable.  Later
                    that date, I again transported Lord Justice Taylor to Hillsborough
                    Football Ground in the black Staff Granada.   I waited outside the
                    stadium for his return, together with the other Staff cars and
                    after he had received a conducted tour of the Leppings Lane end at
                    Hillsborough Football Ground, he returned to the vehicle, briefly
                    speaking to the press that were gathered outside, prior to again
                    sitting in the rear of the car.

                    At this time he was joined by Mr Dear, the then Chief Constable of
                    West Midlands Police, both men being seated in the rear of the
                    Staff car.  Prior to the vehicle setting off back to Headquarters,
                    Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear started a conversation, which I
                    clearly heard, Lord Justice Taylor saying to Mr Dear, "I SUPPOSE
                    YOU REALISE THAT TO GIVE THIS INQUIRY ANY CREDIBILITY WE HAVE TO
                     APPORTION THE MAJORITY OF    THE BLAME ON THE POLICE?"      Mr Dear
                    acknowledged this by saying, "I SUPPOSE WE DO." I then drove    them
                    around to Leppings Lane where Lord Justice Taylor alighted from the
                    vehicle for a short time to look at the turnstiles,           before
                    returning to the vehicle - after which both gentlemen were returned
                    to Headquarters.   The general conversation throughout this journey
                    revolving around the logistics of setting up the Inquiry and where
                    they were going to site their offices to run the Inquiry from.

                    During the course of my duties that day, I also transported the ACC
                    of West Midlands, Mr Jones, to Hammerton Road Police Station, where
                    the Incident Room was.

                    On concluding duty at 6.00 pm that night, I       returned   home and
                    discussed the conversation I had overheard with my w i f e ,
                                     and although angry at the time about the comment
                    that was said, I decided there was little point in submitting a
                    report about this matter for what good is it - a mere            |word
                    against an eminent Judge and a Chief Constable - and I believe that
                    little   good  would  have   come  out  from   me   disclosing    this
                    conversation prior to any Inquiry that was being made.          I was
                    however so annoyed that to left off steam I did mention it to my
                    close work colleagues for although I realised an official report
                    would have no Ultimate benefit, what I needed was close friends to
                    realise what an injustice was likely to be done.
Gen/2
S u b j e c t - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989



However, having discussed this matter recently with Superintendent
Bettison, I feel it only right that the record be put straight.  I
still believe that no one will take my word against the other two
gentlemen but pass the information for your consideration.

I have been asked to treat this matter in the strictest confidence and
I will do so.
                            STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL


                                                     DCC/
                                                     9 May 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:



DISCLOSURE



Was contacted by Peter Metcalf this date concerning the above, who said
that on reflection he thought it would be wrong and perhaps even dangerous
for me or South Yorkshire Police to "consume its own smoke" regarding the
disclosure.

His view is that this matter ought to be considered by someone other than
the South Yorkshire Police as it may indicate possible criminal offences,
for example, 'conspiracy to pervert the course of justice' or 'misuse of
public office'.

Mr Metcalf suggested that one way forward would be through Mr Wells who
has been uninvolved in Hillsborough, then possibly through the Chief HMI
to another Chief Constable, who may take Counsel's opinion or deal with
the matter as he sees fit.

I told him that I regarded his comments above as absolutely confidential
to me as Acting Chief Constable as his client and he agreed this was so.




Acting Chief Constable




                                                         & V-   .^




                                                                     cx
                             eO W T O M L


                                0^                ..   ■;




TELEPHONE:                                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                                                  SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                                              SHEFFIELD S3 8LY

R B WELLS Q P M M A
                                                                                 ■ vJ*\ .3 C
CHIEF CONSTABLE




        IV            — ■X                              Vs         ^T£_a3cL.      V=»

                                                       Mt-t*        V— o-r


    "T »      V>-S>3-f                        q          "c o , X \ 1




                                                                                        s£l—   Q


                                                                                  Sns->^Jr

   V*        o *a«i   trx      srv "   ^ ^ ^ f Y T ^ O             ^    v




                                                       -t




                             CONFrDEKTiAL
V   v* - * r v j Q i   y - s_ _

                          W _ 0^ j   _




                             /"=t-^J^T'V
                                               DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                    4-12 QU EE N ANNES GATE
                                                       L O N D O N SWJH 9AZ
                                                       Telephone 071-273 8098
                                                       Fax       071-222 0802
Allan D. Green Q C




                       PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


Richard Wells Esq QPM MA                                          9 July 1990
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY




                     RE: H I LL SBO ROU GH DISASTER



Thank you very much for coming to see me today about this
matter on wh ich you have sought my advice.


I have considered the report by            , It is dated 12 April
1990 but relates to an incident w m c n occurred on 18 April
1989. I assume that I         ]who was driving the Staff car,had
no opportunity to make any note of the fragment of conversation
at the time. Whe n did he first make any written note ? Plainly
it is vital to assess h o w accurately          |heard and
remembered the precise words us ed,since a small difference in
what was heard or recalled may be crucial to the interpretation
of what was said.


On the assumption that                     heard and recalled the words
spoken accurately and tnac tney expressed an improper intention
(and on the further as sumption that two very senior public
figures would have expressed such an intention in front of a
third party who was a South Yorks hir e police driver) the
question arises wheth er there is any prima facie evidence of a
criminal offence. I do not believe that there is.I think that a
conspiracy to pervert the course of public justice must relate
to the course of actual or pote nti al civil or criminal
p r o c e e d i n g s ,and not to the conduct of a non-statutory inquiry
set up by the Home S ecr etary.There is no evidence here of any
bribery of a public official (see Archbo ld, 43r d edition,volume
2 at pa r a . 24-47) nor would there appear to have been misconduct
by an officer of justice,since Lord Justice Taylor was not
appointed by the Home Secretary to act as a judge in civil or
criminal proceedings    (ibid. par a.24-49).
It is therefore a matter for you to decide what further action
you should take. Plainly it would be open to you to consult Sir
John Woodcock or Sir Clive Whitmore at the Home Office. If you
wished to show this letter to Sir John or Sir Clive,I would
have no objection whatever.
tlAMMOND SUDDARDS
                            S O L I C I T O R S
ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY                PETER C. METCALF             DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE   CONSULTANTS:                  EMPIRE HOUSE
D. TREVOR LEWIS                  CHRISTOPHER W. JONES         J. PATRICK MITCHELL    ROGER W. SUDDARDS cue         10 PICCADILLY
MICHAEL E. GREGSON               ANDREW R. JORDAN             CHRISTOPHER MARKS      SIR DESMOND HEAP              BRADFORD 801 3LR
JOHN D. DE MAIN                  SIMON R. B. STELL            MICHAEL S. HENLEY      IAN W. WHITSON
                                 SIMON R. INMAN               ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMITH
                                                                                                                   TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
MICHAEL L SHEPHERD
PETER N. WILBRAHAM               RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH        PHIUP W. HARLING                                     TELEX 517201
J. RICHARD ARCHER                JOHN G. BECKETT              WILLIAM N. DOWNS
                                                                                                                   D.X. NO. 11720
BARBARA W. FRANCE                G. N. IAN GREENFIELD         LUCCI DAMMONE
C. NOEL HUTTON                   STEPHEN GALE                 ANDREW H. McDOUGALL                                  FAX (0274) 7 37 5 4 7
JOHN H. G. HELLER                MARK W. HILTON
IAN R. SHUTTIEWORTH              RICHARD BURNS



OUR REF.               PCM/PAB                    YOUR REF.                                       DATE        18 th July, 1990



Dear Sir,

Hillsborough

We refer to recent telephone discussions and, having reviewed the
authorities, we have the following comments:


             1.        The common law offence of conspiracy was abolished
                       by the Criminal Law Act 1977, save specifically in
                       relation to conspiracy to defraud and conspiracy
                       to engage in conduct which would tend to corrupt
                       public morals or outrage public decency.

             2.        Subject to the exceptions above the statutory
                       offence of conspiracy can only be charged in
                       respect of a conspiracy which necessarily involves
                       the commission of an individual criminal offence.

             3.        In our view, the conduct under consideration would
                       not necessarily have involved the commission of
                       the offence of perverting the course of justice.
                       As has been pointed out, the inquiry to be
                       conducted was not judicial in nature.

             4.        Until 1974, it was widely believed that there was
                       a common law offence of "effecting a public
                       mischief". This was often used to charge persons
                       making false statements to the Police about
                       imaginary crimes, but convictions were also


                                                                                                                         / __ contd.


The Chief Constable,
S out h Y o r k s h i r e Police,

Snig Hill,
SHEFFIELD S3 8LY.

i p p r v t OFFICES:     BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4 /5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557 2 0 2 FAX 4 4 47 9 4 /4 21 1 9 9
                        JO S E PH S WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868
      LQNDSUDDARDS                                             RW3EN0.   2




          obtained for such diverse acts as disseminating
          rumours calculated to cause widespread alarm and
          building defective air raid shelters.

     5.   We have no doubt that if there was such a common
          law offence as effecting a public mischief, then
          the conduct with which we are concerned (if it
          could be made out) would involve a commission of
          that crime. We reach this conclusion because the
          inquiry was commissioned by the Secretary of State,
          expressly for the purpose of producing
          recommendations intended to ensure the. future
          preservation of human life.  In our view,, to
          commence the inquiry needed to produce such
          recommendations, having deliberately pre-judged the
          conclusions, must amount to the effecting of a
          public mischief.

     6.   However, in the case of DPP v Withers (1974)
          3AER984, the House of Lords ruled that conspiracy
          to effect a public mischief, in the sense of an
          agreement to do an act which, although not
          unlawful in itself, was extremely injurious to the
          public, is not an offence known to the law. That
          case concerned impersonation of officials by
          inquiry agents attempting to obtain sight of
          government and financial records.    The Judgments
          of the various law Lords made clear that the
          offence could still be charged i f a n d only if,
          the conduct complained of was of a type .which had
          already been recognised at common law.or
          statutorily defined as a crime.


We are, therefore, drawn to agree with the conclusions of the DPP,
albeit reluctantly, because we do feel that if such conduct were
made out, then it ought to disclose an offence.

Finally, we should say that we do not hold ourselves out as experts
on criminal law.  It, therefore, occurs to us that if, from the
point of view of South Yorkshire Police, this matter is to be seen
as having been thoroughly examined, the Director might be asked if
he would be prepared to obtain an external opinion from Leading
Counsel.


Yours faithfully,
TELEPHONE:                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                           SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


R B WELLS QPM M A
CHIEF CONSTABLE                                               23 July 1990



                                                 PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL


A Green Esq QC
Director of Public Prosecutions
4/12 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AZ




Thank you, again, for your letter of 9 July.  I understand clearly what
you say and can now confirm that there was no original note made of the
conversation in question.

Would you be kind enough to run your professional eye across the attached
letter provided by our solicitors?

The last paragraph suggests that, with a view to the matters being seen
to be thoroughly examined, you might seek Counsel's opinion on the angle
now introduced, which I perceive to be fresh.   This thought is offered,
I'm sure, only in the spirit of canvassing the widest of independent
view

I am due shortly to go back to                  Driginating the report and
would   like  to  do   so  with   the  maximum   possible  collateral  for
open-handedness. I do hope that this final enquiry will not prove the
last straw on the burden of your office.       I anticipate publicity when
I have seen          and we should be seen to have tried our best




Richard Wells
#
                                         OPINION


    1.    I have been asked to advise whether certain evidence in a
    report dated 12th April 1990 could support a prosecution for any
    criminal    offence.     I shall proceed on the assumption that the
    writer of the report has recorded that evidence with complete
    accuracy.


    2.    I have    considered whether          the   evidence    could support      a
    prosecution for an offence of perverting the course of justice
    or conspiracy to commit such an offence. Perverting the course
    of   justice   is a common     law offence         and has been       accurately
    described as contempt of court under another name                      (Archbold,
    Criminal Pleading Evidence and Practice, 43rd Ed., para. 24-39.)
    It has been established beyond any doubt that the law of contempt
    does not apply to commissions or committees of enquiry of the
    kind set up in this matter, with the statutory .exception of an
    enquiry under the Tribunals of Enquiry (Evidence) Act 1921: see
    Lutchmeeparsad Badry v. D.P.P.           [1983] A.C. 297 (P.C.) and see
    section 19 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981 as construed by Lord
    Donaldson M.R. in R. v. Liverpool Daily post [1990] 2 W.L.R. 494,
    at 501 (C.A.).      It follows that the evidence could not support
    a prosecution for the offence of perverting the course of justice
    or conspiracy thereto.


    3.    I have further considered whether the evidence could support
    a prosecution for the offence of misconduct by a person in public
    office, also an offence against the common law, or for conspiracy
    to commit      such an    offence.    The    offence    has been defined        as
    follows:
         "It is an indictable offence at common law for a public
         officer  wilfully   and   without   reasonable  excuse   or
         justification to neglect to perform a duty imposed upon him
         either by common law or statute." (Halsbury's Laws of
         England, 4th Ed., volume 11(1) re-issue, para. 292)
    In R. v. Dytham [1979] 1 Q. B. 722 (C.A. C.D.)                    (which provides
    modern authority for the above definition), the Court said that
    the offence involves:
         "an element of culpability              which     is   not    restricted   to
        dishonesty but which must be of such a degree that the
        misconduct impugned is calculated to injure the public
        interest so as to call for condemnation and punishment."
        (At pp. 727-728)
(The editors       of Archbold,    43rd Ed. , para 24-49 describe             the
offence too narrowly).


4.      In R. v. Whitaker    [1914] 1 K.B.       1283   (C.C.A.),     a public
officer is described as:
        "an officer who discharges any duty in the discharge of
        which the public are interested, more clearly if he is paid
        out of a fund provided by the public. If the taxes go to
        supply his payment and the public have an interest in the
        duties he discharges, he is a public officer." (At p. 1296)
In that     case   a regimental    colonel     was   held    to be    a public
officer. In Dytham (above), a police officer was conceded to be
a    public officer.      In R. v. Llewellyn-Jones [1968] 1 Q.B.              429
(C .A . C.D.) the registrar of a county court was conceded to be
a public officer.      In the light of these authorities and other
authorities to be found in Russell on Crime 12th Ed., 361 et seq.
and Stephen's Digest of the Criminal Law,               9th Ed., pp.112-115
both persons are public officers. However, it may well be that,
for reasons of public policy, a person in the position of the
first    speaker mentioned    in    the     report   is immune      from   being
pursued in the ordinary courts: see Russell, above, at p. 362 and
Anderson v. Gorrie [1895] 1 Q.B. 668.


5.      Any public officer who conducts an investigation with the
deliberate intention of concealing the truth from the public by
falsely attributing blame could, on the authorities, be convicted
of   the   offence   of misconduct     by    a person       in   public    office
(subject to any immunity from prosecution). Such a person would,
it seems likely, be found to be under a legal duty to conduct the
investigation fairly and properly.           (As to the duties of police
officers,    see R. v. Commisioner of Police,           ex parte Blackburn
[1968] 2 Q.B. 118, at p. 135-136.) Such conduct would constitute
a wilful neglect, without reasonable excuse or justification,
to perform the duty. An agreement to conduct an investigation in
that way could constitute a conspiracy to '- ; :


6.      A person speaking the words recorded in the report would
•
    not thereby commit        the offence of misconduct         by a person in
    public office or an attempt to commit that offence. Talking about
    an offence that one might commit is not, of course, committing
    the offence. Nor could any agreement to commit the offence be
    inferred   from   those    words.   At   the   very   highest,     a possible
    agreement is being discussed.



                                                          Anunony t i o o p e r y . u .
    5 Paper Buildings
    The Temple                                                       27 July 1990
    London EC4
Dru Sharpling

    J        .
HILLSBOROUGH

1        I enclose a bundle of papers comprising:

                 letter from Chief Constable South Yorkshire Police to the then DPP of
                 4 August 1990;

                 Minute from Acting Chief Constable dated 9 May 1990;

                 Minute from                  of 12 April 1990;

         •       Letter from DPP to Chief Constable dated 9 July 1990;

         •       Letter from Chief Constable to DPP dated 23 July 1990;

         •       Letter from Hammond Suddards dated 18 July 1990;

         •       Counsel’s opinion dated 27 July 1990.

2       The issue is whether we should place the minute of 12 April 1990 on a schedule
        for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

3       Few people here know about the papers - they have been kept separately in the
         safe. As far as I know, they have not been referred to in the past and form no
        part of any decision making, recent or otherwise. I would not like to say for
         definite whether the material was seen by counsel who advised in 1990, but I
         doubt it.

4       I can not see that the information (assuming it to be were true), would have any
         impact on the case.

5        I suggest, as we discussed, that we are open with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
          that we say we have the item and, if necessary, copy it to him. We will need to
          explain how the minute came into our possession. We will need to consider
        ' whether any of the accompanying documentation needs to be mentioned. I think
          it is so unlikely to have any impact on the case that we do not need to bring it
          to the scrutiny’s attention.

Chris Enzor
Central Casework
23 July 1997
RESTRICTED - SENIOR MANAGEMENT




RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.   I attach a bundle of papers which upon reading will become self explanatory. Chris
      Enzor’s note sets out the position clearly.

2.   My own reaction is that we should be open with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and write
     separately indicating the nature of the material in our possession and its import.

3.   I agree with Chris that the information, even if it were true, would have very little
      impact on the case.

4.   Before, however, I advise the Director I would be grateful if you could give an
      indication of the relationship between the CPS and the scrutiny for the purposes of
      disclosure. The nature of Mr Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny is informal but he
      will be talking to witnesses albeit in private.

5.   Although the decision will obviously be ours at the end of the day, I would be
      grateful for any advice on disclosure. My worry is that if we do not then
      may (if he is still around) decide to break silence and we will be left holding the
      baby.

6.   Obviously these papers must have an extremely limited circulation.




Dru Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework
30 July 1997
Ext.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room *** 5.:' '•
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT




RE:    THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


Further to the Director’s letter of 30 July 1997,1 enclose two schedules showing the material
held by the CPS.

As the Director indicated, the material falls into two distinct parts, the material relevant to
the 1990 decision not to prosecute and that relevant to the recent 1997 decision not to
prosecute.

The schedules are comprehensive and list all the material held at the CPS or viewed by the
CPS. All the material we hold is currently at United House in York. Rather than reproduce
in our own schedules all the lists contained in the West Midlands Police Report, I have
attached a copy of the master index of witnesses and documents as an appendix to the
schedule of pre August 1990 material.

You will no doubt wish to discuss access to the material. There is one further item which
is not covered on the 1990 schedule, about which the Chief Crown Prosecutor will be writing
to you separately.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                               m
|Aliss D. H. Sharpling
 -hief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                        CPS
                                                                                                               50 LitcgcU Hill
                                                                                                               London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                   Switchboard; 0171-273 8000
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                          1                                             DX No:   300850 Ludgate EC4
     Hillsborough Scrutiny
     Room 528                                                                Facsimile:   0171 -     273 8050
     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
     London                                                                Direct Line:   0171-      273 1225
     SW1H 9AT
                                                                         Our Reference:

 L                                                      J               Your Reference:


                                                                                                     7 August 1997



     Dear Sir

     RE: THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

     I am writing in connection with recent correspondence detailing schedules of material
     currently held or viewed by the CPS.

     A s indicated, I am in possession of a police report dated 22 April 1990 and associated
     documents stemming from the remarks allegedly overheard by                     made in
     conversation between the late Lord Chief Justice and a Chief Constable.

     The report does not relate to evidential material pertinent to the Hillsborough disaster.

     I have taken the opportunity to discuss the matter with the Director (who is currently away
     from the office) who would, of course, be happy to discuss the matter with you.
     Alternatively, the material is available for inspection at this office or can be forwarded at
     your convenience. I look forward to hearing from you.

     Yours faithfully




p- Dru Sharpling
   Chief Crown Prosecutor
   Central Casework




                          Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the, interests of justice
                                                                       CONFIDENTTAT.


                                    FIL E N O T E

                        HILI SROROI CH CASF,


4 August 1999

RE:    CONVERSATION BETWEEN LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR AND
       MR GEOFFREY DEAR IN 1989

Points for Discussion

       A conversation between the above two persons was overheard by                who was
       their driver on 18 April 1989, three days after the disaster.

                     nade a report dated 12 April 1990, which went to the Chief Constable of
      South Yorkshire Police (Richard WELLS                     had discussed the conversation
      with his wife                                aria an undisclosed number of close work
      colleagues. At the time he was angry at t le injustice but decided that he would not be
      listened to. He then discussed the matter with Supt. BETTINSON (presumably in 1990)
      and felt that the record should be put straight.

3.    A police file note of 9 May 1990 records a conversation between the ACC and Peter
      Metcalf (Hammond Suddards solicitors), with the latter suggesting that as criminal
      offences could be involved it should go to Richard WELLS, who had not been involved
      in the disaster.

4.    On 4 July 1990, Richard WELLS wrote to the DPP, Allan GREEN, enclosing a copy of
      the report, desiring that "truth is served" and requesting advice.

5.    On 9 July 1990 the DPP wrote back to RW, expressing the view that he did not think
      that there was prima facie evidence o f a criminal offence. The offences that he
      considered were conspiracy to PCOJ, bribery of a public official and misconduct by an
      officer o f justice.

6.    On 18 July 1990, Hammond Suddards wrote to RW with their review o f the law. They
      reluctantly agreed with the conclusions of the DPP, but considered that if there was such
       an offence as "effecting a public mischief it was committed here, where there was
       deliberate prejudgement of the conclusions of the Inquiry. They suggested obtaining an
       opinion from leading counsel.

7.     On 23 July 1990 this letter was passed to the DPP by RW.
Anthony Hooper QC (as he then was) provided an opinion dated 27 July 1990. He
advised that, on the basis that the conversation was accurately recorded, there was
insufficient evidence to support a prosecution for a conspiracy to PCOJ, or for
misconduct in a public office.

There is no further correspondence on the subject until 23 July 1997 when Mr Enzor
flagged up the matter to Miss Sharpling (CCP Central Casework) as part of disclosure
to the Hillsborough Scrutiny. In the end Miss Sharpling wrote to Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith on 7 August 1997 with the details of the information held and offering him an
inspection o f the material. There is no record o f a reply on the file. Matthew Pyne at the
Home Office holds all the Scrutiny documents. He has informed me by telephone that
Dru's letter is on file, however he has not found either a copy reply or a file note on the
point. He will do a further search.

Key Issues

•   Ian DAINES, the ACC at South Yorkshire Police who is in charge of the
    Hillsborough Archive, is concerned about disclosure of these sensitive papers in his
    possession. He is asking for the advice o f the Director. Quite rightly he wants to
     ensure that the police act fully in accordance with their duty o f disclosure under the
    common law.
•   The first main issue to consider is whether or not to disclose the details o f the
    conversation. Is it relevant? If it is, is it so sensitive that PH applies? Do the police
    or we have a duty of disclosure?
•   Media interest: this matter does not yet appear to have been brought to the attention
    of the press. Those officially aware of the conversation are the South Yorkshire
    Police, the CPS, the now Mr Justice Hooper, the police solicitors Hammond
     Suddards, and presumably the Hillsborough Scrutiny team. A leak from those
     sources should not be expected. The complainant,                      | spoke to his wife
     and a number of colleagues. There is a possibility that, when the trial begins and
    receives the likely national coverage, the memories of police officers may be jogged
     and occasion press reports o f “an establishment cover-up”.
•   There is no reason to reconsider the 1990 decision that there was insufficient
     evidence o f any criminal offence.
•   Relevance: whether or not the material is relevant to any o f the issues in the private
    prosecution.
•   Duty of disclosure. See the 1992 Guidelines re disclosure to third parties. The
     Crown Court can grant the HFSG a summons requiring the police to produce
     relevant statements and exhibits so as to permit the private prosecutor to comply
     with the general responsibilities of a prosecutor. There is no reason why that should
     not apply to us as well. Under the present policy it must be that we would have a
     duty to disclose relevant material, or make a PII application to the court.
•   If either the material is now seen as relevant and/or we wish an independent view on
     disclosure, then there are a number of avenues to consider. We could first obtain
     advice from Treasury Counsel; and then, if required, the police, by themselves or
    jointly with the CPS, could make an ex parte PH application, with or without notice,
     to the trial judge.
•   Does P n apply? Is there a need to maintain the confidentiality o f the information
     because disclosure would be damaging to the public interest? If there is to be a PII
          application to the trial judge in accordance with the normal procedure, should it be
          type I, II or III?
      •   At this stage it should be noted that the Circuit presiding judge has reserved the case
          to himself He is Mr Justice Anthony HOOPER.
      •   An advantage o f an early PII application to the trial judge is that it deals with three
          main issues. The first o f disclosure, the second that the trial judge has already been
          involved in giving an opinion on the material in question and the last to show (if the
          media make a meal o f it) that the CPS and the SYP have behaved properly and in
          accordance with the interests of justice.
      •   The next hearing at the Crown Court on 3 September 1999 is to hear argument on
          disclosure.


George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
