                             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                     Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9J
           DX 123242 St James’s Park   Direct Fax:    Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)

                                           Direct Line:

Christopher Newell                                   Please quote;
Director, Casework                                   L98/L98/8265K/SJR/D1/CHJ/D1
Crown Prosecution Headquarters
50 Ludgate Hill                                      Your reference:
London EC4M 7EX
                                                     Date:                   22 March 1999




                                                                       (yC
Dear Chris,

Re: ex parte Duckenfield & Muray


I enclose a copy of your affidavit with the signed jurat attached.


Yours sincerely,




B M Smith
for the Treasury Solicitor
                                                                               (1) C.W.P. Newell
                                                                                (2) First Affidavit
                                                                (3) Sworn on behalf of Respondent
                                                                              (4) Sworn 22.3.99.

                                                                                       CO/856/99

 IN THE HIGH COURT O F ITTSTTPF.

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION



BETWEEN:


                                          REGINA

                                             -v-

                           DDRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                     Respondent
                                        Ex parte
                              DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                                          and
                                BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                                      Applicants




                                     AFFIDAVIT




I, CHRISTOPHER W ILLIAM PAUL NEWELL, of 50 Ludgate Hill, London EC4M 7EX,
MAKE OATH and say as follows:


1.    I am Director of Casework of the Crown Prosecution Service at the above address and

       it was I who took the decision in this case on behalf of the CPS and the DPP not to

       intervene in the private prosecution against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray. I refer

       to my letters of 1 February 1999 to the solicitors for Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray,

       in which I sought to set out the reasons which led me to that decision. I am now asked

      to elaborate on my conclusion that any public interest factors tending against
     prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour and on my conclusion in relation

     to the specific charge against Mr Duckenfield alone of attempting to pervert the course

     of justice.




PUBLIC INTEREST FACTORS

2.   As I now recall, the public interest factors tending against prosecution which I

     considered were as follows.

     (1)     Previous reviews of the case, in particular those carried out by the DPP when

             considering the question whether criminal proceedings should be taken against

            Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray and the more recent report of Lord Justice

            Stuart-Smith.

     (2)     The fact that the Applicants had been told on previous occasions that the DPP

            did not intend to prosecute.

     (3)     The delay which had occurred between the commission of the alleged offences

            and the commencement of this prosecution and its likely effect on the

            Applicants, although I took the view that delay may be offset by the seriousness

            of the alleged offences (as is reflected in paragraph 6.5(d) of the Code for

            Crown Prosecutors) (“the Code”).

     (4)     The effect of the delay on the evidence, for example in terms of the potential

            impairment of the recollections of witnesses.

     (5)     The assertion made on behalf of Mr Murray of ill-health, although I noted that

            no medical evidence had been put forward in support of this assertion and that,

            as again reflected in the Code (at paragraph 6.5(e)), ill-health may be offset by



                                            2
<4




                  the seriousness of the offence.




     3.   As against these factors tending against prosecution, there was in my view one

          extremely important factor in favour of prosecution, namely the very serious nature of

          the alleged offences, in particular, the alleged offences of manslaughter.         In my

          opinion, the allegation that two senior police officers were responsible for the deaths

          of a number of people as a result of criminal negligence was a very grave allegation.




     4.   Paragraph 6.2 of the Code reflects the considerable weight attached by the CPS to the

          seriousness of the alleged offence when seeking to strike the right balance as to the

          factors for and against prosecution. (I refer also to the opening words of paragraph

          6.4). Having carefully considered the factors tending against prosecution and this

          extremely important factor in favour of it, I came to the firm conclusion that the factors

          tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh what I considered to be the very

          strong public interest factor in favour of prosecution.




     THE ADDITIONAL CHARGE AS AGAINST MR DUCKENFIELD ALONE

     5.   I was fully aware of the seriousness of this additional charge.        I also tentatively

          concluded that partial intervention (i.e. intervening in order to take over one charge but

          not intervening in relation to the other charges) was in law open to the CPS and I

          proceeded on that assumption. However, the existing policy did not cover the situation

          which arose in this case, namely where the conclusion was reached that there was

          clearly a case to answer in relation to some of the charges but not in relation to others.



                                                    3
       (I can say that with some confidence, since I had overall responsibility for   fo r m u la tin g


       the policy). I had therefore to consider the question which arose in relation to this

       additional charge without the benefit of any specific or settled policy. Having carefully

       considered the question, I concluded that it was in fact inappropriate to intervene only

       to take over (with a view to discontinuing) this additional charge.




6.     First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate or desirable. It

       seemed to me that the DPP should either intervene so as to take over the proceedings

       in their entirety or not at all. To have intervened partially would still have left criminal

      proceedings in place in relation to the other charges which included the even more

      serious charge of manslaughter.          Secondly, I took into account the fact that Mr

      Duckenfield would not be left without any remedy in relation to this additional charge.

      On the contrary, he would be entitled to invite the Magistrates’ Court to dismiss it on

      the basis that there was no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge arose out of essentially

      the same events as the events which gave rise to the other charges and thus those events

      would be scrutinised in any event.



SWORN at                      CiAJurc ^tuikc f cj

this 1 2^ day of March 1999




Before me,

                              Solicitor/€ommissioner fof Oaths




                                                    4
                                   CO/856/99

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVTSTON


BETWEEN:


                REGINA

                   -v-

 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                         Respondent
              Ex parte
    DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                and
      BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                          Applicant?




           AFFIDAVIT




           Treasury Solicitor
         Queen Anne’s Chambers
              28 Broadway
           London SW1H 9JS

         Ref. L98/8265K/SJR/D1

         Counsel’s ref. C .64241
