                  ftv           |
           H IL L S B O R O U G H
            IN Q U IR Y TEAM



i


/
    v/          Y~
                              wl/O




         u>£t$/ compliments
                                                          JMJ/VSC

                                                          11 December 1989


Letters sent to:-
Hammond Suddards
Davies Arnold Cooper
Reynolds Porter Chamberlain
Messrs Keeble Hawson
Brian Thompson & Partners
E Steel, Hillsborough Steering Group

Also To:-
R M Whalley
Dr Popper
C Cleugh, DPP   y
Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - RELEASE OF STATEMENTS

As you know I am currently leading, on behalf of Mr Geoffrey Dear, the
criminal investigation into the events that occurred at Hillsborough on
15 April 1989- That investigation is continuing with maximum possible
speed and I would hope to have completed the full file for the Director
of Public Prosecutions by the Spring of next year, although for obvious
reasons I cannot guarantee that at this time.

Over the last few weeks I have received quite a number of requests for
information which we presently hold which was initially collected for
Lord Justice Taylor's public inquiry and also for Her Majesty's Coroner
in Sheffield.  All the information gathered now forms part of the
criminal investigation and the Director of Public Prosecutions has
requested that no material is released, until such a time that the
Director has had the opportunity to consider all the circumstances and
decided whether to issue proceedings or not.  Lord Justice Taylor and
Her Majesty's Coroner are in agreement with this policy of non-release
at this time which, as you will appreciate, is what would normally apply
in any criminal investigation.  I am afraid, therefore, that I am not in
a position to respond to your requests for material at this time.  If
during the coming months we interview any of your clients, you may think
it advisable that they should ask for a copy of any statement at the
time that they make it to my police officers.




                                Lloyd House, Birmingham
                                   -   2   -




I trust that this letter clarifies the current position.  I am sorry I
cannot be more helpful, but I think you will appreciate the reasons why
the policy exists.  Once the Director of Public Prosecutions has reached
his decision, or proceedings have concluded, then I will address any
requests you have to Her Majesty's Coroner in Sheffield.  I will continue
to keep your interests in mind.

Yours sincerely




Assistant Chief Constable
(Hillsborough Inquiry)
