                                    MINUTE


TO:    Chris Newell
       Robin Booth



RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.    All the parties to the private prosecution are at Leeds Magistrates’ Court this
      morning for an application by the defendants re disclosure of documents in the
      possession of the South Yorkshire police.

2.    Attached is a copy faxed letter from the solicitors for Mr. Murray requesting
      details of our decision making process. I have spoken to them this morning
       and they now know that any decision about disclosure will be taken in London .
      ai^lwill.be promulgated to ^tiemas sp^ryas possible.

3.    I have also spoken to Ann Adlington of the HFSG and to Mr. Shepherd of
       Hammond Suddards who are both keenly interested in what we now intend to
       do re disclosure of documents in our possession.

4.    I understand that the court are waiting on our decision before setting a new
       date for the present application. A further complication is that Mr. Murray
       intends to make an application for judicial review of our decision not to
       intervene and his solicitor considers that the disclosure point should be
       considered after that application is heard. That is, if their application is
       successful and we intervene in order to discontinue then disclosure will not be
       relevant, while if they are unsuccessful then voluntary disclosure can be given
       as required before committal proceedings.

5.    All parties have a schedule of the documents in CPS possession. Except for
      internal CPS material, advice from Counsel and correspondence with the
      police and other judicial authorities,it is comprised of papers provided to us by
      the police. These are in the form of transcripts of evidence from the Taylor
      Inquiry and the Inquest, copy statements and exhibits obtained by the police
      and police reports.

6.    It may be considered that we can give voluntary disclosure of documents in
      our possession that are already in the public domain (statements and other
      material that are now in the House of Commons Library as a result of the
       scrutiny). Advice from counsel is legally privileged and there is no reason
      why that privilege should be waived for the purposes of the private
      prosecution. Internal correspondence and notes of the decision making
      process are subject to public interest immunity on the basis of the candour test
       and in any event are unlikely to be relevant (except for judicial review
      proceedings when evidence can be provided by way of affidavits).
•
    7.    We have not been asked by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire police for
          further advice re voluntary disclosure and from taking to the police solicitors
          this morning it appears that they will advise as required. Any PII documents
          generated by the police (eg police reports) will require waiver from the Chief
          Constable before disclosure can be given.

    8.    Do you need any more information from me to enable the disclosure decision
          to be made at this time? All the parties are pressing for either the decision to
          be made as soon as possible today or for a deadline date to be given them.




    George R.Croston
    Prosecution Team Leader
    Central Casework York
    Tel:
    Fax:
DRAFT LETTER TO DEFENCE SOLICITORS 1 0 . foU. K



Dear Sirs

RE: ADLINGTON v. DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

The Crown Prosecution Service decision not to intervene in this private prosecution
by Ann Adlington , representing the Hillsborough Family Support Group, has already
been promulgated to you.

Mr. Croston’s letter of 27 July 1998 to the solicitor acting for the Hillsborough
Family Support Group, and which was copied to you, explains our policy where a
private prosecution is involved. In particular he covered the application of that policy
where, as here, we are asked by a defendant to take over the case in order to
discontinue it. In essence we should only take over a private prosecution when there
is a particular need for us to do so on behalf of the public and in accordance with the
principles set out in the stated policy.

As was disclosed in earlier correspondence the policy is different to that of the Code
for Crown Prosecutors which states that we can only bring cases where there is
sufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and that the public interest
requires a prosecution.

The policy in considering private prosecutions enshrines the individual’s right to
bring a private prosecution, which is contained within Section 6(1) of the prosecution
of Offences Act 1985. It recognises that there will always be some circumstances
where although the Crown Prosecution Service will not take over and run a
prosecution, it is right that the private prosecutor be allowed to continue with their
prosecution.

The review conducted by the Crown Prosecution Service considered all the
documents made public by the various inquiries and judicial hearings from that of the
late Lord Taylor through to the recent scrutiny. In addition documents subject to legal
privilege and public interest immunity that had been seen by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith were also considered. All the parties to this prosecution were asked if they
could provide further material that had not been previously examined. Evidence and
representations were received from both you and the other parties and these were
incorporated into the review bundle.

We then used our stated test and considered whether one or more of the following
circumstances applied;

•   There is clearly no case to answer.
•   The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those
    factors tending in favour.
•   The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.
In coming to our decision not to intervene in the case as a whole, we judged that it
was not possible for us to say that any one or more of those circumstances clearly
could not apply. We fully considered all the evidence and representations, the overall
circumstances of the case and the interests of the public and justice. It was thought
not appropriate to exercise the Director’s power under the Prosecution of Offences
Act 1985 to accede to your request to take over and discontinue the case.

I appreciate that our decision will not be welcomed by your client and that you might
wish a more detailed explanation of the application of our stated policy, but we
consider that it would be wrong to go further and publicly discuss the strength of the
evidence in a particular case and a decision not to prosecute.

If I can be of any further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.
