                                                            f A L K I R
                                                            ■fc r o ;Jt I S
                                                                       S olicitors


                Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
            Facsimile 0113 2459412. D ocum ent Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                       Web: http://www.walkermorris.co.uk


George R. Croston, Esq.                                                                 Our ref               RBM/MT/MURRAY
Crown Prosecution Service
Central Casework                                                                        Your ref              YBF/GC/3341/89
D.X. 65204 YORK 6
                                    fT '

                                                                                         16 July 1998




Dear Mr. Croston

BERNARD MURRAY
SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES COURT 17TH JULY 1998

Thank you for your letter of the 15th July. We note that Mr. Croston is dealing with this
matter and the terms o f reference as set out in the second paragraph.

Our instructions for a second time in this case come as a result of the private Summonses
issued. The Writer had represented Superintendent Murray at the Inquest before the Coroner
at Sheffield.

We have recovered our papers from our archives and we will let you have a Schedule of the
principle items within our archived material. They will of course be principally concerned
with the Inquest, and with some of the matters that were before the earlier Taylor enquiry.
We did not represent at that enquiry nor were we involved in it.

What we have gathered since our enquiry will, we are sure, be already well known to you,
namely the Lord Justice Stuart Smith Report and the statements made in Parliament.

So far as you can tell, is it likely that you will have all of these papers already.

Are there any papers in your possession that you think can be released to us by way of
copies?

Will it be you who advises the Assistant Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire in relation to
any request that we make for him to advise what papers they hold, and for consideration to
be given for release o f the same?

We confirm that the Summonses in South Sefton have been withdrawn. We regret that we do
anticipate that some further Summonses will be issues against our Client and Mr Duckenfield.

    [s fiithfully


R.B. Manning
Partner




        A list o f the partners names is open to inspection a t the above address. Regulated by The Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
