 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                          CO                199

 QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

 CROWN OFFICE LIST

     IN THE MATTER OF A N APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                  REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                                             THE QUEEN



                                                  and



                              D IR EC T O R OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                  Respondent

                                              EX-PARTE

                                   DAVID GO DFREY DUC KEN FIELD
                                                                                   Applicant




                                  VARIOUS LAW C O M M ISSIO N AND
                                   ROYAL COM M ISSIO N REPORTS




                                                                                      Page
1.        Extract from the Royal Commission o f Criminal Procedure - January           1-8
           1981.

2.        Extract from         the Law    Commission’s Consultation Paper   149       9-14
           “Consents to Prosecution”.

3.        Extracts from the Law Commission’s final report “Consents to               15-17
           Prosecution” - October 1998.




P:\24332\l \d0005.0P:\24332\l \d0005.0}
   The Royal Commission on
      Criminal Procedure

          Chairman: Sir Cyril Philips




                  R EPO R T

Presented to Parliament by Com m and o f Her M ajesty
                    January 1981




                 LONDON: HM SO
                     £19.00 net
                                                        Cm nd 8092
Chapter    7


large urban areas) are reluctant to become involved at all in some kinds of
prosecution for which they have no primary responsibility. Some agencies, for
example the National Television Licence Record Office, work almost wholly
without reference to the police and without wishing to involve them. Others
investigate their own cases but pass them to the police for prosecution. And
there are some, like the Department of Health and Social Security in its social
security fraud work, which have inspectors without special powers and which
work with the police to the extent that is possible. Indeed in its evidence to us
the Departm ent has expressed concern lest the level of cooperation should
diminish. And that is the sense of the evidence of other non-governmental
bodies, such as the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds. The introduction
of the Crown prosecutor will certainly affect these relationships and that will
have to be kept in mind as changes are implemented.

The private prosecutor
   7.46. Apart from those retail stores that have to prosecute because of the
policy of a particular police force, prosecutions by private citizens are, as a
significant phenomenon, confined to prosecutions for common assault.1 Even
private prosecutions for the latter offence may well owe their relative frequency
(but they form a tiny proportion of all prosecutions) to the way in which the
offence is treated by the Offences against the Person Act 1861. The Act makes
it an essentially private wrong; any proceedings have to be brought by or on
behalf of the aggrieved person and any person who is prosecuted is thereby
released from the threat of civil proceedings.2 The Criminal Law Revision
Committee has recommended the repeal of these provisions.3 We accept the
case for bringing this offence under the purview of the police and into the
prosecution arrangements which we propose. As far as prosecutions by retail
stores for shop-lifting are concerned, we recommend that this practice should
cease and that the police should start proceedings in such cases and the Crown
prosecutor should conduct the prosecutions. Police forces have not found it
easy to achieve consistency in the treatm ent of shop-lifters, who may be elderly
and with medical and personal histories justifying non-prosecution. Since a
greater degree of consistency in the use of prosecution in these cases is
desirable, it is, in our view, inappropriate to permit or to expect private
organisations routinely to be exercising the responsibility for the decision to
prosecute.
   7.47. Prosecutions by private citizens other than in these cases are very rare
indeed and scarcely seem a sufficient base to justify the position of the great
majority of our witnesses who argue in one way or another that the private
prosecution is one of the fundamental rights of the citizen in this country and
that it is the ultimate safeguard for the citizen against inaction on the part of
the authorities.
   7.48. This right, upon which as we have noted the whole prosecution system
is in theory built, is in fact subject to a num ber of constraints for the private
’See the Law and Procedure Volume, paras 169 ff, and Lidstone, Hogg and Sutcliffe, op. cit.,
  chapter 5.
’See the Law and Procedure Volume, paras 172 and 173.
’Fourteenth Report of the Criminal Law Revision Com m ittee Offences against the Person. London
  H M S O 1980 Cmnd 7844. paras 158 to 166.
                                        The C om m ission's proposed prosecution system

citizen. First in well over ] 00 Acts of Parliament the right to prosecute is
subject to the consent of a Minister, usually the Attorney General, an official,
the Director of Public Prosecutions, or a judge.1 The second, more important,
constraint on the private prosecutor is the cost. Legal aid is not available to
begin a criminal prosecution. In indictable cases the prosecutor may at the
discretion of the court be awarded his costs out of central funds a t the
conclusion of the case whether or not there was a conviction. In summary
matters this does not apply and he can only be awarded costs to be paid by the
defendant, and then only if the prosecution succeeded. If the defendant is
acquitted, in all cases the court has the power to order that the defence costs
shall be paid by the prosecution, and he might have to find both his own legal
expenses and those of the person he has prosecuted. Certain technical
considerations about the right of audience at the Crown Court also restrict the
right as does the need for the prosecutor to have the necessary legal and
procedural knowledge. As Lidstone and his colleagues observe,
        “ These constraints combine to put formidable obstacles in the way of a
        private prosecutor, and they make the right of private prosecution one
        that is hardly exercised in practice.” 2

   7.49. They do not, however, preclude a person maliciously and vexatiously
applying to a magistrates' court for the issue of a summons or warrant of
arrest which effectively is the start of proceedings, even though the complainant
does not intend or will be unable to take the matter further than that. We have
received evidence of this occurring, and, where a magistrate, perhaps properly
on the evidence before him, accedes to the application, the harm caused to the
person accused can be substantial.

   7.50. If then the private prosecution is to be retained as an effective
safeguard against improper inaction by the prosecuting authority, the financial
difficulty must be removed. At the same time the risk of malicious, vexatious
and utterly unreasonable prosecutions must be guarded against. Nevertheless,
the application of the criminal law is of its nature only appropriate where the
community’s interests arc at risk. Criminal sanctions arc imposed for the
benefit of society as a whole, on its behalf and at its expense. We do not think
that private citizens should have an unlimited right of access to the criminal
process to remedy wrongs for which other measures might be more appropriate.
But where criminal proceedings should be taken, then they should be paid for
out of public funds. We therefore recommend that if a private citizen wishes to
initiate a prosecution he should apply in the first instance to the Crown
prosecutor. If the latter is satisfied about the case, applying the same criteria
as he would apply for any other prosecution, he should take the case on. If he
is not and the private citizen, after explanation, still wishes to proceed, the
latter should be able to make an application for leave to commence proceedings
to a magistrates' court, that is to at least two justices, attended by a clerk.
  7.51. The Crown prosecutor should attend the hearing of the application,
which should be held in private, to explain why he considers the matter should
no: be prosecuted. We have considered whether, if leave v-cre granted, the
’See the L a * e nd Procedur e Vol ume, para 159.
2Op cii., p i l l

                                                161



                                                                                          3
Chapter   7


Crown prosecutor should be obliged to undertake the case. But we do not
consider it sensible to require a lawyer to conduct a case he has already
rejected. We think it preferable to permit the private prosecutor to employ his
own solicitor for the purpose and to guarantee that he will be paid. W here
leave has been given, this should automatically carry with it a right for the
prosecutor’s reasonable costs to be paid out of central funds. This will serve to
remove the financial obstacle to private prosecution, but will also remind the
court that leave should be given only for prosecutions which it is proper to
finance out of public funds.
The role of central Departments
  7.52. We have already said that there will be a measure of national control
and machinery for accountability to central Government in the locally based
system which we propose. These are necessary for three purposes: first, in
order to develop consistent prosecution policies and to minimise arbitrary
variations in decisions between different areas; secondly, to achieve uniform
and acceptable standards of efficiency and service; and thirdly, to provide a
measure of accountability to Parliament in relation to general policies.
Development o f consistent prosecution policies
   7.53. The present position is that there is a limited degree of influence
exercised by the Attorney General (and the Director of Public Prosecutions)
through their responsibilities for the conduct of and provision of advice in
certain prosecutions, and also by the Home Secretary through his general
responsibility for the police.
The roles o f the Attorney General and the Director o f Public Prosecutions
   7.54. The Director currently has responsibilities under the Prosecution of
Offences Regulations 1979 for making the decision to prosecute in a limited
range of cases and for advising the police on that decision in the cases which
they refer to him and for consenting to prosecutions in a range of other cases
as required by individual statutes. He may also intervene in any case to take
over the prosecution. The Attorney’s role both in consenting to prosecutions
and in entering the plea of nolle prosequi to discontinue a trial on indictment
is more limited. Many of these powers have a long history but the statutory
consent provisions have often been arbitrarily imposed. The Director’s central
role derives from the nineteenth century attem pt to bring some order to public
prosecutions of major offences. The main general criticism of these arrange­
ments that we have had in our evidence is the delay in handling cases by the
Director’s office, which is attributed to lack of resources to meet the substantial
pressure of work.
    7.55. We would not propose remedying this by an infusion of new resources
 into the Director’s office. We consider that the service we propose will, in time,
 remove the need for the Director to be brought in by local prosecutors to
 decide or advise on prosecutions to anything like the extent that he is required
 to do now, and will thus reduce the pressure upon him and the delay in
 consultation. For the time being he will have a key part to play in developing
 the proposed new service, in conjunction, no doubt, with a reshaped and
 renamed Prosecuting Solicitors’ Society. W;hile new Crown prosecutors’
                                                                                   Bringing a case to trial

their being told whether they are in fact going to be prosecuted,1 and also of
saving resources, since at present, we believe, much police and court time is
taken up with ensuring that notice of summons in respect of such offences has
been properly served. It would also add to the flexibility of the police response
to offences on the street. However there are practical difficulties that would
have to be overcome; for example, adequate police supervision would have to
be arranged, consideration would need to be given to how cautioning practice
would be affected and arrangements would have to be made for liaison between
the police and courts over listing of cases. We consider that, especially in the
light of our proposal for the accusation, the possible benefits of such a
procedure merit its being introduced more widely on an experimental basis to
test its general feasibility.

The criteria for prosecution
   8.6. The present procedures for the commencement of proceedings were,
presumably, developed to enable the court to apply appropriate criteria for
allowing a prosecution to be launched. As we have recognised, this check is
now almost alw-ays a formality. In the written submissions made to us we
received substantial comment upon what the criteria for prosecution should be
and in our discussion of the present arrangements for prosecution in chapter 6
we observed that one of the standards of fairness by which a prosecution
system should be judged is whether prosecutions are brought only in those
cases where these criteria are met.2 This raises issues of great political and
social importance; it reflects the interplay between the law enforcement
agencies, prosecutors, the courts and society at large in ever-changing
circumstances; there can perhaps be no absolute answers. A statutory
prosecution service will promote a greater measure of openness and account­
ability and will stimulate, and provide the forum for, the development of
agreed and consistent criteria for the exercise of the discretion to prosecute.
We therefore offer some comments upon what these criteria should cover.

   8.7. It has long been accepted that not all incidents thought to have involved
breaches of the law can or indeed should be visited with prosecution. At the
minimum, prosecution should follow only if it is thought that an offence known
to the law has been committed. However repugnant or anti-social a person’s
behaviour, a prosecution should not be launched unless he has committed an
offence under the law. There must also be evidence to support the accusation;
in the absence of such evidence a person should not be accused of an offence
and brought before a court simply to allay public disquiet or to satisfy public
demand or prejudice. The English system permits arrest and investigation
when there is suspicion but not necessarily evidence in the full legal sense. Our
proposals for the institution of proceedings, and the criteria for exercise of
coercive powers such as arrest, do not affect this. The decision to prosecute,
however, is in practice a series of decisions from the initial arrest (or report of
an incident for consideration of prosecution) up until the trial. The further
down the path towards prosecution a case has travelled the more important it
becomes that whoever takes the decision to continue proceedings should satisfy
 See G e m m i l l and M o r g a n -G il e s , op.   c h .,   Tab le 3:12, p 2 y
!Sec paras 6 . 9-6 .1 1.
  Chapter 8

 himself that there is evidence by which the offence could, if necessary, be
 proved. This is particularly important in the English system of criminal justice
 which allows accused persons by pleading guilty to waive their right to have
 evidence produced against them.”
      5.8. There are at present differing views among prosecutors as to what
  constitutes enough evidence to justify a prosecution. The minimum standard
  (which all seem to agree is a necessary, although some do not consider it a
  sufficient, test) is often referred to as the existence of a p rim a fa c ie case: that
  is, evidence upon the basis of which, if it were accepted, a reasonable jury or
 magistrates court would be justified in convicting the accused of the offence
 alleged. The Director of Public Prosecutions is one of those who consider the
  existence of a prim a fa cie case a necessary but not sufficient condition for
  prosecution. In cases where his Department is involved, the Director has told
 us that the test used is whether or not there is a reasonable prospect of
 conviction; in other words, whether it seems more likely that there will be a
 conviction than an acquittal.1 This test requires the prosecutor, in reaching his
 decision, to go beyond consideration of whether there exists a p rim a fa c ie case
 and to consider whether the evidence that comprises it is, in fact, likely to be
 accepted. To do this he needs to assess all the available information, including
 any explanation or further information forthcoming from the prospective
 defendant. To this end it may be advantageous to the defendant or his legal
 adviser to disclose as much as possible to the prosecutor. This may sometimes
 result in the preferring of less serious charges or the abandonment of the
 prosecution.

    8.9. There is an underlying rationale in the application of this standard
 which, in our view, justifies its adoption as the minimum requirement for
 prosecution in any case. Someone should not be put on trial if it can be
 predicted, with some confidence, that he is more likely than not to be acquitted,
since it is both unfair to the accused and a waste of the restricted resources of
the criminal justice system. It does not follow that no case where the prosecutor
has doubts about its strength should be prosecuted. We accept, as was often
put to, us, that in such doubtful cases the prosecutor should “ let the court
decide , and in many instances the prosecutor does not know until the actual
trial shows it that there was a doubt about the strength of his case. But those
where it is apparent to the prosecutor, that is the police a t their stage in the
process or the Crown prosecutor at his, that there is no reasonable prospect of
conviction can hardly be described as doubtful. In such cases the prosecutor
should take responsibility for deciding not to prosecute, as the Director does
now.2 W e therefore suggest that the prosecutor should have to satisfy himself
that there is a reasonable prospect of conviction before going ahead with a
prosecution. The test applied to the Director’s cases should be extended to all
cases, and applied by all who make the decisions that bring a case to court.
   8.10. The Director also told us that he takes into account factors other than
the nature of the evidence and whether there is a reasonable prospect of
conviction.3 The factors which properly can be taken into account are difficult
'See the Law an d Procedure Volume, Appendix 25.
'/bid.
                                                         ■Bringing a case to trial

to enumerate exhaustively, but some commonly accepted ones have emerged
from the evidence submitted to us by the police service, the Director, and other
prosecuting agencies. Among these are the staleness of the offence, the youth
or age of the offender, and any mental illness or stress affecting the offender.
It is also sometimes proper to take into consideration the attitude of the victim
and the relationship of the victim to the offender. But there are undoubtedly
other factors which may indicate that no useful purpose would be served by
instituting a prosecution. These cannot be comprehensively listed; they depend
to some extent on the circumstances of individual cases. We consider, however,
that an attem pt must be m ade under the auspices of the Director of Public
Prosecutions to develop and promulgate throughout the police and prosecution
services criteria for the exercise of the discretion to prosecute.

   8.11. Within that framework it will always be possible that a prosecutor
will be subjected to criticism over the way he has exercised his discretion. But
the possibility of criticism cannot be a justification for starting a prosecution
against any individual if the criteria are not met. It must also be recognised
that the impartial administration of the criminal law does not mean that every
offender will or should be prosecuted. The decision to prosecute or to
discontinue proceedings must be seen for what it is, a decision on whether
prosecution is justified, on the basis of the evidence, and, as appropriate, taking
into account the sort of factors outlined in the previous paragraph. N o r can
the process of prosecution be used primarily to determine what occurred during
incidents of serious disorder or to allay public disquiet. It may be that some
other means of doing this needs to be found, but that is not for us to determine.
We confine ourselves to the observation that if there is such a gap in our
present arrangements for ascertaining and bringing to light the circumstances
of incidents that give rise to public concern, those who wish to see it filled
should not look to the decision on or the process of prosecution to do it.

Disclosure
   8.12. The term disclosure refers to the cxchnngc of information between the
parties before trial. That information can include names of witnesses, other
material which may be evidence relevant to the offence, and information on
the line of attack or defence which it is intended to pursue at trial. The
standards that we have been applying throughout our discussion of pre-trial
procedures apply equally to this aspect of preparing the case for trial. Openness
is essential if the system is to work fairly for the accused. There are a num ber
of critical decisions he has to make before the case comes to trial and he can
make them properly only if he is fully informed; the decision whether to plead
guilty or not guilty is only the most obvious of these. Similarly those decisions
and disclosure of certain information by the defence (an alibi, for example)
can affect the way the prosecution prepare their case and the resources they
devote to it. The prior disclosure of matters that could take up time at trial can
be of great importance in securing the efficient use of the resources of the
police, prosecutors and the courts. Accordingly it is our view that provision
should be made for the fullest disclosure possible, but any arrangements for
disclosure must be consistent with the overriding features of the accusatorial
  Chapter 9

      • . n the light of our proposals for a statutorily based prosecution service
 '! e avc            in chapter 8 the means by which prosecutions are started.
 t e means for ensuring that only adequately prepared cases for which
 prosecution is justified come to trial and the procedures governing their
 preparation.                                                             6

    9.9. We see no case for retention of the present different procedures f o r
 starting prosecutions (by charge or summons). We recommend a single
 procedure, called an accusation, which should not require the consent of the
 magistrates in cases initiated by the police or other official prosecutors (8.4).
    9.10. There should be agreed and consistent criteria f o r the exercise o f the
 discretion to prosecute. The criteria cannot be exhaustively enumerated; they
 must take account of varying circumstances. We would recommend the
 adoption for aH prosecutions of the test at present applied by the Director of
 Public Prosecutions. The prosecutor should have to satisfy himself that there is
 a reasonable prospect of conviction before going ahead with the prosecution:
 the cxibtencc of a prim a fa cie case would not of itself be sufficient (8.9-10).
   9.11 We endorse the principle now established in statute that the require­
 ment for disclosure by the prosecution should also apply to cases tried in the
m a8T CT f ‘ 0 U m ’ 3nd recornrnend a framework for facilitating such disclo­
sure (8.14-17). At the Crown Court, disclosure of material additional to that
at present required should be the responsibility of the prosecutor. Subject to a
discretion to withhold sensitive materia], he should be under a duty to copy or
make available statements or documents having some bearing on the offences
charged or the surrounding circumstances of the case (8.19). We rule out any
formal requirement of general disclosure by the defence, on grounds both of
principle and of practicability (8.20), but recommend the extension of the
provisions relating to the notification of alibi to certain other defences (8.22).
    9.12. T h &f o r m a l com m ittal of cases for trial seems to us unnecessary. But
some procedure is required where there will be delay in bringing a case to trial
in which the defendant wishes to challenge the justification for prosecution.
 I hat applies as much to cases tried in magistrates’ courts as in the Crown
Court. A new procedure should be devised to enable the defendant, whether
represented or not, to make a submission to the magistrates of no case to
answer in all either way or indictable cases, if the delay before trial will exceed
a specified period, which might be set at eight weeks (8.28-30).

  9.13. Other ways of improving the procedures for preparing a case for trial
were put to us in evidence, but for the various reasons given in the body of the
report we have not considered these in any detail. It would, in our view, be
more sensible to allow the new arrangements for prosecution to settle down
before any further wide examination of these other matters is undertaken.
  !Yl.pUi l
                                                                                                 tdUC I 01 _




              Home     J ^ L ib ia iy
      «



                                                  The Law
                                                  Commission
                                                   Working for Better Law



                     CRIMINAL LAW: CONSENTS
                     TO PROSECUTION
                     CONSULTATION PAPER NO 149


                     Comments on this Consultation Paper are invited until 31 December
                     1997. They can be sent to:

                     Ms C Salmon, Law Commission, Conquest House. 37-38 John Street
                     Theobalds Road, London W C IN 2BQ

                     Tel: 0171 453 1232

                     Fax: 0171 453 1297

                     E-mail: com m on.lawcom m ^gtnet.gov.uk



                     CONTENTS

                     PART I: INTRODUCTION

                                    The need for review                               12
                                    The objective o f this project                    hi
                                    Our approach                                      1 .1 2 -
                                                                                      1.16
                                    Provisional conclusions                           1.17
                     PART II: THE PROSECUTION PROCESS, PRIVATE
                     PROSECUTIONS AND MECHANISMS FOR
                     CONTROLLING THEM

                                   Commencing proceedings                             23
                                   The Crown Prosecution Service                      2-7
                                   Other public bodies                                2.26
                                   Private prosecutions                               2.28



http: w w v .g t n e t .g o v . u k 'l aw com m 'library 1ccpl4 9 coir.cms.htm                    2 '26 1
Report / Consultation Paper                                                                    Page 2 ol 16




                             (e) finally, we attempt to identify the sorts o f
                             offences the prosecution o f which would be
                             most likely to give rise to the harm identified
                             and which would, therefore, most appropriately
                             include a consent provision.

               THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLE
               6.3 Lord Simon o f Glaisdale spoke o f the constitutional principle
               underlying the right to private prosecution as the "principle o f individual
               liberty based on the rule o f law". {3} And in the House o f Lords case o f
               Gouriet , (4) both Lord Diplock and Lord Wilberforce emphasised that,
               although resort was rarely had to instituting a private prosecution, the
               right to bring a private prosecution provided a constitutional safeguard
               against "capricious, corrupt or biased failure or refusal" (5) by the
               authorities to prosecute, and "inertia or partiality on the part o f the
               authority". (6)

               6.4 We respectfully agree. Indeed, we expressed a similar view in our
               recent report on involuntary manslaughter, (7) in which we said o f that
               right that it was "an important one which should not be lightly set aside".
               (8) We acknowledge that the right o f private prosecution cannot be easily
               exercised: it can prove expensive, and private individuals do not have the
               expertise or resources which are available to the police and CPS.
               However, for some members o f our society those, for example, who have
               doubts about the impartiality o f the prosecuting authorities, or who
               believe that an official prosecutor has misjudged the evidence in a case
               the right o f private prosecution provides an important safeguard against
               abuse. We therefore begin our consideration o f the principles underlying
               a reformed consent regime by setting out this "fundamental principle":
               that the right o f private prosecution should be unrestricted unless some
               very good reason to the contrary exists.

               THE HARM CAUSED BY AN
               UNFETTERED RIGHT OF PRIVATE
               PROSECUTION
               6.5 Arguably, the proper objective o f a prosecution system is to
               prosecute all those who have committed a crime and to avoid prosecuting
               those who have not. This formulation, however, makes no allowance for
               the fact that the outcome o f a trial is very uncertain and that it is wholly
               unrealistic to expect proceedings to be instituted only in those cases in
               which there is a guaranteed prospect o f conviction and no risk o f
               acquittal. It also fails to take into account the fact that there are
               circumstances in which, despite the strength o f evidence against a
               defendant, it might not be in the public interest for that defendant to be
               prosecuted.

               6.6 The Code for Crown Prosecutors, (9) on the other hand, takes into
               account both these matters: the evidential sufficiency test (requiring there
               to be a "realistic prospect o f conviction" if the case is to continue) marks
               what might be regarded as the acceptable risk o f acquittal and the public
               interest test provides the prosecutor with a discretion not to continue a
               prosecution despite evidential sufficiency.

                6.7 The private prosecutor is not bound by the Code for Crown                                 10

hup:'7\v\vw.gtnet. g o v . u k ’law comm 'library 'lccp 149.pt6.htm                                2/20
Report / Consultation Paper                                                                      Page 3 o f 16



               Prosecutors. Indeed, he or she is likely to institute proceedings in the
               very cases which fail the Code tests: the difficulty in bringing a private
               prosecution is such that if a case were to pass the Code tests but the CPS,
               nonetheless, refused to prosecute it, a preferable course would be to
               apply for judicial review o f the CPS decision. (10) If this is the case,
               then, depending on which o f the Code tests is failed, either or both o f the
               following kinds o f harm are likely to result from a private prosecution:

                      (1) the harm that results from an unsuccessful prosecution;

                      (2) the harm that results from any prosecution (successful or
                      not) which is not in the public interest.

               6.8 But the interplay between public and private interests is more
               complex than this suggests. It is clear from the Code that some o f the
               factors relevant to the "public interest" test relate to the harm that a
               prosecution would do to the private interests o f the various individuals
               involved. For example, one reason for not prosecuting is that the
               defendant is ’’suffering from significant mental or physical ill health,
               unless the offence is serious or there is a real possibility that it may be
               repeated". (11)

               6.9 Another factor is the effect that a prosecution would be likely to have
               on the physical or mental health o f the victim . (12)

               The Crown Prosecution Service acts in the public interest, not just in the
               interests o f any one individual. But Crown Prosecutors must always
               think very carefully about the interests o f the victim, which are an
               important factor, when deciding where the public interest lies. (13)

               Thus the "public interest" includes the private interests o f the victim. It
               also includes the private interest o f the defendant (and his or her
               family) in not being subjected to the mental anguish, damaged
               reputation, disruption to career and financial costs (direct or indirect) o f a
               prosecution. The greater the likely harm to the individuals involved, the
               less likely it is that the public interest w ill require a prosecution.

               6.10 Similarly, an unsuccessful prosecution can damage both private
               and public interests. An unsuccessful prosecution is obviously likely to
               do less harm to the interests o f the defendant, and his or her family, than
               a successful one; but even for a defendant who is innocent, and is
               eventually acquitted, the harm done by a prosecution can be
               considerable.

               6.11 In addition, all prosecutions involve public costs, such as those o f
               running the courts; The more likely a prosecution is to result in an
               acquittal, the harder it is to justify incurring those costs. On the other
               hand a private prosecution which is unsuccessful, and which is
               therefore less likely to result in an award o f costs to the prosecutor, (14)
               may for this reason involve less cost to the public purse than an
               unsuccessful prosecution brought by the CPS.

               6.12 We conclude that the object o f the two Code tests is to avoid
               various kinds o f harm, both public and private, which might result from a
               prosecution, by ensuring that a case is not prosecuted if the risk o f such
               harm outweighs the general public interest in prosecuting those who
               appear to be guilty o f crime. Where that is the case, any prosecution
               must logically be undesirable. This conclusion is, on the face o f it,
               directly contrary to our fundamental principle that the right o f private



hup:/.'w\vw.gtnei.gov.uk/la\vcoinrn lib ra ry I c c p l 49.pt6.htm                                    2/26.'^S
                  prosecution should be unrestricted: i f there is an unacceptable risk o f
                  harm in bringing a prosecution in any circumstance which fails to satisfy
                  the Code tests, and if it is to be assumed that the CPS w ill continue
                  proceedings in any case which satisfies the tests, then it would seem to
                  follow that there should be no right o f private prosecution at all.

                   6.13 We take the view, however, that this line o f reasoning places too
                   much reliance on the Code tests: (15) there is always a risk that an
                   individual Crown Prosecutor w ill either misapply the Code or more
                   likely, given the width o f the Code tests apply a personal interpretation
                   to the tests which, although not wrong, might differ from that o f other
                  prosecutors. (16) More fundamentally, the Code itself may, in the eyes o f
                   some, fail to achieve a proper balance between the rights o f the
                  defendant and the interests o f the community. We appreciate that in cases
                  where the failure lies not in the Code itself but in its misapplication,
                  judicial review (17) is the more obvious remedy. Nonetheless, the rarity
                  with which a right is exercised does not dimmish the significance o f
                  protecting that right.

                 6.14 Furthermore, that line o f reasoning assumes that the Code tests are
                 appropriate for all prosecutions, public and private. It assumes that i f it
                 is wrong to bring a public prosecution then it is also wrong to bring a
                 private prosecution. We agree that this assumption is likely to be right if
                 a case is refused or discontinued by the CPS on the grounds o f public
                 interest: it is difficult to imagine why a prosecution which is private
                 should not be prejudicial to the public interest when it would be if it were
                 public.

                  6.15 On the other hand, if, for example, a case is turned down by the
                  CPS because it fails the evidential sufficiency test, but only just; if the
                 private prosecutor knows that the defendant is guilty (because, say, he or
                  she was the victim and can identify the offender); and if the case is a
                  serious one, then a private prosecution might be thought desirable. The
                 Philips Commission favoured an evidential sufficiency test along the
                 lines o f the Code test (18) because they thought a less demanding one
                 would be "both unfair to the accused and a waste o f the restricted
                 resources o f the criminal justice system". {19} The evidential sufficiency
                 test does, indeed, provide a threshold to enable the CPS to carry out its
                 role as "a filter for evidentially weak cases"; (20) and it properly takes
                 into account fairness to the defendant. However, where a defendant is
                 guilty, there is arguably, in principle, no moral unfairness in bringing a
                 private prosecution against him or her. (21} As for the risk o f court and
                 other legal resources being wasted, whilst it is true that limited resources
                 will be used at the expense o f other pending cases, it may be argued that
                 bringing a guilty defendant to trial is a good use for those resources even
                 if he o r she is acquitted , so long as the evidence against the defendant,
                 whilst not meeting the Code test o f evidential sufficiency, is reasonably
                 substantial. (22)

                6.16 W e provisionally conclude that the harm which might result
                from an unfettered right o f private prosecution will be either or both
                o f the following:

                #1(1) the harm that results from an unsuccessful prosecution o f an
                innocent defendant,

         #1(2) the harm (whether to any individual involved in the criminal process or
         the public interest in the strict sense) that results from any prosecution
         (successful or not) which is not in the public interest.



http:// \v \v w .g tn e t.g o v .u k luwconun'library lccp]-19 pt6.htm                          2 2 o ’9X
Report / Consultation Paper                                                                  Page 4 o f ] 6



               prosecution should be unrestricted: if there is an unacceptable risk o f
               harm in bringing a prosecution in any circumstance which fails to satisfy
               the Code tests, and i f it is to be assumed that the CPS will continue
               proceedings in any case which satisfies the tests, then it would seem to
               follow that there should be no right o f private prosecution at all.

               6.13 We take the view, however, that this line o f reasoning places too
               much reliance on the Code tests: (15) there is always a risk that an
               individual Crown Prosecutor will either misapply the Code or more
               likely, given the width o f the Code tests apply a personal interpretation
              to the tests which, although not wrong, might differ from that o f other
              prosecutors. (16) More fundamentally, the Code itself may, in the eyes o f
               some, fail to achieve a proper balance between the rights o f the
              defendant and the interests o f the community. We appreciate that in cases
              where the failure lies not in the Code itself but in its misapplication,
              judicial review (17) is the more obvious remedy. Nonetheless, the rarity
              with which a right is exercised does not diminish the significance o f
              protecting that right.

              6.14 Furthermore, that line o f reasoning assumes that the Code tests are
              appropriate for all prosecutions, public and private. It assumes that if it
              is wrong to bring a public prosecution then it is also wrong to bring a
              private prosecution. We agree that this assumption is likely to be right if
              a case is refused or discontinued by the CPS on the grounds o f public
              interest: it is difficult to imagine why a prosecution which is private
              should not be prejudicial to the public interest when it would be if it were
              public.

              6.15 On the other hand, if, for example, a case is turned down by the
              CPS because it fails the evidential sufficiency test, but only just; i f the
              private prosecutor knows that the defendant is guilty (because, say, he or
              she was the victim and can identify the offender); and if the case is a
              serious one, then a private prosecution might be thought desirable. The
              Philips Commission favoured an evidential sufficiency test along the
              lines o f the Code test (18) because they thought a less demanding one
              would be "both unfair to the accused and a waste o f the restricted
              resources o f the criminal justice system". (19) The evidential sufficiency
              test does, indeed, provide a threshold to enable the CPS to carry out its
              role as "a filter for evidentially weak cases"; (20) and it properly takes
              into account fairness to the defendant. However, where a defendant is
              guilty, there is arguably, in principle, no moral unfairness in bringing a
              private prosecution against him or her. (21) As for the risk o f court and
              other legal resources being wasted, whilst it is true that limited resources
              will be used at the expense o f other pending cases, it may be argued that
              bringing a guilty defendant to trial is a good use for those resources even
              i f he or she is acquitted , so long as the evidence against the defendant,
              whilst not meeting the Code test o f evidential sufficiency, is reasonably
              substantial. (22)

              6.16 W e provisionally conclude that the harm which might result
              from an unfettered right of private prosecution will be either or both
              o f the following:

              #1(1) the harm that results from an unsuccessful prosecution o f an
              innocent defendant,

        #1(2) the harm (whether to any individual involved in the criminal process or
        the public interest in the strict sense) that results from any prosecution
        (successful or not) which is not in the public interest.                                           13


http:,'/ \Y\vw .gJnci.uov.uk/la\vcomm/library/Iccp]49 pt6.htm                                    2/26 98
    K e p o n , Lun su iia uo n j^aper
                                                                                                   ragcD 01 io




     S ? d ? F NT P R 0 V I S I 0 N S: THE PR EFER R ED M EC H A N ISM FOR PREVENTING THE


      f -i     have1_su| g e^ed that generally (23) a private prosecution is likely to be undesirable if it
     tails either or both o f the tests in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. Where an undesirable
     prosecution is brought, it should be terminated as soon as possible; but it would be better if the
     prosecution were not brought at all. Consequently, a prosecutorial control mechanism that
     prevents an undesirable private prosecution being brought is preferable to one which terminates
     proceedings once they have begun. (24) A consent provision has this advantage. Whereas the
     otner principal mechanisms o f control (that is, the power o f the CPS to take over a prosecution
     and terminate it or the power o f the Attorney-General to enter a nolle prosequ i ) are
     retrospective and operate by terminating proceedings that are under way, a consent provision is
     pre-emptive, preventing the institution o f proceedings in the first place. (25) W e provisionally
     conclude, therefore, that a consent mechanism is the preferred mechanism for preventing
     the harm that would be caused by an undesirable prosecution.


    AN OFFENCE-STRUCTURED CONSENTS REGIME?

•
    6.18 The present consent regime is, by and large, offence-structured. B y this we mean that the
    consent attaches to a particular offence rather than, say, to a particular type o f offender or a
    particular set o f circumstances. There are, however, some examples o f hybrid criteria. As we have
    seen, (26) the Law Reform (Year and a Day Rule) Act 1996 imposes a requirement o f consent on
    the prosecution o f homicide offences but only in certain circumstances, namely (a) when there is a
    lapse o f time o f more than three years between the date o f the injury and the date o f death and (b)
             6 defendant has already been convicted in relation to the injury. The War Crimes Act
    1991 imposes a requirement o f consent on the prosecution o f homicide offences committed as war
    cnm es in Germany or German-occupied territory during the period o f the Second World War.

              now 11111110 the question whether we should retain an offence-structured regime or adopt
    a different structure. In approaching this question we bear in mind the crucial importance o f
    certainty as to when consent is and is not required. It would not be satisfactory for the criteria to
    be framed in such a way that only a ruling at the start o f the trial could determine whether or not
    the prosecution was valid.

   6.20 Bearing this in mind, our approach is to focus on the kinds o f prosecution that we are trying
   to prevent: that is, prosecutions which are unlikely to succeed or which, even if likely to succeed,
  are undesirable because the public interest in prosecuting the guilty is outweighed by other
' interests (public, private or both) militating against prosecution. In the case o f prosecutions which
  are unlikely to succeed, we believe that the most important kind o f harm to be averted is that
  likely to be suffered by the (presumably) innocent defendant, who may be subjected to stress,
  expense and damage to his or her career or reputation. These same kinds o f private harm may also
  result from a prosecution which, though likely to succeed, is not justified in all the circumstances,
  and thus fails what the Code for Crown Prosecutors describes as the "public interest" test; but in ’
  this case an equally important consideration may be the public interest in the strict sense that is,
  the interests o f the public as distinct from those o f the individuals involved

    6.21 As regards harm to innocent defendants, a distinction should be drawn between those
    innocent defendants who are particularly likely to be privately prosecuted (and therefore to suffer
    harm) and those who, i f privately prosecuted, are likely to suffer serious harm. We suspect
    that the first category o f individuals is an abstract which has no actuality; w e cannot see why a
    particular class o f individuals (defined other than by way o f the offence charged) should attract
    inappropriate private prosecutions. As regards the second category, on the other hand, we have
    been made aware, for example, o f the concern o f doctors who, it is said, are likely, if privately
    prosecuted for manslaughter in the event o f a patient dying, to suffer particularly serious harm.
    We acknowledge this concern and will be asking consultees to express a view about it. However,
    even if we were able to make an unambiguous classification o f protected classes, we doubt
    whether this would be a sufficiently comprehensive way o f deciding when consents should be
    applied.


h ttp:'/\v\\ ay.gtnct.gov.uk la w c o m m /lib ra ry /lc c p ]49 ptO.htm                             2/26'98
The Law Com m ission
(LA W C O M N o 255)




CONSENTS TO PROSECUTION
Item 11 o f the Sixth P rog ra m m e o f Law Reform :
C rim in al Law




Laid, before Parliament by the L ord H igh Chancellor p u r s u a n t to section 3 ( 2 ) o f the
L a v : Com missions A c t 1965




 Ordered by T h e H o u s e o f C o m m o n s to be p r in te d
 19 October 1998




                          L O X D O K : T h e S t a t i o n e r y Office
                                         £ 1 3 .9 5


H C 108^

                                                                                                   15
                     (3)      It should n o t be assum ed th a t if it is wrong to bring a public prosecution
                              th e n it is also wrong to bring a private prosecution. If, for example, a case
                              is t u r n e d down by the C P S because it fails the evidential sufficiency test,
                              b u t only just; if the private prosecutor knows that the d e fe n d a n t is guilty
                              (because, say, he or she was the victim an d can identify the offender); and
                              if the case is a serious one, th en a private prosecution m ight be th o u g h t
                              desirable.


                   R esponses on consultation
           5.23    T h e vast m ajority of those who considered the provisional conclusions relating to
                   the h a r m which might result from an unfettered right or private prosecutors
                   agreed a n d m a d e very little additional c o m m e n t. L ord A rcher of Sandw ell Q C ’1
                   a d d e d th a t a problem arose when it was necessary to apply a j u d g m e n t based on
                   s ta n d a r d s , a n d he cited as an example the Obscene P ublications Act. H e
                   c o m m e n t e d th a t the extent to which this was a problem m ight d e p e n d u p o n how
                   centralised the C P S structure was at any time. L o rd Archer d o u b t e d w h e th e r it
                   was a p ro b le m at present and he was merely setting down a marker. We believe
       ^          that the responses that we have received confirm our provisional view'.

           5.24   We therefore conclude that the harm which might result from an
                  unfettered right of prosecution would be either or both o f the following:

                    (1)      the harm that results from an unsuccessful prosecution o f an
                             innocent defendant;

                    (2)       the harm (whether to the individual involved in the criminal
                              process or to the public interest in the strict sense) that results
                              from any prosecution successful or not which is not in the public
                              interest.


                  The      r o l e o f c o n s e n t p r o v i s i o n s ln p r e v e n t i n g t h i s h a r m

        5.25      In the c onsultation paper, we pointed o u t ;: that a private p rose c ution is likely to
       ^          be undesirable if it fails either or b o th of the C ode tests. We explained that an
       ™          undesirable prosecution should be term inated as soon as possible b u t it would be
                   b e tte r if it was not brought at all. We advocated a prosecutorial c ontrol system
                   which prevented undesirable private prosecutions being brought r a th e r th a n a
                   system which terminated proceedings after they had been co m m e n c ed .

       5.26       T h e reasoning be hind this is that if there was a consent provision the de fe nda nt
                   would n o t suffer the h a rm caused by an a borted prosecution and the legal and
                   administrative costs would not be incurred. Again, it is a less attractive optio n for
                   the C P S to intervene after a private prosecutor has gone to the trouble of
                   instituting proceedings rather than to prevent the c o m m e n c e m e n t of proceedings
                   at the outset. In essence, the consents provision acts as a pre-em ptive m easure
                   preventing the institution of undesirable proceedings and is thus preferable to the



                      Si'iiciior-Gener.'.i          ] 4 7 9.

                      Para 6.17.


                                                                                                                     16

v. .
           oth er m ec h a n ism s o f control, namely, the power of the C P S to take over a
           prosecution and term ina te it or the power of the A ttorney-General to enter a nolle
           prosequi, b o t h of which are retrospective, not pre-emptive.

    5.27   O u r provisional view was that the consent m echanism was the preferred
           m ec h a n ism for preventing the h a r m that w'ould be caused by an undesirable
           p r o s e c u t i o n . T h i s view was accepted by the majority who c o m m e n t e d on it,
           while those w ho disagreed did not p u t forward any a rgum e nt which p e rs u a d e d us
           to change o u r provisional conclusion. A significant point raised was th a t it is
           im p o r ta n t to b e a r in m in d that the consent provisions are to be seen in the light of
            the fact th a t existing private prosecutions can be stopped by the D P P or the
            A tto rn e y - G e n e ra l.’^ We therefore appreciate that the salient feature o f a consent
            provision is th a t it prevents the institution of inappropriate criminal proceedings
            which could subsequently be stopped. Professor Sir John Sm ith said in his
            response, “ the question to be asked seems to be, why is it n o t sufficient that the
            D P P can take over private prosecutions and, w ithout giving any reasons
^          term ina te t h e m ’\ We m u st focus on the h a r m that could be caused betw een
*          institution and discontinuance of misconceived private prosecutions and ensure
           that the consent m echanism deals, if possible, with this harm .


           Should          w e h a v e an o f f e n c e - s t r u c t u r e d c o n se n t s r e g im e ?

    5.28   We now t u r n to look at the circumstances in which consent should be required.
           T h e present regime is basically offence-structured in the sense th a t broadly the
           consent attaches to a particular offence rather than, for example, to a particular
           type of offender with a particular set of circumstances. In other words, the
            question of w h e th e r a consent is required depends on the offence charged,
            although there are some examples of hybrid criteria. '' A fundam ental issue to be
            d e te rm in e d is w h e th e r we should retain an offence-structured regime or adopt a
            different type of structure.

    5.29   In the consultation paper we stressed the im porta nc e of certainty as to when
            consent is or is n o t required as it would be totally unsatisfactory for the criterion
)          to be fram ed in such a way that only a ruling at the start of the trial would
            determ ine w h e th e r or n o t the prosecution was valid."




                P a r a 6 .1 7 .

                See p a r a s 2 . 1 4 a n d 2 . 1 7 - 2 . 2 0 above.

            ”   P O A s 2 3 ( 6 ) p r o v i d e s that:
                     on g iv i n c an v n o ti c e [that h e d o e s n o t w a n t th e p r o c e e d i n g s to c o n t i n u e in w h i c h case
                     t h e y s h o u l d b e d i s c o n t i n u e d w ith effect f r o m t h e giving o f t h a t no ti c e] t h e D i r e c t o r shall
                     i n f o r m t h e a c c u s e d o f th e no ti c e a n d o f th e a c c u s e d ' s ri g h t to r e q u i r e t h e p r o c e e d i n g s to
                     b e c o n t i n u e d ; b u t t h e D i r e c t o r shall n o t b e ob li g e d to give th e a c c u s e d a n y i n d i c a t io n o f
                      his re a s o n s fo r n o t w a n t i n g th e p r o c e e d i n g s to c o n t i n u e .

            "   F o r e x a m p l e , t h e L a w R e f o r m (Year a n d a D a y ) R u le A c t 1996 im p o s e s a r e q u i r e m e n t o f
                c o n s e n t on th e p r o s e c u t i o n o f h o m i c i d e offences b u t o i l y m csi'tcivi c i r c u m s t a n c e s , n a m e l y (a)
                w h e r e th e r e is a lapse o f m o r e t h a n th r e e years b e t w e e n th e dat e o f th e in j u r y a n d t h e d a t e o f
                th e d e a t h a n d (b) w h e n th e d e f e n d a n t ha> a lre ad y b e e n co n v ic te d in rel atio n to t h e injury.

                 P a r a ft. ID.
