b          *




    From:               Michael Kennedy
    To:                 CPSHQY.CCU(crostong)
    Date:               26 August 1998 10:05am
    Subject:            Hillsborough: draft reply to HFSG letter -Reply

    George

    Many thanks for your e-mail and draft reply to HFSG.

    I have altered the draft - mainly cosmetically.

    Two substantive points do concern me.

    1. The point that the police are claiming CPS gave guidance that they the police should keep the papers within
    their control.
        i) Did we give any such guidance?
        ii)Have you spoken to the police or their solicitors about this? iii)What specific CPS guidance do the
    solicitors say they are basing their correspondence with HFSG upon?

    2. I am unsure whether we need to mention the PCA. Have they been involved earlier? The HFSG must know
    about the PCA's involvement in the initial enquiry. Once a PCA supervised enquiry has been completed they
    sign it off and, in my experience, are very reluctant to become further involved. Hillsborough is an exception to
    every rule and it may be worth finding out their current level of interest.

    Have a word when you have had a chance to consider this

    Regards

    Mike

    Files:              C:\M GK\HBOR0.021
•      %




    Keva Coombes Esq.
    Legal Advisor
    Hillsborough Family Support Group
    1st Floor
    Central Buildings
    41 North John Street
    LIVERPOOL L2 6RR
*




                         273 8450

                         273 8099

                        YBF/3341/89




                        <Date>


    Dear Sir

    RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

    Thank you for your letter of 17 August and enclosures. I understand Mr Croston in
    our York office has explained to Ms Adlington that he holds all the CPS case papers
    and is briefing me. This has resulted in a slight delay in responding.

    I note the concern you express about the papers remaining in the custody of the
    South Yorkshire Police. In the absence, however, of any indication of impropriety I
    do not feel it is appropriate for me to request the South Yorkshire Police to make
    alternative arrangements for the safekeeping of the original papers.

    It is our understanding of the correspondence you enclosed from the police that they
    are deferring the consideration your request for voluntary disclosure until the CPS
    review decision has been made.

    We have no record of CPS guidance given in the terms you describe. It may be that
    there is some confusion between the policy on voluntary disclosure and that of the
    responsibility for storage of the material. However my understanding is that the
    material is the property of the South Yorkshire Police and the question of where the
    material is to be held is a matter for the Chief Constable to decide.

    [ As the Police Complaints Authority(PCA) supervised the original West Midlands
    Police investigation which generated the material held in South Yorkshire. You may
    wish to contact the Chairman, Mr P W Moorhouse, to ascertain whether or not he
    has any remit to assist.]

    I appreciate your wish to obtain disclosure of documents in the possession of the
    police and the CPS as quickly as possible. It is my firm view that consideration of
    voluntary disclosure should be deferred until after the CPS review decision has been
made. If our decision is to let the private prosecution continue then voluntary
disclosure will be given as expeditiously as possible (except for material subject to
public interest immunity or legal privilege).

I understand Mr Croston has informed all the parties involved in the prosecution that
the case review ought to be completed by the end of September. This is date may
be subject to revision by any new material that is brought to our attention. The
Director will then be consulted before any decision is made. I understand the next
hearing is on 30 October at Leeds Magistrates' Court and that provisional dates for
an oral committal have been set for mid-December.




M G KENNEDY
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
