FEB. ’ 5 8 (THU) 1 8 : 0 7     ATTORNEY GENERAL              TEL                                      P. 001




                 PfiiVATEO fftC B
                     R&CSVEO:
                 11 FEB 1rQM   V*




                                                                           q ^ n




                                                                                                    ‘V

                             FAX TRANSMISSION
                                                                                          */■        cLu'i
                    Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers                                          C_*WjVAJu/-l
                                                                                                   (Lvjs. £>0** ^1/
              Attorney General’s Chambers, 9 Buckingham Gate                                     AyvJtj #VOt
                             London SW1E 6JP                                                    (/JU-
                                                                                                MfiJ. ' f \

                                    TEL:
                                    FAX:

       TO:                          _________

       ORGANISATION: _________                  ££5l

       FACSIMILE N O : _______________ _________

       FROM:                        STEPHEN WOOLER

       SUPPLEMENTARY MESSAGE: _____




                             m y      asfep.




      DATE: _ ^ / ^ r                TIME:      fc fo   No. OF PA G E S:_____ 3_
                                                                          (including this one)
      Hard copy to follow:            YES/NO
1 1 -FEB. ’ ^ 9 8(THU) 1 8 : 0 8   ATTORNEY GENERAL            TEL:                               P. 0 0 2




             DRAFT LETTER FROM THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO:

             The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
             Secretary of State for the Home Department
             Home Office
             50 Queen Anne’s Gate
             LONDON SW1H9AT
                    February 1998




             HILLSBOROUGH


             Thank you for your letter of 9 February 1998 about the Report by Lord Justice
             Stuart-Smith following his r e v ie w of the evidence relating to the Hillsborough
             Disaster. You invited me to agree the proposed handling.

             The Report is impressive and will. I believe, command respect even though the
             families of the Hillsborough victims are bound to be disappointed. The Report
             clearly confirms that there is; no basis for an application to the High Court
             under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 and I am content that you should
             say that on my behalf whilst recognising that I would have an ongoing duty to
             consider an}(truly)fresh and cogent evidence which might later emerge. The
             same goes for the DPP in relation to her decision on prosecution.

             The proposal to place in the Library at the House of Commons the legal advice
             received by the DPP does, however, give rise to difficulty. Such advice attracts
             legal professional privilege and it is the firm policy of the DPP not to publish
             such detailed documentation relating to the merits of individual cases which
             A G /1102/2
i l - F E B / 98(THU) 1 8 : 0 8   ATTORNEY GENERAL           TEL:                              P. 0 0 3
 *




            have not been before the courts. There are cogent reasons for not doing so
            which were recognised by the Philips Royal Commission on criminal procedure
            - not the least being the potential unfairness to those in respect of whom there
            has been a decision not to prosecute.

            So far as the remaining points in your letter are concerned, I can see no basis
            for disagreeing with the view ©pressed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about the
            preparation of evidence by the South Yorkshire police and would certain
            endorse the view that there is no basis for revisiting the question of
            disciplinary proceedings or considering prosecution. I am content too with
            what you propose to say about action to eliminate or reduce the overlap
            between public inquiries and inquests; you have already signalled your
            intention to tackle the abuse by police officers who take advantage of medical
            retirement to avoid disciplinary proceedings.

            My officials will be happy to discuss with yours exactly what should be said
            about the reasons for not publishing the CPS documents referred to above. I
            should be grateful to see your proposed statement in draft and for the
            opportunity to comment.

           The DPP has seen this letter in draft and asks that it be treated as a response
           on her behalf also.




           A G /1102/2
                                   HILLSBOROUGH



RE: POINTS TO CONSIDER RE PII AND PRIVILEGED MATERIAL

1.    ISSUE

1.1   Do we accept that the joint opinion of 1990 and the CPS review note of 1997 should
      be put in the public domain.

2.    ACTION REQUIRED

2.1   Liaise with the LSLO and ascertain their comments on the propriety of disclosing the
      two advices as part of publishing the evidence considered by the scrutiny.

2.2   Advise the Director as soon as possible on disclosure.

3.    TIMING

3.1   Immediate.

4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   This is fully covered in the Briefing Note of the 10 February 1998.

5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

5.1   The terms of reference for the scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith involve his
      consideration of whether any new evidence exists, relating to the Hillsborough
      disaster, that was not available to Lord Taylor, the Director, the Attorney General
      and South Yorkshire Police. He was then to draw the attention of the Director to such
      relevant evidence not previously considered. It was not envisaged that the scrutiny
      would examine the CPS decisions or the decision making process.

5.2   The Director’s letter of the 30 July 1997 to the Judge stated that the CPS would co­
      operate fully with the scrutiny. A schedule of material considered by the CPS in
      coming to the decisions not to prosecute anyone in criminal proceedings (in 1990 and
       1997) would be sent by the 4 August. The Judge had previously asked for access to
      the material held by the CPS. The Director said the Judge or members of his staff
      were welcome to inspect the substantial quantities of material held at Central
      Casework York. She also welcomed the opportunity to discuss the CPS decision
      making process and identify the precise material inspected.

5.3   CCP Central Casework sent a letter on the 1 August 1997 to the Judge enclosing the
      two schedules of evidence considered in 1990 and 1997.
5.4   On the 11 August 1997 a request was received from the Judge for a copy of counsels’
      joint opinion. In accordance withe the Director’s letter of the 30 July this was
      provided by hand delivery on the 14 August.

5.5   On 26 September 1997 a further request was received for a copy of the 1997 review
      report. A Briefing Note was sent to D.Sharpling on the 1 October for a decision to
      be made as to disclosure to him of that report. I advised that it would be in our
      interest to co-operate with the Inquiry and that I had no objection to disclosure if PII
      was waived.

5.6   On 14 October the CCP Central Casework sent written confirmation that my report
      should be disclosed. Disclosure took place by post on 15 October 1997; I confirmed
      that the Crown waived PII in the report.

5.7   My Briefing Note of the 10 February 1998 shows my concern about placing the two
      advices into the public domain. The arguments against disclosure are as follows:

      5.7.1 The two documents are of a class that prior to the Attorney General’s
            announcement to Parliament on the 18 December 1996 would generally have
            been immune from disclosure. Counsels opinions are seen as being legally
            privileged and CPS internal documents have until now been protected on
            ‘candour’ grounds, ie the review function would be less effective if reasons
            for decisions and minutes between prosecutors and caseworkers and their line
            managers were in the public domain. The leading authority for this class of
            PII is Evans v Chief Constable of Surrey [1988] 1 QB 588.

      5.7.2 The principle now is that there should be maximum disclosure consistent with
            protecting essential public interests. The new ‘serious harm’ or ‘real damage’
            test means that we do not claim PH to protect internal advices merely by
            pointing to the general nature of the document. The principle applies to all
            government documents which may be relevant to criminal or civil
            proceedings.

      5.7.3 While PII has been waived for the purposes of the Judge looking at the
            material I would submit that it has not been waived for any other reason. It
            is not yet in the public domain.

      5.7.4 The key question involves the relevance or materiality of the two advices. The
            scrutiny was to draw the Director’s attention to new evidence not previously
            considered by her. The Home Secretary has said to the Judge that he intends
            to publish the evidence which was considered during the scrutiny. The only
            purpose for the Judge to look at the two advices was to ascertain exactly what
            material the CPS had considered in 1990 and 1997. In that way he could say
            what ‘new’ evidence should be brought to the Director’s attention. The
            advices were not ‘evidence for the purposes of the scrutiny, except for the
            detail of the schedules of material that we reviewed. For that reason I consider
            that there is no duty of disclosure based on a statement of intention made by
            the Home Secretary. If the Minister wished nevertheless to put these advices
            into the public domain it would be a disclosure additional to what we have
             been led to expect.

      5.7.5 There is an argument here that if we were to disclose material without there
            being a corresponding duty to disclose there would need to be a substantial
            and clearly justified public interest in the administration of justice involved.
            Without this, we will in future be laying ourselves open to arguments that if
            we disclose confidential internal advices in these circumstances we should do
            so generally in criminal proceedings. It may not be an ‘opening of the
            floodgates’ but it could cause problems of national concern.

      5.7.6 Even if there were a duty to disclose the documents by putting them into the
            public domain PII arguments must still apply. The balancing exercise must be
            carried out to compare the competing public interests for and against
            disclosure. I submit that the public interest favours disclosure of the schedules
            detailing the evidence considered by us in 1990 and 1997 but not the rationale
            of the underlying decisions not to prosecute. The appendix to my letter of the
            1 August 1997 to the Judge contains these schedules.

      5.7.7 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith made no mention of my 1997 advice in the scrutiny
            report. He did comment favourably on the 1990 joint opinion of counsel.
            There could be some force to an argument that this opinion should therefore
            be fully disclosed. However I would resist that by submitting that this mention
            is not enough to bring the advice within the definition of ‘evidence’ that
            should be disclosed. The instant case is not one that would outweigh the
            strong public interest in not divulging details of the decision making process.

6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1   It is not in the overall interests of justice that present policy on the disclosure of
      confidential internal documents should be circumvented in the present case.
      Disclosure of the scrutiny report and the associated ‘evidence’ considered by the
      Judge is sufficient to uphold the Home Secretary’s stated intention for putting material
      into the public domain.

6.2   If pressed, we are on stronger ground for the withholding of the 1997 advice than that
      of the 1990 counsels’ opinion.

7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   That the Director should consider advising the Attorney General of her views along
      the lines expressed in this Briefing Note.

7.2   I understand that the Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers concurs with this general
      viewpoint.

George Croston                                                             11 February 1998
FEB   ’38      17:00 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703
                                                                                               P. 2/3


                                                         Q U E I N A N N E ’ S GATE L O ND O N S W l K 9AT

                                         cc        H
                                              «w O' E>'- ‘
 The Rc H on John Morris QC MP                                                0 9 FEB 1998
 A ttorney General _
 Attorney General’s Chambers                   LcvO ^        U :° ^
 9 Buckingham Gate                              P*rr~ <h<?C
 London SWl




                                                 j^y    p.
                                                                V*\,}Sr-


                                               JsrfV' V/iCi/^<2/-
                                                JsjV' OVv-*^»
                                      HILLSBO RO U G H

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted to me his report on whether there is any new
 evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. I understand that your office was provided
 •with a copy of the report as soon as we received it. We need now co agree our response to
 his conclusions.

 A copy of the judge’s terms of reference, which we agreed, is attached. Essentially he had
 two tasks.

        (i)       to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
                  significance as to justify a further public inquiry; and

        (ii)      to identify for you, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the chief
                  constable, as disciplinary authority, any evidence that might be relevant to
                  your statutory responsibilities that has not previously been considered.

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions are clear. He considers that there is no basis for
 establishing a further inquiry or re-opening the Taylor Inquiry. N o r is there any basis for
 a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest. N or does he consider there is
 any material which might require re-consideration of previous decisions in relation to
 criminal or disciplinary proceedings. His report is very full and detailed. Having
 considered it carefully, I am entirely satisfied that his central conclusions are right.

 W hen I established the scrutiny on 30 June last year, I gave a commitment that the judge’s
 report would be published, together with as much of the evidence which he considered as
 possible. Much of the key evidence is contained within Appendices to his report. Most of
 the remaining material which he has considered is already in the public domain, such as
 transcripts of public proceedings. There is some material, however, which Lord Justice
 Scuart-Smith refers to but which has not so far been made public. This includes
FEB    '38   17:01 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703
                                                                                            P. 3/3




 particularly advice considered by the DPP in 1990 and 1997 about whether the evidence
 available would support criminal proceedings. 1 would be grateful for your views on
 whether that advice can be placed in the Library at the House.

 W hen the report,is published, I intend to confirm that I accept the conclusions and the
 reasoning behind those conclusions and that there will be no further public inquiry. It is
 im portant that, as far as possible, publication of this report should draw a line under
 speculation about further investigations or proceedings. I realise that both your and the
 D irector’s responsibilities require you to keep open the possibility that, should anything
 new emerge, you would consider it. But it is essential that I should give as firm an
 indication as possible about your views at this stage. If you agree, I consider that I should
 say on publication of the report that you and the Director have considered its conclusions,
 and on the basis of the material which it contains, the Director consider that there is no
 basis which would justify fresh criminal investigations, and that you consider that any
 application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of
 succeeding. I would be grateful for your views.

 There are two particular issues in the report on which I would be grateful for your views.
 The first concerns the process by which statements of police officers submitted to the
 inquiry were amended. The report considers this process in detail, setting out exactly how
 and why it occurred and confirming that it had no material effect on the outcome of the
 proceedings. There are bound to be questions, however, about whether anything in this
 process might amount to misconduct of a criminal or disciplinary nature. Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith considers that it would not. It would in theory be possible to instigate a
 further police investigation to confirm this conclusively, but I think the outcome would be
 a foregone conclusion, and I do not consider that such an investigation should be
 instigated. I would be grateful for your confirmation view on this point.

 The second issue concerns the technical evidence put forward by South Yorkshire police
 about the state of the ground. He suggests that the condition of the terraces and the over-
 estimation of crowd capacity was worse than Taylor suggested. If that information had
 been available at the time, it is possible that Taylor would have attributed a greater
 proportion of the blame on the club and the local authority. However, it is clear that Lord
 Justice Stuart-Smith does not think the issue would have had any material effect on the
 balance of conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry.

 One of the observations made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith is that it is unsatisfactory to have
 an inquest where there has already been an.inquiiy, chaired by a judge, into a major disaster.
 This issue was in fact considered by a Home Office Working Group on disasters and
 inquests, whose report was published last March. This recommended that, where a major
 disaster has occurred, and the Lord Chancellor is able to certify that a judicial enquiry into
 the disaster will also constitute sufficient investigation into the deaths, the role of the coroner
 should be limited by securing the adjournment of the inquest and not requiring its
 resumption except in the most exceptional circumstances.

 Although further comments on the report are awaited, in responding to Lord Justice Stuart
 Smith's report I propose, subject to the views of Derry Irvine, to endorse the
 recommendations in principle. In the absence of a suitable legislative opportunity, there are
FEB   '96   17:01 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                        P. 4/3




 no early prospects of implementing the recommendations (which require primary
 legislation), but I think it will be important to flag up a willingness to remove one of the
 causes of delay and difficulties for the families of disaster victims.

 Publication of the-report will come as a severe disappointment to the Family Support
 Group, but, however painful for them it will be, I think we must try to draw a line here. I
 will want to emphasise that that does not mean that those responsible have escaped blame -
 the Taylor inquiry was clear about that. I will want to emphasise also that we are putting
 right the shortcomings in the police disciplinary system which in part enabled the officers
 in charge to avoid disciplinary action. I will want nearer the time to clear w ith you the
 text of m y statement, but I would be grateful for your urgent agreement in principle to
 what I propose.

 My aim is to lay the report before Parliament and to make an oral statement in the week
 beginning 16 February. Ann Taylor’s office have suggested 18 February. The report is
 very long (over 120,000 words) and detailed, and it will be impossible for MPs to read in a
 short time. But it will inevitably provoke strong feelings and requests for further debate.
 If Ann agrees, I would like to head off those protests by indicating that we would be
 prepared to make time available for the House to debate the report.

 I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Lord Chancellor, the President of the
 Council, the Director of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




                                       JACK STRAW
                    CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE
                                 CENTRAL CASEWORK - PROSECUTIONS,
                                 INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AND APPELLATE
                                          50 LUDGATE HILL
                                         LONDON EC4M TEX
                                          FAX: 0171 273 8450


                                              FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION

                               x* '■’>                                           N
   For the attention o f : __ ................................................
                                                    s=y2__

   Address:.................................................                     cxvkC..........^7. .'^ C r s/L c .




   Fax No:

   From:... ........ ."s5j W ^ 5T\.

  D ate:....                                              Time:

  This FAX transmission consists of this page +                                             others

  Message..................................




  Original(s) to follow-Y/N
  Please acknowledge receipt Y/N

  If You do not receive all pages or cannot read
  all the text please contact the sender of:   0171 273 + ext                                   (Direct Line)


FORM/FAX
                                                 - d l ° )       ^




                                                                                            ^     3




                                                                         x 'v , V *




^ (1<r       »IP         -x                                                               V^o

         I       /            ^         c         ^          >       ?           ^                ^

                                            - a ~ * » r > « V


   ~         v       r        -     i        *        -      .               -       ^           °<
jd«4 U '>«M»«I 19 P ^ ^ ®                                                                             I
                                  jiJrrTiTVtify& ^W
                                                                         _               - ——— — ——       I,,r»


                                                                                         '» m £ £
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room ***
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT




RE:       THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                  &*.                                                 J®.
Further to/a                   i                                     *** I enclose/schedule*
showing tHe material^held by the CPS.
                              ft     tzdciiJ**
As mcntioned-by the Director^iixe material falls into two distinct parts, t & the material
relevant to the 1990 decision not to prosecute and that relevant to the recent 1997 decision
not to prosecute.

The schedules are comprehensive and list all the material held at the CPS or viewed by the
CPS. All the material we hold is currently at United House in York. Rather than reproduce
in our own schedules all the lists contained in. the West Midlands Police Report, I have
attached a copy of the master index of witnesses and documents as an appendix to the
schedule of pre August 1990 material.

YoiKfrill note that the schedules include item&in respect of whidrssJe^ouldjionpaHy'seek
/tfjdafin public in^reSflm m unity, pojiee'reports, in^gm al^iaeSnoranda^^Sm fing notes.
Jiriie r lettepHfieDirector mentjfl*i§Hthe CPS view^sHKese item^^-itfSfbeing evidence^, do
 not f^lH o b e consideredjsy^your sc ru tin y ^ ^    ^

                        <^rly diseusNlonpttttSe helpful to clarjj^ffny Humes
                Ication o f any o f tlje^tiatters on the scheduKsTplease do noj-feesitete to contact the
          office.                                              ___

    lis m , you will no doubt wish to discuss access to ^              materia^ 3»d I look foward-to
hww*; frnm vnri in this respecL-                                                     i
.jL * k        fo fr-   e«\(sA»JL</ rt/v. (rL t        t                               Q jw v k   ( h fi

  t a l l fc                     & jj-n , -dj

   f                                is r -                 ,
Yours sincerely




Chris Enzor
Branch Cmwii I'm/woulm'
