                Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
            Facsimile 0113 2459412. D o cu m en t Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                        W eb: http://w w w .w alkerm orris.co.uk



FAO George R Croston                                                                      Our ref                R B M /B Q W /M U R R A Y
Crown Prosecution Service
DX 65204                                                                                  Your ref
YORK 6
                                                                                           18 September 1998




Dear Mr Croston

HILLSBOROUGH - ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

I understand that you have had copied to you a letter from HFSG of 17 September.
I do not view it as either helpful or necessary to the conduct of the case by you for
me to respond at length and therefore I will make two points only.

1.       I attach a copy of the reply that I have sent to HFSG.

2.       I now make formal request for your office to provide me with the tables that
         were annexed to the letter from HFSG. This request being on an undertaking
         from this firm that we will meet the reasonable copying charges for the
         preparation of those papers.

Yours sincerely




R B Manning
PARTNER




H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVIEW\MURRAY43 ,LET\18 September 1998




        A list o f the partners names is open to inspection a t the above address. Regulated by The L aw Society in the conduct o f investm ent business.
Hillsborough Family Support Group                      Our r e f   RBM/BQW/MURRAY
1st Floor
Central Buildings                                      Your re f
41 North John Street
Liverpool
                                                       18 September 1998
L2 6RR




Dear Sirs

ADLINGTON -V- MURRAY AND DUCKENFIELD

We refer to your letter of 17 September. We keep having to remind you that our
Client is accused o f most serious alleged offences in a Prosecution initiated by you.
We are sure that you have acquainted yourself of the duties of a Prosecutor which
inter alia require you not only to serve evidence but to make a disclosure of all
material save if it is subject o f a Public Interest Immunity Certificate granted by a
Judge.

You keep trying to draw inferences or indeed in this letter reach conclusions from any
instance where you perceive the Defence will not assist the Prosecution. That is
wrong.

The fact that there are bereaved families is a tragedy and indeed we are conscious of
all of those whose lives were touched by the events at Hillsborough. However, as has
been said many times, the proceedings are governed by the law and one cannot turn
a blind eye to the obligation to comply with Statute Case Law and Rules of Evidence.
A very simple example of this was the way in which you issued summonses in South
Sefton Magistrates’ Court and then sought to justify and perpetuate a position that was
wrong in law.

You said that you were prepared to disclose submissions to the Crown Prosecution
Service in relation to their reconsideration of this case. What is the “secret material”
annexed to your letter? Why is it that we are only allowed the letter and not the
documents? We have undertaken and repeat our undertaking to pay reasonable
copying charges for the same.

The conditions that you now seek to attach to a perfectly straightforward request for
disclosure are wholly unacceptable. There are no conditions which the Prosecution
can attach to answer such defence request. If you will not meet the request then there
may be consequences which flow from that refusal.

H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVIEW\MURRAY42.LETA18 September 1998
                                                      Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                     18 September 1998
                                                                                 Page 2



Regrettably, the whole substance of your long letter seems to be an attempt to
besmirch characters of individuals and of bodies and essentially to allege that all of
these persons and bodies are conspiring against your clients.

Yours faithfully


R B Manning
PARTNER




H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVIEW\MURRAY42.LETA18 September 1998
