                                                                                 tL
                                     OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,      *
                                                                      WATERY STREET
                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                      SHEFFIELD
                                                  (West District)
                                                                      S3 7ET
        STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                      CORONER

                                                                      15th February
                                 Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                     .iff:
        SLP/JT.


        Mir. C.W.P. Newell,
        D.P.P.
        Director of Headquarters Case Work, :
        Headquarters,
        4/12 Queen Anne's Gate,
        London.SW1H 9AZ.

        Dear Mr. Newell,

        Re: HILLSBOROUGH - 15th of April 1989

        I refer to Miss. Steel's letter to you of the 5th of February 1990.
        I have discussed the contents of this letter with Mir. Mervyn Jones
        Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands Police who is in full
        agreement.
        I also had a meeting with Counsel (prior to the receipt of Miss.
        Steel*s letter) in which I discussed some of the procedural
        aspects relating to this matter.
        On the whole, I think that Miss. Steel's suggestions may have some
        merit in them and in particular as far as I am concerned, I
        think that it might be both helpful and advantageous if I were
        to resume the Inquests in early Spring for the purposes of taking
        the medical evidence, together with non-contraversial evidence
        such as to the location of the deceased, either alive or dead
        or both within the ground.
        If I were to do this, it would be on the basis that the evidence
        being taken at that stage would be restricted to these matters.
        Obviously a degree of control of the proceedings would be required,
        but I expect this could be achieved.
        We think that it would be useful if you agree, for Mr. Jones and
        myself to meet with you to discuss this aspect of the matter as soon
        as possible so that if we were minded to deal with it along these
        lines, the appropriate arrangements can be made as soon as possible.
        Mir. Jones and I would be available on the following dates
                   20th (a.m. only), 21st, 22nd, 23rd February 1990
                   or other, after discussion.
                                  hear from you as soon




R8606
