                                                                                                               i-lAsfo 0*S
                                              Ix '             " U U r-T & 7 3 >                                                    CL
                                                                                                                 m
                                                                                                                 CPS
                                                                                                               Central Casework
                                                                                                                  United House
  Facsimile                                                                                                            Piccadilly
                                                                                                                 York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                       Direct Line
                                                                                                      SwitchboaraTi
                                                                                                        Facsimile: 01904-456577
                                                                                                          DXNo. 65204 York 6
Attention of:        i/^QX)C\       C O O H ^C ^

Address:

Fax No:      OI S      \       23b               \-93b
From:                                  (? • CJbsrocs)
CPS Division:

Date:      ‘X *?/   71°}   ^   Time:             ||L ( - 0

This fax transmission consists of this page plus /-(-others

Please aclmo\\Jsdge"receipt:


If transmission is not properly received please call 01904-                                       C



   Sbrrvj                  c fy A & jy           ,
    Cl/\tyXo4_ fe foi^w                                             (Jb It'




                               Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
4




    Keva Coombes
    HFSG
    1st Floor
    Central Buildings
    41 North John Street
    LIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                                         YBF/GC/3341/89




                                                                             27 July 1998


    Dear Sirs

    HILLSBOROUGH: Adlington v Duckenfield and M urray

    Thank you for your letter of 20 July 1998 addressed to Mr C.H.Enzor and informing us that
    you have taken over the conduct of the case from Watts Leather. Mr Enzor has asked me
    to reply on his behalf as I am involved in the CPS review of the papers.

    Following the receipt of the Watts Leather letter of 30 June we had been in communication
    with them and were about to send a more substantive reply. I shall incorporate that
    information in this letter.

    I am aware that the original summonses issued at South Sefton Magistrates’ Court have been
    withdrawn because of perceived problems with the court’s jurisdiction. Thank you for your
    confirmation that summonses were issued on 13 July returnable for 20 August 1998 at Leeds
    Magistrates’ Court.

    You may already know that the two firms of solicitors acting separately for Mr Duckenfield
    and for Mr Murray have formally requested the Director to exercise her power under section
    6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the conduct of the proceedings
    instituted by the private prosecutor for whom you act, and then to discontinue under section
    23 of the Act.

    It may help if you were acquainted with our policy in cases of this type. The Code for
    Crown Prosecutors contains the principles that apply to the CPS review of criminal
    proceedings started by the police. There are two stages in the decision to prosecute. The
    first being the evidential test. If the case does not pass that test, it must not go ahead, no
    matter how important or serious it may be. If the case does pass the evidential test then a
    Crown Prosecutor must decide if a prosecution is needed in the public interest. This second
    stage is the public interest test which I shall come to later.
The evidential test is an objective one and a Crown prosecutor must be satisfied that there
is enough evidence to provide a ‘realistic prospect of conviction’ against each defendant on
each charge. In other words a jury or bench of magistrates, properly directed in accordance
with the law, is more likely than not to convict the defendant of the offence charged.

Where there is enough evidence to provide a realistic prospect of conviction the public
interest must be considered. Crown Prosecutors must balance the factors for and against
prosecution carefully and fairly.

The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private prosecutor builds on that
contained in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. The right to bring a private prosecution is
preserved by section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 subject to the power under
section 6(2). The CPS will take over a private prosecution where there is a particular need
for it to do so on behalf of the public.

As you know the original review decision released in August 1990 was made following the
joint advice received from two leading counsel. The advice was that there was "no sufficient
evidence to support criminal proceedings of any kind against those mentioned in the West
Midlands Report". The subsequent Press release made on behalf of the Director of Public
Prosecutions was that there was "insufficient evidence to justify the institution of proceedings
against any officer in the South Yorkshire Police Force or any other person for any other
offence".

Following the showing of the Jimmy McGovern drama documentary on national television
in December 1996 and the representations made to us by a number of parties including the
HFSG on 4 March 1997, the CPS commenced a further review of what was said to be ‘new
evidence’. Our responsibility focused on whether or not there was new material, which, if
properly investigated, might lead to a realistic prospect of conviction of any person. The
conclusion that was reached was that there were no grounds for reopening the police
investigation into the Hillsborough disaster. In the subsequent Scrutiny set up by the Home
Secretary, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked to ascertain whether any evidence exists
relating to the disaster which was not available to the Director of Public Prosecutions for the
purpose of discharging her statutory responsibility. His conclusions are laid out in detail in
his report and in Chapter 7 he says that he does not consider there to be any material that
should be put before the DPP or the Police Complaints Authority which,might cause them
to reconsider the decisions they had taken. These decisions were made in accordance with
the principles laid down in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. It was decided that there was
insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction.

In the instant case where we have been asked by the defendants to take over the prosecution
in order to discontinue it, we would do so if one (or more) of the following circumstances
applies:

•      There is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution commenced in these
       circumstances would be unfounded, and would, therefore be an abuse of the right to
       bring a prosecution.

•      The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those
       factors tending in favour.
f o u o


 Pe
•      The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.

The CPS would then regard itself as having to act in accordance with our policy.

If none of the above apply there would be no need for the CPS to become involved and we
would not interfere with the private prosecution.

Clearly there is a distinction between the "realistic prospect of conviction" test in the Code
and the "clearly no case to answer" test mentioned above. Accordingly we recognise that
there will be some cases which do not meet the CPS Code tests where nevertheless we will
not intervene. It has been considered that to apply the Code tests to private prosecutions
would unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their own cases.

Before this decision can properly be made the CPS must be assured that all relevant material
has been considered. While we have access to material available to the Taylor Enquiry, the
Inquests, the judicial review hearing in the High Court and that submitted to us by the
Hillsborough Family Support Group, it may be that other important evidence is not known
to us. You have kindly provided the CPS with schedules of evidence in your possession and
we have asked the solicitors for the defendants for the same information. Where there is
evidence that we have not seen we shall be asking the relevant party for voluntary disclosure
of the same.

Until there has been a detailed review of the many papers in the case the Crown’s position
cannot be determined. This review will of necessity take some little time to complete. I
regret that at the moment we are not able to give a date for the promulgation of the decision
but I can assure you that our review will be expedited.

In order to be assist your review of the papers involved in the private prosecution I shall
arrange for a schedule of our papers to be sent to you as soon as possible. However this will
not apply to those documents subject to either public interest immunity or to legal privilege.

Under the circumstances outlined above we do not feel that it is appropriate for us to
consider your request for voluntary disclosure of our case papers until our decision has been
made.

We have advised the Chief Constable for South Yorkshire Police on disclosure of documents
in his possession in similar terms to those above.

I shall be writing to the solicitors for Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray enclosing for them a
copy of this letter.

Following our review I should be able to advise in more detail as to the stance we take on
the other issues raised by yourselves.
Please let me know if there is any way in which I can assist you further.

Yours faithfully




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
