                                                 C    j/            a -S L -c Jf<9-v
C W P N e w e ll
Director of Casework Evaluation
                                                                     f 5 ^ L.0W0 t
and Chief Inspector
                                                              /U,                   ttw '   V                  Headquarters
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hill
                                                              fS^v.        lE ^g or                            London EC4M 7EX

                                                              h u . C-t^osV©**
 r                                                                                              Direct Line
                                                                                                Switchboard
                                                                                                               0171-273 1226
                                                                                                               0171-273 8000
     S J Wooler Esq                                                                               Facsimile    0171-329 8366
                                                                                                    DX No      300850 Ludgate EC4
     Deputy Legal Secretary                                ftc r\
     The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
     Attorney General’s Chambers
     9 Buckingham Gate
     London SW1E 6JP
                                                                                            v,
 L                                                            J                   3 December 1998

                                                               V v . D              V-V5.


                                                                    Io      IA--O                             L(_flu^£fVv

                                                                  •^ rv
     \)a s u
                                                                                                               (L   l


     ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY: PRIVATE PROSECUTION:
     HILLSBOROUGH 1989

     1.   I spoke to you briefly last week about this and indicated that I would be writing to draw
           the matter to the attention o f the Law Officers. The issue concerns the private
           prosecution currently being pursued by Ms Ann Adlington, on behalf o f the
           Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG), against Mr David Duckenfield and Mr
           Bernard Murray, two former officers o f the South Yorkshire Police. The prosecution
           arises out o f the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium in 1989. Those representing the
           defendants have invited the Crown Prosecution Service to intervene and assume
           conduct o f the prosecution, with a view to discontinuing it.

     2.   The new Director previously had some association with the private prosecution and
          does not think that he should be involved in the current decision. He has therefore
          asked me to deal with the matter.

          Background

     3.   You will undoubtedly be familiar with the general background. The disaster occurred
          in April 1989 at the Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield, at the start o f an FA Cup semi­
          final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.             As a result o f gross
          overcrowding behind one o f the goals, 96 people died and over 400 were injured.

     4.   Lord Justice Taylor (as he then was) conducted an Inquiry, which led the then DPP to
          ask for a criminal investigation to be carried out. This was conducted by the West
          Midlands Police, on behalf o f the South Yorkshire Police. The West Midlands Police
          report was submitted to the DPP in 1990. The DPP, having taken the advice o f Gareth
          Williams QC (as he then was) and Peter Bills QC, concluded that there was insufficient




                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
                                        a



      evidence to justify criminal proceedings against any person for any offence arising out
      o f the disaster.

5.    The Coroner’s inquests were resumed.         In 1991 verdicts o f accidental death were
      returned.

6.    More recently, following a television programme in December 1996 and the submission
      o f papers by the HFSG to the DPP, the history o f the case was re-examined by the CPS.
      In June 1997, the Home Secretary announced that the Attorney General and the CPS
      were satisfied that there was no new evidence that would have materially affected the
      outcome o f any o f the earlier investigations. Nevertheless, he appointed Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny, which reported in January that (inter alia) there was
      no new material for the Director to consider.

7.    In June, Ms Adlington obtained summonses against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray,
      alleging against each two offences o f manslaughter and one offence o f misconduct in a
      public office. A further summons against Duckenfield alone alleged that he perverted
      the course o f justice.

      Enclosures

8.    I am sending with this letter a number o f documents, which explain the matter in more
      detail. The first of these, marked A, is a comprehensive report (the “Hillsborough
      Report”) prepared by George Croston o f Central Casework, which contains a full
      chronology o f the disaster and its aftermath and considers the question that I am now
      asked to decide, namely whether to intervene and discontinue the private prosecution.

9.    The other documents, or bundles o f documents, that I am sending with this letter are
      identified as follows. All are copies.

           B       The Informations

           C       The prosecutor’s submissions in support o f the issue o f summonses

           D       Representations to the DPP on behalf o f the prosecutor

           E       Representations to the DPP on behalf o f the defendant Mr Murray (adopted,
                   mutatis mutandis, by the defendant Mr Duckenfield)

           F       Selected correspondence containing various representations made on behalf
                   o f the prosecutor and the defendants

            G      The CPS policy on private prosecutions.

      CPS policy on private prosecutions

10.   The last o f these documents, the CPS policy on private prosecutions, is important. The
      policy has been fully explained to both prosecution and defence. Each now prays it in
      aid in arguing that the CPS should adopt the particular course favoured by them. Before
       turning to the strength o f the cases against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray, it might be
       helpful to consider the policy, and its possible application to this case.

11.    For present purposes, the relevant paragraphs o f the policy (7.11 - 7.13) can be
       summarised thus:

        i)     if both tests o f the Code for Crown Prosecutors appear to be satisfied, the CPS
               should take the case over and continue with the prosecution, if there is a
               “particular need to take over the prosecution on behalf o f the public”;

       ii)     the CPS should take over and discontinue the case if:

               a)    there is clearly no case to answer; or

               b)    the public interest factors against prosecution clearly outweigh those in
                     favour; or

               c)    the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice;

      iii)     if the CPS cannot say that either ii) a), b) or c) above applies, the CPS should
               not intervene and the prosecution should be allowed to continue, even if the
               CPS believes that there is not a realistic prospect o f conviction.

12.    The policy does not cover “partial” intervention. By that, I mean the possibility that the
       CPS might intervene (whether to discontinue, or otherwise) in relation to one only o f
       two or more defendants, leaving the prosecution o f the other defendant(s) in the hands
       o f the private prosecutor; and/or the possibility that the CPS might intervene and
       discontinue one (or more, but not all) o f a number o f charges against a defendant
       (whether that defendant is charged alone or with others), leaving the prosecution o f the
       remaining charge(s) in the hands o f the private prosecutor. In other words, if we
       intervene at all in a private prosecution, must we take over all charges against all
       defendants, or can we “pick and choose”? The point is significant in cases where we
       believe that the evidence falls somewhere between “clearly no case to answer” and “a
       realistic prospect o f conviction” (there is, surely, a distance between these two
       positions), because - as the policy makes clear (paragraph 7.6) - once we have
       intervened, we will apply the Code tests.          Once we have intervened, we will
       discontinue a case that fails the evidential test, notwithstanding that we cannot say
       that there is clearly no case to answer.

13.    The policy does not address the question o f partial intervention, because the possibility
       was not considered at the time that the policy was drawn up (and subsequently approved
       by the then Law Officers). I can state that with some confidence, being the author of
       the policy.

       The strength of the evidence

14.    I do not propose to rehearse the evidence in this letter, nor to analyse it in detail. It is
       considered at length in the enclosed documents. There is a wealth o f further material
       available for the Law Officers, should they wish to see it; but they may feel that, for
       present purposes, the enclosed will suffice.
15.   I have read all the enclosed documents carefully. I have also considered key statements
      o f witnesses and transcripts o f evidence. I should add, for the record and for the
      avoidance o f doubt, that I have previously considered the evidence that was available in
      1990, having been concerned in the original CPS decision not to institute proceedings.
      W hen considering the strength o f the current prosecution, however, and the application
      to intervene, I have not relied solely on my earlier knowledge o f the case.

16.   Stripped o f the high emotion that inevitably surrounds the circumstances o f this
      appalling tragedy, the essential facts are not much in dispute. George Croston’s
      Hillsborough Report (A) summarises them. Mr Duckenfield was in overall command o f
      the policing o f the match and Mr Murray was one o f his most senior supporting officers.
      It is not in dispute that the South Yorkshire Police were negligent on the day and that
      their failures - whether o f omission or commission - were in part the cause o f the
      disaster. For the purposes o f a prosecution for manslaughter, however, the key question
      is whether the negligence amounted to gross negligence and was therefore criminal.

17.   The offence alleged against both defendants o f misconduct in a public office arises
      essentially out o f the same circumstances as the allegations o f manslaughter.

18.   Against M r Duckenfield alone there is a charge o f perverting the course o f justice. This
      is based on his false assertion (a “disgraceful lie”, according to Lord Justice Taylor),
      within minutes o f the disaster and whilst the full horror o f the situation was still
      emerging, that the build-up o f crowds within the ground was as a result o f the outer
      gates being forced by Liverpool supporters. This was simply not true. The relevant
      gate had been opened on Mr Duckenfield’s instruction, in order to relieve pressure
      outside the ground.

19.   I remain firmly o f the view that there is not a realistic prospect o f conviction o f either
      Mr Duckenfield or Mr Murray for any o f the offences alleged against them. I have
      specifically considered that question when applying our policy on private prosecutions,
      to determine whether there are proper grounds for intervening in the prosecution in
      order to continue with it. I find no such grounds.

20.   On each o f the charges, I have reached the same conclusion as George Croston in his
      Hillsborough Report. As against Mr Duckenfield, whilst I do not think that there is a
      realistic prospect o f conviction for manslaughter (the evidence on each such charge
      being identical), I cannot say that there is clearly no case to answer. The case against
      him o f misconduct in a public office is no weaker - if anything, it is marginally
      stronger.

21.   The case against Mr Murray, on both the charges o f manslaughter and the charge o f
      misconduct in a public office, is not identical to the case against M r Duckenfield.
      Given that the latter was in overall command on the day, there is a clear argument that
      he must bear ultimate responsibility - particularly for his own actions - and that Mr
      Murray should not be held accountable for Mr Duckenfield’s failures. But whilst Mr
      M urray’s responsibilities differed from Mr Duckenfield’s, so did his experience. In
      short, he had a different role to play and he, too, failed to discharge his responsibilities
      satisfactorily. As I have said, the case against him (on both charges) is not identical to
        the case against M r Duckenfield; arguably it is even weaker; but again, I do not feel
        able to say that there is clearly no case to answer.

22.     That leaves the charge against Mr Duckenfield o f perverting the course o f justice.
        There is conflicting evidence about precisely what Mr Duckenfield said to whom, in
        whose presence and at what stage. But again, the essential fact is not really in dispute.
        Mr Duckenfield deliberately asserted that Liverpool supporters had forced a gate, when
        he knew that they had not. He gave, as his explanation, that acknowledgement o f police
        failures at the time might have further weakened police control over a volatile, shocked
        and frightened crowd o f more than 50,000 people. That might have been the reason -
        or, at least, one reason - for Mr Duckenfield to lie. I have my doubts. I am more
        inclined to the view that it was a desperate (and no doubt disgraceful) attempt by a
        desperate man to avoid coming to terms with the enormity o f what he had done (or not
        done), even as the terrible consequences o f his action (or inaction) were unfolding
       around him. Crucially, whatever motivated him to lie as he did, I do not believe that he
       was at that moment contemplating judicial proceedings (of whatever sort) and lied
       therefore in order to frustrate them. In my opinion, however disgraceful the lie was,
       there is clearly no case for him to answer that he intended to pervert the course o f
       justice.

       Application to this case of the CPS policy on private prosecutions

23.    In summary, my assessment o f the evidence is that, in relation to M r Duckenfield:

        i)     on the two charges o f manslaughter, there is not a realistic prospect o f
               conviction, but I cannot say that there is clearly no case to answer;

       ii)     on the charge o f misconduct in a public office, my conclusion is the same; and

      iii)     on the charge o f perverting the course o f justice, there is clearly no case to
               answer.

24.    In relation to Mr Murray:

       i)      on the two charges o f manslaughter, there is not a realistic prospect o f
               conviction, but I cannot say that there is clearly no case to answer; and

       ii)on the charge o f misconduct in a public office, my conclusion is the same.

25.    On application o f our policy to each charge, therefore:

        i)     we should not intervene to continue the prosecution o f any charge;

       ii)     we should not intervene to discontinue any o f the manslaughter or misconduct
               charges (against either defendant);

      iii)     we should intervene and discontinue the charge against M r Duckenfield o f
               perverting the course o f justice.
26.   I have left unanswered from paragraph 12 above, the question o f partial intervention. I
      have found no authority that assists one way or the other as to our powers. Section 6(2)
      o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act, 1985, reads:

                “Where criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which the
                Director is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may nevertheless do
                so at any stage.” (My emphasis.)

        Section 23(1) o f the Act, however, in referring to the power o f discontinuance, reads:

                “Where the Director o f Public Prosecutions has the conduct o f proceedings for
                an offence...” (My emphasis.)

27.   M y tentative conclusion - in the absence o f further research, which, for the reasons
      which follow, is not necessary, in my view - is that partial intervention is possible
      (perhaps there is some analogy with the Attorney General’s power to enter a nolle
      prosequi against one o f several defendants, presumably in respect o f one o f several
      counts on the indictment).

28.   I view with alarm the prospect o f this particular point being challenged (for example, by
      way o f judicial review). It is a highly unattractive prospect, for several reasons. But
      even if my tentative conclusion is correct - and whether or not the point were
      challenged - 1 find the prospect o f partial intervention equally unattractive. It would be
      messy; it would be difficult to explain - indeed, it would probably be ridiculed; and it
      would send the wrong message about our assessment o f the strength o f the case on the
      charges o f manslaughter and perverting the course o f justice, no matter how carefully
      we tried to explain our policy.

29.   I f we do not intervene in part, should we take over the whole case - i.e. all charges
      against both defendants? We would, o f course, be hoist with the petard o f our own
      policy, for having taken over the whole case in order to discontinue the charge o f
      perverting the course o f justice (in accordance with the policy), we would then have to
      apply the Code tests to the remaining charges (in accordance with the policy).
      Application o f the evidential test would require us to discontinue these remaining
      charges, thus frustrating our policy o f allowing private prosecutions to continue unless
      there is clearly no case to answer.

30.   Finally, whether or not we can intervene in part, if we do not discontinue the charge of
      perverting the course of justice we will appear to be frustrating our policy by allowing a
      prosecution to continue on a charge in respect o f which there is clearly no case to
      answer.

      Conclusion

31.   A charge o f perverting the course o f justice is a serious charge. It is a particularly
      serious charge when levelled against one who was, at the relevant time, a serving, senior
      police officer. Nevertheless, in the context o f this appalling disaster, I do not think that
      it is the gravamen o f the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield. In my opinion, I
      must be influenced primarily by the appropriate course o f action to take in relation to
      the charges o f manslaughter and misconduct. On a proper application o f our policy, I
      do not think that the CPS should intervene in relation to the prosecution o f either Mr
      Duckenfield or Mr Murray on any o f those charges. For the reasons already given, I do
      not think that partial intervention (assuming that it is permissible) would be appropriate.
      I have therefore concluded that the CPS should not intervene at all in this case.

32.   If this decision runs contrary to our policy in one respect, then to do otherwise would
      run contrary to it in another. That merely illustrates the point that this situation was not
      contemplated when we drew up the policy. To that extent, therefore, I must decide the
      matter in isolation.

33.   I have discussed my approach to this decision in consultation with Philip Havers QC.
      Philip is satisfied that my approach is correct.

34.   I apologise if I have written at unnecessary length. The matter is important and is
      bound to attract public attention. I am anxious to give the Law Officers the opportunity
      to consider my proposed course o f action and to comment on it if they wish. I am, o f
      course, ready to discuss the case at their convenience; and to supply any further material
      or information that you or they might wish to have.

35.   The matter is next before the court on Monday, 7 December. I have indicated to the
      court and to all parties that our decision will not be reached by then, but that I expect
      that it will be reached before Friday, 18 December. I trust that this will give you and
      the Law Officers sufficient time to consider the matter. I f you feel that it will not, I
      should be very grateful if you would let me know as soon as possible.

36.   There will, o f course, be important handling issues to address. These are in hand.




                             7 & -1 —     s                 ,
C W P NEWELL
                           IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE


THE INFORMATION o f A N N ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, who states that




             THE DEFENDANT


             BERNARD DEAN M URRAY
             of

             On 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

             (1)   Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (2)    Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (3)    Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                    Contrary to Common Law




             DATED THE 10TH DAY OF JULY 1998
                           IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE




THE INFORMATION o f ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, who states that


             THE DEFENDANT


             DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD o f




             On the 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

             (1)    Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (2)    Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (3)    Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (4)   With intent to pervert the course o f justice did an act which had a
                   tendency to pervert the course o f justice in that he lied about the
                   circumstances in which gate C became open.
                   Contrary to Common Law




            DATED THE 10TH DAY OF JULY 1998
                         Tn Re David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray




                              Submissions as to Issue o f Summonses




The informant

1       Ann Adlington is solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, which supports
        this application. The Group’s members are relatives o f victims o f the Hillsborough
        disaster in April 1989.


The issue o f summonses.

2       A magistrates’ court has jurisdiction over any indictable crime committed in England
        and Wales by virtue o f section 2 o f the Magistrates Courts Act 1980.

3       The Informant applied to the South Sefton Magistrates Court for summonses identical
        to those now sought. Those summonses were issued on 26th June 1998. Solicitors for
        Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray objected that under section 1 o f the Magistrates Court
         1980 there was no power in a justice in Merseyside to issue a summons. There
         followed correspondence between the informant, the court and the Clerk which is
         attached as Annex I. The summonses were withdrawn by consent for the reasons set
        out in the letters.

4       The Informant appeared, together with leading counsel, before the Chairman o f the
         Bench at South Sefton and the Clerk to the Justices when the summonses were
         granted. The same annexes were presented to the justice as are attached to this
         application, except Annex I. These submissions are a slightly expanded and modified
         version o f those presented at South Sefton.

5        The decision has been made to lay informations before this court because Mr Murray
         lives in Pontefract, in the county o f West Yorkshire, and a justice in Leeds has
         jurisdiction to issue the summonses, on any view, by virtue o f section 1 (2) (c) o f the
         Act, because Mr Murray resides in his “area”. The “area” to which the section applies
          is by virtue o f section 1 (8) a ’’commission area . This phrase has the meaning, by
         virtue o f section 150 o f the Act, as amended, given by section 1 o f the Justice o f the
          Peace Act 1997, namely “every metropolitan county” and “every retained county”.
          Leeds and Pontefract are therefore in the same area .

    6     A justice therefore has jurisdiction to issue a summons to Mr Duckenfield, who lives
         in Bournemouth, by virtue o f section (1) (2) (b). It is submitted that it would be
         “expedient” to proceed against Mr Duckenfield in Leeds, rather than commencing
         separate proceedings against him in Dorset.

                                                   1
7        Leeds has been selected by the Informant because it one o f the nearest convenient
         locations for people travelling from Liverpool which is unlikely to be the subject o f a
         technical jurisdictional challenge.

8        The justice is therefore invited to consider first the summons against Mr Murray, and,
          if it is granted, to consider the summons against Mr Duckenfield.

The reasons for the laying o f informations

9        David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray, then respectively a Chief Superintendent and
          a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police Force, were on duty in the control box
          at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on 15th April 1989, when a semi-final o f the F.A.
          cup was to be played between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football clubs.
          Attached are chapters 1 to 5, 9 to 11, and 16 o f the Taylor Report. The facts set out
          therein form the basis o f the allegations against the two potential defendants. (Annex
         A)

10       Other sections o f the Taylor report make other criticisms o f the police in general, and
          o f other bodies.

11       Lord Taylor said at paragraph 265 o f his report;

                 “The immediate cause o f the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was
                 the failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut off access to the central pens
                 which were already overfull.”

12       The evidence o f forensic pathologists called at the mini inquests in 1990 was that in
          almost all cases death resulted rapidly from unconsciousness that was caused by the
          crushing that followed the inrush o f spectators, in full view o f the two men, following
          the order to open the gates, and a failure to divert the incoming spectators from pens 3
          and 4.

13       Mr Duckenfield was in overall charge, and primarily responsible for thedecisions and
         lack o f decisions which led to the deaths. Mr Murray shares in this responsibility. He
         knew the ground much better. He had been in an important position o f responsibility
         at the identical semi-final the year before, when the Liverpool supporters were also at
         the Leppings Lane end o f the ground. A similar concentration o f supporters in the
         pens 3 and 4 had occurred, as was clear to him, but crushing had been avoided by the
         simple expedient o f diverting the incoming supporters from the tunnel which led to
         those overcrowded pens.

    14    In 1989, Mr Duckenfield was entitled to call on Mr Murray’s experience. Mr Murray,
          like Mr Duckenfield, failed, in breach o f his duty, to take, or to demand, or to
          recommend, the obvious steps to avoid the obvious dangers.




                                                   2
The right to bring a private prosecution

15        This right was preserved specifically by section 6 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act
           1985. The provision was reviewed in R v. Bow Street M agistrates Court, ex parte
          South Coast Shipping Company (1993) 96 Cr. App. R. 405 (Annex B).

Manslaughter

16        It is alleged that the actions and omissions o f the two were a substantial cause o f
           death; that they owed the deceased a duty o f care and were negligent, and that a jury
           is entitled to find that the negligence was o f such a gravity as to amount to a crime
           within the principle in R v. Adomako [1995] 1 A.C. 181.

                   “The essence o f the matter which is supremely a jury question, is whether
                   having regard to the risk o f death involved the conduct o f the defendant was so
                   bad in all the circumstances as to amount in their judgment to a criminal act or
                   omission.” [1995] 1 A.C. 187E. (Annex C)

 17        This    test was not thought to be correct in 1990 when the DPP decided not to
           prosecute any individual in relation to the disaster. The prevailing legal view was that
           involuntary manslaughter o f this kind involved the complicated concept o f recklessness
           deriving from statutes setting out crimes o f causing death by reckless driving and o f
           criminal damage.

 18        In Adomako, the House o f Lords did not change the law. It declared that gross
           negligence rather than recklessness was and is the basis o f the crime. That approach
            governs the facts o f this case.

 19         Two representative victims have been selected for the manslaughter allegations.

 Misfeasance in public office

 ?0         The same facts will be put forward to support allegations o f this offence, the        ■
            ingredients o f which are set out in R v . Dytham (1979) 69 Cr. App. R. 387 (Annex D)
            Proof that gross negligence was a substantial cause o f death is not a necessary element
            o f the offence.

 Doing acts tending and intending to pervert the course o f public justice.

  21         This allegation against Mr Duckenfield alone refers to the allegation that he lied about
             the cause o f the disaster, shortly afterwards, when he must have nahsed that inquests
             and/or other legal proceedings, would flow from the tragedy. He falsely and
             deceitfully alleged that the gates had been broken by the supporters. (Taylor,
             paragraph 98)

     22      The offence is very wide. It consists in



                                                        3
               “The doing o f some act which has a tendency and is intended to pervert the
               administration o f public justice”

               R v Vreones [1891] Q.B. 360, 369, (A n n exE ) and it includes;

               “conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, whether or not
               they have yet been instituted but are within the contemplation o f the wrong­
               doer whose conduct was designed to affect the outcome o f them. That
               conduct includes giving false information to the police with the object o f
               among other things putting the police on a false trail.”

               R v. Selvage and Morgan (1982) 73 Cr. App. R. 333 (Annex F)


The history o f the case


23     This is set out in the chronology, Annex G . Verdicts o f accidental death were
       recorded by the jury in 1991, and were not overturned by the High Court in 1993. The
       verdicts are, however, no bar to the bringing o f criminal proceedings, and it is the
       contention o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group that the inquest proceedings
       were deeply flawed. N o prosecutions o f any kind have been instituted.

24     A “Scrutiny” into the new evidence which the Group suggests became available after
       the judicial review proceedings was conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
       Home Secretary in 1997-8. He upheld the findings o f Taylor LJ, but found no grounds
       for referring the matter to a fresh inquiry, for quashing the inquest verdicts, or for
        requesting the Director o f Public Prosecutions to re-open the investigation.

25     A summary o f the “Scrutiny” is to be found in Hansard, for the 18th February 1998
        (Annex H). The facts as set out in that report show why the institution o f proceedings
        is justified. A full copy o f the report o f Lord Justice Taylor and the “Scrutiny” o f Lord
        Justice Stuart-Smith will be supplied on request.

26     Preparations for the committal bundle are well advanced. Statements o f dozens o f
        witnesses are available now, although the prosecutor does not yet have the originals.
        Reliance will be placed on admissions o f basic facts made by the two proposed
        defendants in evidence to the Taylor enquiry and the inquest. It is not thought that the
        justice will consider it appropriate at this stage to consider the evidence, but these
        copy statements and transcripts o f evidence will be supplied if requested.
The timing o f the prosecution

27    It is submitted that this is not a factor in the decision whether to issue summonses.
       However, it is pointed out here that although the prosecutor has had the transcripts o f
       evidence given to the Taylor Enquiry and to the inquest, the majority o f the eye­
       witnesses now relied on were not known to the prosecutor, because they had not given
       evidence at those earlier enquiries. These statements have been disclosed to the Group
       in the last year, in the course o f the “Scrutiny”.

28    Further, the prosecutor believes, and has grounds for this belief, that the Director o f
       Public Prosecutions was given selective and incomplete accounts o f the disaster in
       1990, to the advantage o f the South Yorkshire Police, when the decision was taken
       not to prosecute anyone in connection with the disaster. This matter is at present the
       subject o f further study.




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray’s Inn
London WC1


10 July 1998                                                         Alun Jones QC
                       Adlington v. Murray: Adlington v. DuckenfielH



    Representations to the Director o f Public Prosecutions on behalf o f the Prosecution



                                        Introduction



1     These representations are made in opposition to the requests by the defendants to the

      Crown Prosecution Service, asking that the prosecution of the defendants be taken
      over under section 6 (2) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, for the purpose of

      discontinuing it under section 23 (3). These submissions reflect further reading of

      materials that have become available in the last year, and are still becoming available.

      They should be read in the light o f the documents submitted previously, particularly
      the following:



      (i) informations o f 10th July 1998, and supporting documents, laid before the Leeds
      Magistrates Court;



     (ii) the letter from the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“HFSG'') to the Crown
     Prosecution Service o f 3 1st July 1998;



     (iii) the letter from the HFSG to Mr Croston o f 24th.August 1998 and supporting
     documents.



2    The HFSG is a non-political organisation, and draws its members from many walks of

      life. The author o f these representations had no involvement in the case until he was

      instructed in the case in the Judicial Review proceedings as leading counsel in about

      September 1993 for the six families. After the hearing, he took no part until the end of

      1996, when he was again asked to advise in the light o f the new evidence discovered,

      some o f which was the subject of the drama-documentary televised in December

      1996. He then represented and advised the Group before, during and after the

      “Scrutiny” in 1997-8.


                                                1
3   It is regretted that this submission and supporting documents come at a late stage of

    the review. The Home Secretary said in Parliament in February 1998 that he would
    make available all material in the House o f Commons library considered by him “save

    where there are overriding reasons for doing otherwise”. (Annex A. page 1988). The

    attached correspondence (Annex B) shows that this process is incomplete, and that

    obvious omissions have not been made good by the South Yorkshire police. Since
    July 1998, the Assistant Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire has taken it upon himself

    to stop the provision even o f documents that the Home Secretary ordered to be

    disclosed. (See Tab 17, pages 202-7, file of 24th August 1998.)


                                  The right to prosecute



4   The right to prosecute “privately”. This right was preserved specifically by section 6

    o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985. The provision was reviewed in R v. Bow

    Street Magistrates Court, ex parte South Coast Shipping Company (1993) 96 Cr.
    App. R. 405. This is not the occasion for a full review o f the right o f private subjects
    to prosecute. It is a right o f constitutional importance, and may properly be exercised

    where a “public” body, such as the Director o f Public Prosecutions, has declined to
    prosecute.



5   The tests that the Crown Prosecution Service adopts under its Code for Crown

    Prosecutors were borne well in mind in the decision to prosecute in this case. On the
    basis o f the Taylor findings alone, supported by a proper basis o f witness statements,

    there is a realistic prospect o f conviction for the offences of manslaughter and

    misfeasance in public office. Further, the prospect of a conviction for manslaughter is

    enhanced by the decision o f the House o f Lords in R v. Adomako [1995] 1 A.C. 151.

    However, it is submitted that a “private” prosecutor would be entitled to apply a less

    strict test in deciding to prosecute; he need not follow the test imposed upon itself by

    the CPS. The CPS should not approach a review of the present kind on the basis that

    it should apply its own test o f evidential sufficiency.


                                             2
6    Public interest and “interests o f justice” factors are reviewed below. The matters
     raised by the defendants will probably form the basis o f an application that the case be

     stayed, or not committed, because the prosecution, it will be said, is engaged in

     abusing the process o f the court. If the defendants do not for tactical reasons present

     such an argument, the prosecution may well decide to raise this matter with the

     magistrates’ court o f its own motion, and may invite the court, if it wishes, to hear
     evidence on the subject.



7    It is submitted that, except in the very plainest o f cases, it would be a misuse o f the

     discretion given to the Crown Prosecution Service to take over a prosecution such as

     this for the purposes of discontinuing it. Arguments about “abuse of process” involve

     questions o f fact and evidence. Matters such as the effect o f press publicity and

     alleged prejudice caused by delay are evidential and they should be subject to
     empirical tests. Increasingly, witnesses are called before the tribunals which are

     called upon to decide “abuse o f process” arguments. Above all, all circumstances

     should be balanced and weighed in determining whether to stay a case, and they

     should be considered “in the round”. See Tan v. Cameron [1992] 2 A.C. 205, 225E
     (PC), per Lord Mustill.



    Previous inquiries; the relevance o f the 1998 Home Office disclosure o f evidence.


8    There have been a number of inquiries: by Lord Justice Taylor; the Director o f Public

     Prosecutions; the Coroner; the Police Complaints Authority; and a “Scrutiny” by Lord
     Justice Stuart-Smith. The West Midlands police collected evidence for the first four of
     these, and appear also to have conducted a separate private inquiry for the South

     Yorkshire police, which may be alleged to provide the justification for the exclusive

     control o f South Yorkshire police over most o f the documentation in this case.


9    The defendants ask why another, criminal, trial of these events should take place, and.
     in the light o f those earlier inquiries and their findings, they ask the Director o f Public

     Prosecutions to put an end to it. A mass o f new evidence has been made available in
     the last year at the insistence o f the Home Secretary, after the “Scrutiny”, which was

     not previously in the public domain or known to the families o f those who died, and

     which has hitherto been concealed in the possession o f those who have been held
     liable for negligence, the South Yorkshire police.



10   The significance o f the witness statements disclosed in the course of the “Scrutiny”,

     and the hundreds of unsworn police statements, edited and unedited, disclosed by the

     Home Secretary in 1998, is difficult to overstate. They disclose, prima facie, such a

     thorough manipulation o f the evidence to the past benefit of the defendants and South
     Yorkshire police in general, that they cause all aspects o f the investigation, all known

     statements, indexes to evidence and correspondence, to be examined differently.


11   The documentation referred to below is relevant to the defendants’ reliance on the

     outcome o f previous inquiries and investigations. In summary, it indicates the
     following;



     (a) the alleged independence o f the West Midlands police throughout these enquiries

     was a sham;


     (b) the South Yorkshire police statements sent to the DPP by West Midlands police

     were known by both forces to include edited statements; the “undertaking” given by

     Mr Mervyn Jones o f West Midlands Police (“Scrutiny” report, page 213) that he

     would not release the unedited statements to the Taylor Inquiry discloses a principal-

     agent relationship inconsistent with independence;


     (c) West Midlands police allowed full or at least wide access to the papers in the case

     to South Yorkshire police at the inquest, civil proceedings (and presumably the Taylor

     Inquiry), while denying it to the Liverpool families;



     (d) the statements and documents sent to the DPP in 1990 were the result o f a

     calculated selection, from which many statements o f central importance were


                                             4
     excluded, and which included edited statements o f police officers;


     (e) Hammond Suddards, solicitors to South Yorkshire police, and in particular Peter
     Metcalf, have acted under a serious conflict o f interest in the course o f previous

     inquiries, and continue to deny access to the Liverpool families to the South Yorkshire

     archive. No protest is made at this by the defendants, whose defence, it is believed, is

     funded by the South Yorkshire Police Authority, and one o f whom, Mr Duckenfield,
     is represented by solicitors who acted for the South Yorkshire police in the “Scrutiny”.



                                  Sufficiency o f evidence


12   It has already been pointed out in previous submissions that the Taylor findings in

     themselves amount almost to a prima facie case o f manslaughter by gross negligence
     and o f misfeasance. The decision to open the gates without taking steps to divert the

     oncoming spectators was a “blunder o f the first magnitude” and was an immediate

     (and therefore substantial) cause o f death. The decision was taken by Duckenfield,
     with the agreement or acquiescence o f Murray.



13   The witness statements already provided to the defence and DPP provide cogent
     evidential support for the manslaughter and misfeasance allegations, combined with

     admissions o f fact made by each defendant in his various statements, and evidence to

     the Inquest and the Taylor Inquiry. Exhibits such as videos, photographs, plans etc, in

     support o f the Taylor findings are not to hand, because the South Yorkshire police,

     with the encouragement o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions, refuse to hand them

     over pending the outcome o f this review.



14   In an offence in this species o f involuntary manslaughter, following Adomako, the

     prosecution must prove: (a) a duty o f care; (b) a breach o f that duty; (c) that that

     breach was a substantial cause o f death; (c) “The essence o f the matter which is
     supremely a jury question, is whether having regard to the risk o f death involved the

     conduct o f the defendant was so bad in all the circumstances as to amount in their


                                              5
       judgment to a criminal act or omission.” per Lord Mackay LC [1995] 1 A.C. 187E.



15     It is submitted that all elements but the last have never been seriously disputed. The
       remaining element is for the jury. Lord Taylor found, and it is inherent in the

       acceptance o f liability by South Yorkshire police in the various negligence cases, that
       the police were under a duty, and that there was a breach o f the duty o f care ,

       causative o f death. See also Frost v. Chief Constable o f the South Yorkshire Police
       [1997] 1 All.E.R. 540, 544b-c, per Rose LJ;



               “The immediate cause o f the disaster was a senior officer’s decision to open

               the outer gate without cutting off access to the pens. Liability for the deaths

               and injuries o f those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants, the
               first o f whom is the Plaintiffs Chief Constable.”



16     The statements o f the 35 spectator witnesses which have been served on the defence

       and DPP prove this negligence, taken together with the transcripts o f evidence given

       by the two defendants to the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest. The statements should be

       read in full. It is not intended here to set out the evidence as might be appropriate in

       an opening speech, nor to treat the CPS in this review as an examining magistrate,
       considering whether a case to answer is made out on the papers.


Some features o f the evidence already served.



17     Some conspicuous features o f the 35 witnesses are as follows, with a few references.

       In 1988 police officers diverted spectators away from the tunnel leading to those pens,
       (eg Hilton, page 5). The unedited statements o f White and Lang, submitted on 24th

       August, prove the same, and suggest that it had been the practice o f senior officers to

       ensure that the tunnel was closed when the pens were full, something that could be

       seen easily by White from the steps near the Control Box. This police evidence was

       suppressed until 1998.    In 1989, when the gate was opened, a rush o f people carried
       spectators straight into the tunnel, and it was impossible to turn back (Cook).


                                                 6
There was no obvious alternative to the tunnel (Harvey, Murray, Fellowes. Southern. )
There was no diversion away from this tunnel (Odger, Murphy, Langley). Spectators
had to go with the crowd, for fear o f falling underfoot. (Edwards). Spectators were
carried by the surge o f people into the tunnel when Gate C was opened. (Anderson.

Bums, Campbell.) The central pens in the terraces were packed at 2.50 pm (Blayney,

Mullee). PC Guest said that at 2.40 it was not going to be possible to accommodate
the crowd outside the Leppings Lane entrance in those pens. (See file o f 24lh August
1998.) P.C. Walpole (see Annex D . produced below) says the overcrowding was

obvious at 2.55pm. P.C Brooks says the central pens were too full at 2.50pm. (See
Annex D)



Duckenfield and Murray were in the Control Box. They could see the central pens.

Closed circuit television gave them an even better view o f the pens. Five minutes
after Superintendent Marshall had asked for help to relieve possibly life-threatening

pressure at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane, Duckenfield, with the acquiescence and

tacit support o f Murray, finally ordered the gate to be opened without closing off

access to the already crowded pens. Thousands surged in: the deaths o f 96 people

were the immediate and direct consequence. Murray had been on duty at the semi­

final in 1988 in the Control Box. He culpably failed in 1989 to give the proper and
obvious advice. Duckenfield, in Lord Taylor’s words, “froze”. Both defendants admit

their presence in the Control Box, and Duckenfield admits that he lied about matters
shortly afterwards, saying the Liverpool supporters broke open the gate.



The CCTV film, and footage held by the BBC, photographs and other videos o f the

circumstances, disclose full pens before the gate was opened, and a horrifying and

obvious overcrowding after the gates opened. Most o f this evidence is in the hands

o f the South Yorkshire police. The HFSG, and leading counsel, have seen some o f the

video evidence.
21   The basis o f the charges o f misfeasance and attempting to pervert the course o f justice
     is clear from the Taylor interim report, and the informations and submissions lodged

     at Leeds. The HFSG cannot obtain the important statement o f Graham Kelly o f the

     Football Association, because South Yorkshire police refuse to supply it, or even a
     copy. It is intended that Kelly and two witnesses from Liverpool Football Club, Peter

     Robinson, and H.H. Judge Ensor, will be called to say they heard Duckenfield’s lie. It

     was said after deaths had been caused. It will be argued it was an obvious attempt to
     impede inquiries, and to suppress the truth.



22   In leading counsel’s opinion, there is sufficient evidence on which to commit for trial
     already. If. for the sake o f argument, committal proceedings were to begin in a
     week’s time, without any further disclosure by South Yorkshire police, the

     prosecution would call the 35 spectator witnesses, the three police witnesses whose

     evidence has been served (except Guest, who is dead), other officers, and a number o f
     live witnesses, including Kelly, on the basis of transcripts o f the evidence given.



23   The prosecution has already identified further witnesses from the transcripts o f
     evidence given at the Taylor Inquiry, and some from the Coroner’s proceedings, who

     it might call at committal, and police officers who were at the ground, who have made

     contact with us. It is not necessary to identify their names at this stage. There is no

     reason to believe that a committing magistrate would take a different view o f this

     evidence from Lord Taylor. It has been agreed at the magistrates court that the old

     pre-1997 committal rules govern the case, because a police investigation took place
     before 1st April 1997. The provisions o f the Criminal Procedure and Investigations

     Act 1996 do not apply.



24   For the reasons that appear below, however, there can be little doubt that the archive

     o f statements and exhibits in the possession of the South Yorkshire police will add
     significantly to the prosecution case at committal, and then at trial. Assuming that the

     South Yorkshire police continue to refuse to co-operate with the prosecution, witness
     summonses will be sought under section 97 o f the Magistrates Courts Act (after a


                                              8
       decision not to discontinue the case), requiring the Assistant Chief Constable o f South

       Yorkshire police to produce the documentary and technical evidence, and original
       witness statements.



 Public interest and “interests o f justice "factors: (a) the origins o f the present prosecutions



25     The following matters are set out as “public interest” factors which it is suggested are

       relevant to the present review and to the arguments o f the defendants.


The absence o f detailed information until 1997-8



26    It has been an important part o f the prosecution’s approach to the Director’s current

       review, and o f our justification for bringing criminal proceedings in 1998, that the

       HFSG has been deprived o f critical information, statements and documents about the

       disaster for nine years. At the Taylor Inquiry in 1989, a policy appears to have been
       followed o f providing copies o f the statement of an individual survivor or spectator to

       the lawyers acting for him. Attached as Annex C is a letter o f Miss E.M. Steel, a
       solicitor for the “Hillsborough Steering Committee” (now defunct), which records this
       practice. That practice was abandoned during or after the Taylor Inquiry, and certainly

       by the time the Director o f Public Prosecutions became involved formally in August
       1989.



27    It will be noted that Miss Steel did not say that these statements became generally

       available to the families collectively: only, in each case, to a particular solicitor. The

       extent to which these statements were distributed is unclear. Few have remained

       available to the HFSG.


28     It appears from the Stuart-Smith report that police statements (and. perhaps, others)

       were distributed to the press. (See Report, Appendix 8, page 213). (Where edited

       statements had been made, it was o f course the policy o f South Yorkshire police to

       distribute these, rather than the originals.) However, after the end o f the Taylor


                                                 9
       Inquiry, when the DPP investigation began, this policy changed permanently.

       Information and statements were guarded closely. The investigations conducted by the
       West Midlands police for the DPP, Coroner and Police Complaints Authority put an
       end to the policy o f disclosure, except in isolated instances.


29    The new information the Divisional Court was asked to consider in the 1993 Judicial

       Review had been obtained by dint o f the persistence o f individual families,

       dissatisfied and at times appalled by the fact that South Yorkshire police appeared to

       have access to information, whilst they themselves had little. The Divisional Court’s

       judgment o f 5th November 1993 records only a few o f those efforts and the statements
       discovered, but the fact that the substance o f the various investigations was unknown
       to them is evident from a reading o f the transcript as a whole.



30    Over the years, more evidence became available, sometimes accidentally and

       haphazardly, and often after many frustrated efforts. The appointment o f the

       “Scrutiny” o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith followed intense national and televised

       publicity about material which had been discovered after the inquests.


31    Only the open approach o f the Home Secretary in 1998, in stark contrast to the
       miserly approach o f the police forces and the Coroner to the dissemination o f

       information, has permitted the HFSG to obtain the information on which.to embark

       with confidence on prosecutions. The information now available, it is clear,

       undermines the inquest verdicts o f accidental death, and calls into question the

       validity o f all previous investigations.



The decision to prosecute



32    Having advised the HFSG in relation to the “Scrutiny”, the author was asked to advise

       on possible further steps. The report o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, published in

       February 1998, was regarded with profound disappointment and frustration, to say the

       least, insofar as it related to the new evidence. It seemed important that a decision as


                                                   10
      to how to proceed, if at all, should be taken after a pause for reflection, and after the

     material examined by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was disclosed as promised by the

     Home Secretary in Parliament. (See remarks o f the Home Secretary, Hansard, Annex
     A). However, the first batch o f statements o f the South Yorkshire police arrived in

     Liverpool only a few days before the author went to Liverpool in April to address the

     members o f the HFSG about future action, and it seemed wrong to delay a decision in
     principle further.
CO
CO




     Leading counsel’s advice, delivered orally to the Group, and beforehand to the

     Committee in writing, was that the findings o f Lord Justice Taylor had survived

     intact for 9 years. They had been upheld by the Stuart-Smith report. Prosecutions for
     manslaughter, misfeasance and attempting to pervert the course o f justice

     (Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lie”) were justified. Prosecutions for additional offences
     on the basis o f the new material were feasible in spite o f the “Scrutiny”. However, the
     Group was advised that it might be better to confine any prosecutions to the plain
     original facts, in order to avoid long and expensive technical trials involving expert
     evidence about videotapes and cameras.



     The other reasons put forward by counsel, relating to the present charges, were similar
     to those that appeared in the written submissions attached to the informations

     presented in July to the Leeds Magistrates Court. There was evidence, in law, to

     justify prosecution.   Whether to proceed, it was argued, was a decision for the Group.

     The HFSG decided that afternoon to accept counsel’s advice, to instruct him to

     consider the various statements that had come to light before and in the course o f the

     “Scrutiny”, and to formulate charges accordingly on the basis o f the Taylor findings.


35   It was only after that decision was taken, and after members o f the HFSG and counsel

     had read the police statements disclosed by the Home Secretary, that it appeared that

     there had been, on the face o f things, a sustained suppression o f the truth in the course

     o f the original investigations which went far beyond the matters which had been

     alleged by the HFSG, and which had given rise to the “Scrutiny” in the first place.


                                              11
         Public interest and ‘interests o f justice "factors: (b) the concealed material


The edited South Yorkshire police statements



36     On 24th August 1998 statements were sent by the HFSG to the CPS demonstrating the

       practice o f editing, by which, it was submitted, the DPP and counsel had been misled

       in 1990. (See pages I to IV o f the file submitted on that day.) Further examples (see

      attached new file Annex D) have been selected which show again, strikingly, the

      practice o f deleting factual matters, which officers had originally asserted in writing,
      and which were prejudicial to South Yorkshire officers. These examples provide

      further evidence that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, also, was misled on this subject in the
      course of his “Scrutiny”.



      There are dozens o f other instances o f editing, o f varying degrees o f culpability,
      extending, in total and nature, far beyond the cases set out in the report o f Lord Justice

      Stuart-Smith. Unfortunately, some o f these statements have still not been supplied, as

      is apparent from, for example, the Master Witness List, and the exercise of examining

      them is therefore incomplete. Two conspicuous missing statements are those o f Cloke
      and Sykes. The task o f comparing these edited and unedited statements

      comprehensively is vast. The time spent on the exercise must have already have

      exceeded substantially the time available to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith or the people on
      whom he relied in 1997.



      The HFSG has little doubt that the statements provided by South Yorkshire police
      officers, where there were two versions, were the edited ones. It was pointed out in

      the letter o f 24th August 1998 that the page numbers on the index in the Master

      Witness List o f April 1990, prepared by the West Midlands police for presentation to

      the DPP, indicated this. The statements referred to in that list formed the basis o f the
      West Midlands Police Report. An example was shown o f an edited statement being

      one page shorter than the pages set out in the index to that list. The extra page was

      probably a Criminal Justice Act statement, attesting to the truth of the attached


                                               12
       unsworn statement. (It would be interesting to know, if this inference is correct,

       whether those formal statements were on West Midlands or South Yorkshire witness
       statement forms, or, perhaps, on paper which bore the printed name o f neither force.)



39     The material which the HFSG has now supplied demonstrates by itself that a policv

       was adopted by the South Yorkshire police o f withholding information, critical to the
       issue o f negligence, from Lord Justice Taylor in 1989 (so far as they were able), the
       Director in 1990, the Coroner between 1989 and 1991, and, presumably, the Police

      Complaints Authority between 1990 and 1992. How much more is there in the
       Sheffield archive?


The Sharpies statement



40    The policy o f editing statements is to be contrasted not only with the South Yorkshire

      statements setting out ad nauseam prejudicial comment about Liverpool supporters, but

      also with the statement o f James Sharpies, now Chief Constable o f the Merseyside

      Police. It is dated 20th March 1990, and it attaches a computer print-out o f some earlier
      assertions and other pensees (Annex E). The HFSG did not know that Sharpies had even

      been a witness to the disaster until after disclosure o f the Master Witness List. A copy
      o f his statement was obtained from the Merseyside police. It will be noted that large

      tracts o f both statements are expressions o f hearsay, impression, commendation and
      comment, none o f which has been excised.



41    The author o f the statement is a friend o f Assistant Chief Constable Jackson. Sharpies

      bestows lavish praise on the senior officers o f South Yorkshire. His account provides a

       sharp contrast with the edited statements o f junior South Yorkshire police officers, whose

       criticisms o f their senior officers were painstakingly excised. In the Master Witness List.

       Part V is composed for the most part o f police officers. The first entry is the statement

       o f Duckenfield (pages 2457-2469) ; the second is 18 pages o f statements by Sharpies

       (2458-2375); the third is by the defendant Murray (2470-2488). No editing o f Sharpies
       has taken place. It is to be inferred that a deliberate decision was made to place his


                                                13
       statement between the two principal suspects, in order to influence the reader against
       prosecutions.



42     The Master Witness List also includes a statement o f Ronald Hadfield.         He was then
       C hief Constable o f the Nottinghamshire Police. No doubt he was invited for the same

       reasons o f hospitality as led to the invitation to Sharpies. His statement remains
       undisclosed. In contrast to the Sharpies statement, Hadfield’s is listed as last but one of
       the witnesses in Part V.



The significance o f the Phillips “Inquiry and Report"


43     The HFSG learned o f the Phillips “Inquiry and Report” only in the course of

       correspondence during the “Scrutiny”. Attached as Annex F are letters o f 8lh August 1997

       (which contained the first reference to the report which the HFSG saw), 10th and 19th

       September and 6lh October). The first of these letters claims that the report was ordered
       for civil litigation. The report itself is dated “August 1990", the same month in which the

       DPP decided not to prosecute.


44     The origins o f this report are not entirely clear. It is suggested that the South Yorkshire

       Police commissioned it, but the report would obviously have been relevant to the various
       investigations o f the West Midlands police. Attached as Annex G are extracts from that

       report, namely, the cover sheet, contents page, and pages 1-4, 41, 92-3, 100-105, 148-9,

       163-173, and Appendix C. (The whole report will be supplied to the CPS on request.)
       The conclusion indicated that the report attributed negligence (but weakly) to

       Duckenfield and Murray, suggested that fault was broadly spread, and offered mitigation

       for the negligence shown. It was highly sympathetic to South Yorkshire police.



45     The date o f the report is significant. Counsel advised against prosecution on 6lh August

        1990, but “contribution hearings” were pending in the High Court, to be heard in October

        1990, at which the division o f liability between the police, football club, and engineers
       was to be established, and proportional financial contributions to damages were to be


                                                14
     determined. The reference to the closing o f the tunnel in 1988 at pages 92-3 o f the Report

     shows the critical significance o f the editing in relation to the tunnel, described in the

     HFSG letter to the DPP, and attached file, o f 24th August 1998. Clearly, Phillips had been

     misled in relation to White, Woodcock and Lang, the importance o f whose full evidence
     is set out in detail in that letter. He must also have been misled in relation to Sgt
     Crawford. (See pages 86 to 101 o f Annex D.)



46   At page 41, para. 5.29, and page 105, para 8.3, Phillips refers to a “weather eye”. It will

     be recalled that in his statement o f 12th July 1990, Chief Inspector Bettison (File o f 24th

     August 1998, Tab 3, pages 17-18) had referred to the requests to police witnesses,
     instigated by Peter M etcalf o f Hammond Suddards, to “clarify” their evidence. Bettison

     suggested that when officers had talked o f “monitoring” the terraces, they surely meant

     “nothing more than keeping a weather eye out.” Phillips’ use o f the same expression
     indicates that M etcalf s exercise in clarification became indeed a successful manipulation
     o f the evidence.



47   The introductory pages o f the Report fail to disclose who had commissioned it in October

     1989, and whether the report had been used for more than one purpose. It is not known

     to the HFSG whether the report, or a version o f it, was sent to the Director in 1990. The

     HFSG has been sent a list o f documents in the possession o f the DPP that were

     considered in 1990, but it is suggested in the letter o f Mr Croston to HFSG o f 29th July
     1998 that other material may then have been in the DPP's possession. It may be that the

     Phillips report was incorporated in some way into the West Midlands police report.

     Whether sent to the DPP or not, the document shows the pernicious effect o f the editing

     process.



48   The contents o f Appendix C to the Phillips Report will be discussed below.




                                              15
The selective supply o f information to the DPP



49    In the HFSG letter o f 3 1st July to the CPS, it was pointed out, not only that the edited
       statements were sent to the DPP, but also (paragraph 13) that, o f the 35 statements o f

       spectators who had been provisionally selected for committal on the information then

       available, only 7 were in the Master Witness list, 8 were called at the inquest, and 2 were
       called at the Taylor Inquiry.



50    The breakdown of the provisional committal bundle is as follows. O f the 35 “spectator”
       witnesses,



               only Thomas Hilton and Peter Darcy gave oral evidence to the Taylor enquiry;


              only Steven Odger, Norman Langley, Anthony Murray, J\                          Colin

               Flenley,                1a n d _______________ are on the Master Witness List;



              only Thomas Hilton, Norman Langley, Anthony Murray, Derek Richards,
               Stephanie Jones, Colin Flenley, Frederick Maddox, and Karl Mullee gave
              evidence to the inquest.



51    There are about 571 statements in the Master Witness List.       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

       records that 3, 776 statements were taken by the West Midlands Police. Some hundreds
       were taken by South Yorkshire police officers. The Police Complaints Authority records

       (produced below) tell us that 5341 statements were taken in the “overall investigation”.

       It follows therefore that the Director had access to about 12% o f the total statements

       generated in the enquiry. (Very few appear to have been made after August 1990).

       Obviously, many o f these would have been irrelevant or o f little relevance to the question

       o f criminal liability, but not, surely, 88% o f them. How were the 571 selected?



52    O f the 36 edited statements that have now been sent to the DPP (24lh August file, and

       Annex D ). 13 appeared on the Master Witness List sent to the DPP with the West


                                                16
       Midlands Police Report in April 1990. Other very important edited statements have not

       been disclosed yet by the South Yorkshire police, in spite o f the Home Secretary's
       instruction o f February 1998.



53     Given the circumstances set out above, it is impossible to argue that there is no relevant
       material to which the Director did not have access in 1990, and every reason to believe

       that the documentation submitted in 1990 was chosen with partiality; and that the archive

       held in Sheffield contains further relevant and important material that has been carefully

       withheld from the Director and the Coroner, and which is adverse to the South Yorkshire
       police and the defendants.



The selective supply o f information to the Coroner



54     The defendants refer, in connection with their arguments in favour o f discontinuing the

       prosecutions, to the findings o f accidental death by the Coroner’s jury. On Monday 14th
       September 1998, the author o f these representations, together with Ann Adlington and

       Philip Hammond o f the HFSG, inspected documents in Sheffield given in evidence at the
       inquest, and which were now made available in accordance with Rule 57 o f the Coroners'

       Rules 1984. The present Coroner, Christopher Dorries, told us that among the Coroner's

       archive is a copy o f the West Midlands Police Report, sent to the DPP in 1990. The same
       incomplete material, including the edited statements, was sent to Dr Popper in 1990, from

       which he made a further selection, assisted by the West Midlands police, to produce

       about 200 witnesses, o f whom, it should be noted, only 56 had given evidence to the

       Taylor Inquiry.


55     This selection produced a wholly different emphasis to that contained in the Taylor

       report. Attached to these representations is an analysis prepared by Ann Adlington,

       contrasting the findings o f Lord Taylor with the summing-up o f the Coroner. (Annex H ).

       The Popper approach no doubt had its origins in the West Midlands police report, as well

       as in the 571 statements tendered to the DPP.




                                               17
The control o f information.



56     The Director knows from recent correspondence o f our deep concerns that the South
       Yorkshire police hold all the original papers in the case, and that the Director has given

       “guidance”, apparently under the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, that the Chief

       Constable might decide against disclosing these, or copies, until she has completed her
       review.



57    The South Yorkshire policy o f non-disclosure, formed on the basis o f this “guidance” and
       advice from their own lawyers, Hammond Suddards, is obsessively secret and defensive.

       Mr Daines, the Assistant Chief Constable, now refuses to disclose to the HFSG even

       outstanding documents, the disclosure o f which was promised by the Home Secretary in

       February o f this year, at the end o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s “Scrutiny”. Daines is
       thwarting the Home Secretary’s expressed intentions.      He refuses, perversely, even to

       provide the HFSG with the work addresses o f a number o f South Yorkshire police

       officers who the prosecution wishes to interview. (Tab 17, file o f 24th August 1998)



58    Mr Kennedy o f the Crown Prosecution Service has said that “voluntary disclosure” is
       inappropriate at this stage, and that he understands that the archive is the “property” o f
       the South Yorkshire Police. The Coroner has told the author and a member o f the HFSG

       that his understanding also is that South Yorkshire police “owns” the papers, and, that,

       although he has his own store o f papers in the case, he cannot supply documents or copies

       (except as provided by Rule 57 o f the Coroners’ Rules 1984).



59    In search o f the origin o f the argument that South Yorkshire police “owned” the archive,

       members o f the Group have looked back to previous correspondence and events in the

       early years after the disaster and have examined them in the light o f the material now

       available. The true position is that West Midlands police appear to have regarded

       themselves as agents or servants o f South Yorkshire police in the dissemination, control
       and protection o f information, and in the presentation o f facts to the DPP, Coroner and

       PCA, and to a lesser extent Lord Taylor.


                                               18
60    It is now apparent that throughout all the enquiries in this case, the South Yorkshire

       police has had access to all or most information obtained by West Midlands, but that the

       South Yorkshire force has instructed the West Midlands police, in its own interests, and
       in conformity with a distortion o f the common law, to withhold that information from the
       bereaved families, except in isolated instances.


The roles o f the West Midlands Police



61    The ostensibly independent West Midlands police force has reported to, and collected
       evidence for, four official bodies:



       a)     Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry o f 1989, which reported to the Home Secretary;


       b)     The Director o f Public Prosecutions in 1989 and 1990;


       c)     The Coroner’s Inquest between 19th April 1989 and the end o f March 1991;


       d)     The Police Complaints Authority’s supervision o f investigations made by officers
              from, not only West Midlands, but from a variety o f other police forces into
              complaints made against a number o f South Yorkshire officers.


62    In these circumstances, it would seem obvious to the layman that the papers in the case

       would belong to one or other o f these four bodies, who would each be expected to retain
       them (or copies, if one o f the other bodies had the originals.) Alternatively, it might

       possibly be thought normal that the West Midlands police might retain the originals or

       copies. In fact, the South Yorkshire police appear to hold the entire archive, except for

       such copies as are stored by the Coroner.


63    Only if the investigating police force was truly independent o f those it investigated, and

       impartial, could any o f the four inquiries be regarded as full, independent and complete.

       If it were demonstrated that the West Midlands police inquiry was not independent, but


                                               19
       that that force had in fact regarded itself as acting as the agent of South Yorkshire police,

       no weight could be attached to its reports, and the value o f the conclusions o f those to
       whom their officers reported is diminished.



The history o f the claim that South Yorkshire “ow n" the archive: and that they “own", or are
“principals o f the ‘information ”



April to August 1989: The Coroner, Lord Taylor and the two private police investigations



64    It was reported in the newspapers on 17th April 1989 that the Chief Constable o f the

       South Yorkshire Police. Peter Wright, had asked the Chief Constable o f the West
       Midlands Police, Geoffrey Dear, on 16th April “to nominate a senior officer to carry out
       an investigation into the policing o f the match.” It is not known what power was invoked

       by Mr Wright in making that request. This appears to be the same subject for which Mr

       Phillips was commissioned as an expert witness in 1989. and, if the April press reports
       were accurate, the Phillips report may have been commissioned by West Midlands police

       in the furtherance o f this role. Other early press reports, however, make it clear that Mr
       Dear’s officer was to report to the Taylor Inquiry, which had been announced by the
       Government on 16th April.



65    On 16th April 1989, the Assistant Chief Constable o f West Midlands. John Mervyn Jones,
       was nominated by Dear as an investigating officer. According to the evidence o f Jones

       to the “mini-inquest” in April 1990 (Annex I ), he met the Coroner on Tuesday 18th April

       1989 when Popper first gave instructions to him to gather evidence on Popper’s behalf.

       “At that time my other master was Lord Justice Taylor”. At the time Jones was giving

       evidence in 1990, the West Midlands police were assembling evidence, he said, for the
       DPP.



66    It appears to the HFSG, although they cannot be sure o f the point, that West Midlands

       became the force nominated to help Lord Taylor and the other bodies simply because

       Wright had asked Dear to investigate on 16th April 1989. The West Midlands force had


                                                20
     had such poor publicity for the year before April 1989 that it is hard to believe that the
     Home Office would have chosen it.



67   However, it is clear from the reports and statements o f the South Yorkshire Police

     (supplied to the HFSG this year at the request o f the Home Secretary) that by 17th April

     1989 the South Yorkshire police were carrying out their own investigation into the

     policing o f the match. The relationship between this and the separate West Midlands

     police investigation into the policing o f the match, requested by South Yorkshire police,
     is unclear.



68   At all events, Mr Jones was reporting to both the Coroner and Lord Justice Taylor. The
     statements that he and his officers took were taken on behalf of, and for the purpose of

     presenting to, one or other o f those persons, or to both o f those in succession. It cannot,
     plainly, be said that those statements were taken as agent for, or on behalf of. the South

     Yorkshire police office or its Chief Constable, although the fact that Wright first called
     in Dear allows a spurious claim to be made for such agency.



69   On 26th April 1989, a meeting occurred in which Chief Superintendent Wain o f the South

     Yorkshire police said “our job is merely to collate what evidence South Yorkshire police

     officers can provide to their Chief Constable in order that we can present a suitable case,
     on behalf o f the force, to subsequent enquiries.” The accompanying memorandum,

     distributed to all officers present at the ground when the disaster occurred, said “This

     exercise has no connection with the investigation into the policing o f the F.A Cup semi­
     final which is being conducted by the Chief Constable o f the West Midlands.” (See

     Stuart-Smith report, pages 78-9; and questionnaires contained at the beginning o f the file

     submitted on 24th August 1998.) This latter investigation must plainly refer to the

     investigation commissioned by Mr Wright on 16th April 1989.



70   It appears therefore that there were four separate investigations at this stage. The Coroner

     had opened the inquests formally. A second was conducted by West Midlands into the

     policing o f the match, and commissioned by South Yorkshire.               A third was an


                                              21
       investigation by West Midlands for Lord Taylor.          A fourth was an internal South
       Yorkshire police investigation into their own policing, for the benefit o f presenting

       evidence to, among others, Lord Taylor (confirmed by Appendix 8 to the Report o f Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith, page 211).



71     This fourth investigation, conducted by the South Yorkshire police, appears to have had

       full and unimpeded access to all the papers, unrestrained by any restrictions imposed by

       West Midlands police. See the two-page memorandum o f Peter Carr, R1A for example,
       dated 25th April, in which he spoke o f the briefing which the Chief Constable (of South
       Yorkshire) had with “Operational Staff’ on 16th, 17th and 19th April. He also referred to

       various documents in his longer twenty- page report o f the same day, o f video tapes and

       photographs, which were obviously in the possession o f the South Yorkshire, not West
       Midlands, investigators. These Carr documents are Annex.J. Why had the West Midlands
       police not taken these exhibits for their own inquiries?


72     It is clear from the report o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that the South Yorkshire officers

       drafted their own statements, and that the editing was done not by West Midlands officers

       but by South Yorkshire officers or Hammond Suddards. (See Report, page 78-79), but

       apparently for the purpose o f presenting evidence to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, and to any
       other official investigation.



August 1989 to August 1990; the investigation fo r the DPP



73     After the Taylor interim report was published, it appears that in August 1989, the Chief

       Constable o f South Yorkshire wrote to the Director o f Public Prosecutions, requesting

       a decision in relation to criminal liability. The Director o f Public Prosecutions

       commenced an investigation by writing to Mr Wright on 15th August 1989, saying that

       the matter should be the subject of a full investigation. “The West Midlands Police had

       already done considerable work in gathering evidence for Lord Justice Taylor’s Enquiry.

       It seemed sensible therefore to invite Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB, Chief Constable

       o f the West Midlands Police Force, to undertake this investigation.” (See Report o f Chief


                                                22
       Constable to South Yorkshire Police Authority o f 17th November 1989, Annex K. para

       5.3) The report went on to assert that the West Midlands police were also acting for the
       Coroner and the Police Complaints Authority.



74     On 5th January 1990 the Chief Constable reported that the West Midlands police

       investigation into the disaster was being conducted “independently”.


75    The Director received the Master Witness List, the West Midlands Police Report, and

       attached statements, exhibits, and transcripts o f evidence, in this period, probably in
       April. On 6th August 1990, leading counsel advised against prosecution, and the decision

       that there would be no prosecutions was announced by the DPP on 30th August 1990.



April 1989 to March 1991; the inquests; the roles o f West Midlands police and Hammond
Suddards.



76    It is necessary to consider not just the role o f the West Midlands police, but the position

      o f Hammond Suddards in the case. They were the solicitors who have acted for the South

       Yorkshire police throughout most o f the civil proceedings, including two House o f Lords
      cases, and on behalf of the force at the various inquiries. (Weightman Rutherfords acted
       in some civil proceedings for South Yorkshire police in about 1992, and perhaps later.

       Winkworth and Pemberton acted for them in the “Scrutiny”.) Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's

      report shows the prominent part played by Mr Metcalf o f that firm in the early stages of

      the Taylor Inquiry (see pages 78-81 and 211). Mr M etcalf or an assistant attended the

       “Business Meetings”, to which interested lawyers and others were invited by the Coroner,

       before the main and interim inquests were held, for the purpose o f managing the inquest.
       Mr Metcalf spoke o f both the coronal and civil law aspects o f the case, and was clearly

       concerned in each. Copies o f notes o f these Business Meetings are attached as Annex L



11    At page 9 o f the minutes o f the meeting o f 26th February 1990, Mr M etcalf made the

       following observation ;




                                               23
               “In general terms, an inquest takes place before a civil action and it’s always
               legitimate expense to go and be represented at the Inquest because something
               might come out that will be relevant to the civil action.”


78   In April and May 1990, the Coroner held “mini-inquests” at which contentious cross-

     examination was not allowed, so as not to “prejudice” the investigation o f the DPP and
     any possible criminal proceedings. The evidence adduced asserted that in all cases, death

     had followed rapidly from unconsciousness, which had followed rapidly from the crush.

     A consequence o f this, o f course, is that damages for pre-death suffering would be lower
     than if suffering had been greater.



79   In June 1990, Mr Justice Hidden heard civil cases in which the evidence o f sudden death,

     given at the mini-inquests, was adduced. That evidence defeated the families' claims for
     damages for pre-death suffering. The apportionment o f liability between the police and

     other parties, such as Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, was not determined until
     October 1990.



80   In September 1990, the Coroner, Dr Popper, announced that the full inquest would be

     resumed in November. At this time, South Yorkshire police was defending itself in a
     number o f civil actions, including the issues whether claims could be made by those who

     had watched events on television, and appeals by the victims’ families in the pre-death

     suffering cases. Further litigation was outstanding in relation to a number o f spectators
     or relatives o f victims who were present at the match and had suffered injury or mental
     trauma.



81   The three-year limitation period had not expired. A verdict o f unlawful killing at the

     inquest might lead to prosecutions, in spite o f the Director's earlier decision. At the time,

     it was known, and topical in the news, that prosecutions by the Director in the Zeebrugge

     case had been commenced only after a verdict o f unlawful killing at the inquest, and the
     DPP had declined to prosecute at an earlier stage.




                                              24
82   On 30th October 1990, Hammond Suddards were represented at a Business Meeting by

      Belinda Norcliffe o f Hammond Suddards. (She had announced at page 1 o f the minutes
      o f 6th March 1990 that she was from that firm). The Coroner announced at that meeting

      (pages 9-11 o f the minutes for that day) that he would not be distributing copies o f

      statements at the inquest (p 10-11) and also that he would not be circulating a list o f
     witnesses he intended to call (middle o f page 10). He also announced that he was

     proposing to impose a “cut-off’ time in respect o f the disaster, after which time no events
     would be the subject o f inquiry.



83   The claim o f “agency”. Attached is correspondence o f November 1990 in the cases of

     Sarah and Victoria Hicks (Annex M ) . On 15th November 1990, Mervyn Jones, Assistant
     Chief Constable o f the West Midlands Police, wrote to the solicitor for Trevor Hicks,

     Chairman o f the HFSG, in response to a letter which Mr Hicks’s solicitor wrote for the
     specific purpose o f arguing that the Coroner should not impose a “cut-off’ time o f 3.15
     pm.



84   The letter made it clear that a statement o f Paul Taylor could not be released without the

     permission o f South Yorkshire police. The utterly extraordinary assertion is made that

     the West Midlands police were “constitutionally” the agent o f South Yorkshire police.

     Taylor’s statement was taken by the West Midlands police (see Stuart-Smith report, page

     72, paragraph 15) on 8th May 1989. West Midlands police were the “agents” o f Lord
     Taylor and the Coroner in taking it. It would o f course have been impossible for the

     lawyers acting for South Yorkshire police to advise on the propriety o f disclosing it

     unless the South Yorkshire police had the body o f evidence o f which it formed part, or

     at least had access to it.



85   After legal argument on 19th November 1990, when the inquest reconvened, the Coroner

     formally imposed this “cut-off’, a ruling which has been the cause o f great controversy

     and resentment among the Liverpool families. It shielded the South Yorkshire police

     from much embarrassing inquiry. Mr Hicks had not been given Taylor's statement.

     South Yorkshire police, not the Coroner, had refused to give it to him. The subject


                                              25
      formed one o f the grounds on which judicial review was applied for in 1993, and is
      discussed in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.



86   In this connection, therefore, Mr Mervyn Jones gave the advice that the South Yorkshire

     police was responsible for advising on the question o f disclosing matters relevant to the
     jury’s decision: the South Yorkshire police had the “ownership” o f the information. The

     actions o f the South Yorkshire police were o f course at the centre o f the inquest. They

     were under attack. The proposition that the Coroner had had responsibility for the release

     o f information at some earlier period, but did not have it as the main inquest was about
     to begin, is ridiculous and legally indefensible.      The conflict o f interest in South
     Yorkshire police and their lawyers was severe.



87   The role o f C hief Superintendent Beechev.     The letters to and from Sandra Stringer

     throw further light on this (Annex N ). On 28th March 1991 Chief Superintendent

     Beechey o f the West Midlands Police, on behalf o f Mervyn Jones, wrote to Mrs Stringer
     in terms adapted from the letter to Mr Hicks o f November 1990. Mr Beechey’s name

     will be familiar to the CPS. He was fortunately able to find the time to prepare himself

     for the task o f acting as Coroner’s officer, which he eventually performed on a daily
     basis, because, as a former Head o f the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad, he had been

     removed in August 1989 from operational duties after that squad had been disbanded, so
     low had its reputation sunk.



88   These facts are set out in “Unsafe and Unsatisfactory”, an independent report by Tim

     Kaye in 1991. Appendixes A and C to that report are attached (Annex O ). Appendix A

     supplies the interesting information that in 1989-90, West Midlands investigated South

     Yorkshire; (page 85); South Yorkshire investigated West Yorkshire; and West Yorkshire

     in turn investigated West Midlands. No doubt no serious faults in police officers were
     detected by any o f these enquiries. Appendix C shows that Beechey was removed from

     operational duties in August 1989, but was restored in time to act as Coroner’s officer for

     the bulk o f the inquest from 30th November 1990, and to deal with the question of

     disclosure o f information.


                                             26
89   The penultimate paragraph o f Beechey’s letter to Sandra Stringer o f 28th March 1991

      indicates that the South Yorkshire police had “directed” him not to disclose material, after

      advice had been taken: South Yorkshire were the “principals” o f the information.
      Information could only be released on the order o f a court which could include that o f the

      coroner. In the course o f the inquest, Mr Hicks had not been told o f the advice that had

      been given, presumably by Hammond Suddards. The transcripts o f the inquest

     proceedings show no reference to the disclosure o f statements. The notification of this
      new policy came too late. The 28(h March was the last day o f the inquest.



90   While the inquest was continuing, therefore, and South Yorkshire police had the power
     to determine disclosure, they, the “principals”, did not disclose. Only when the inquest

     was over was it alleged that the legal advice was to the effect that the Coroner could have
     taken this decision. The Coroner’s approach to this question, and the severe difficulties

     facing the families before, during, and after the inquest, are evident from the letters in
     Annex N.



91   It may be expected that, if South Yorkshire police had access to all the material in 1990-1

     for the inquest and for civil proceedings, the individual officers who were represented at

     the inquest also had similar access. No conflict o f interest appears to have embarrassed
     Hammond Suddards or indeed Winkworth and Pemberton, the lawyers who advised the
     South Yorkshire police in the course o f the “Scrutiny”. Winkworth and Pemberton

     reminded the CPS o f this when they wrote on Mr Duckenfield’s behalf in July 1998. The

     HFSG believes that South Yorkshire Police Authority are funding the defence o f both

     defendants, and the close relationship between that force and the defendants is further

     proved by the fact that Duckenfield instructed lawyers who had worked closely with the

     South Yorkshire police, and who, it is to be presumed, have knowledge o f the history of
     the control o f documents in this case.




                                               27
The further significance o f the Phillips “Inquiry and Report”



92    Reference has been made already to the Phillips “Inquiry and Report”. The Coroner had
       said at the “Business Meeting” on 30th October 1990 that he would not distribute copy
       statements. However, it now appears that the West Midlands police, acting among other

       capacities as Coroners’ officers, had been supplying copies o f statements o f Liverpool
       supporters to the South Yorkshire police before that date.         This is apparent from
       Appendix C to the Phillips Report. Phillips had been asked in October 1989, allegedly

       by the South Yorkshire police, to prepare an “Inquiry and Report” into the policing o f the
       match by South Yorkshire police, and had also been asked at some point to inquire into
       the behaviour o f Liverpool supporters on the occasion o f the disaster.



93    It will be seen from the Appendix to the report that, although most o f those witnesses

       gave evidence at the Taylor inquiry, many did not, and it is reasonable to conclude that
       their statements came to Mr Phillips from South Yorkshire police, who in turn obtained
       them from the West Midlands police.



94    If the inference is correct that South Yorkshire police had access to papers from the West

       Midlands police for the purpose o f the Phillips report, it is obvious that the West
       Midlands police considered it proper and normal to provide the South Yorkshire police,

       but not the families, with any information gained in the course o f that inquiry


95    The Jones letter o f November 1990, cited above, suggests that Hammond Suddards

       were advising South Yorkshire police on their obligations as to whether to disclose

       documents wanted for use at the inquest. If Jones was telling the truth. South

       Yorkshire was able to deprive the families o f materials at the inquest, but to have full

       or extensive access, as the Phillips report shows, to the statements and evidence

       collected by the West Midlands police. In this way, the inquest, ostensibly objective

       and dispassionate, is now shown to have been manipulated by South Yorkshire police

       for their own ends, and by West Midlands police. For this reason, the defendants are

       not entitled to rely upon the inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.


                                               28
The continuing role o f Hammond Suddards



96    Peter M etcalf o f Hammond Suddards continued to advise South Yorkshire police on

       the subject o f disclosure after the inquest. See, for example, the letter from Miss Steel

       to Mr Teare o f 16th July 1991 contained in Annex N.      M etcalf is, o f course, the

       lawyer who is currently advising the South Yorkshire police not to disclose any o f the
       documents in their possession to anyone at all. He has written to the HFSG that “That

       policy will continue to be applied impartially to prosecutor, defendants and to any

       other party” (letter o f 17th August, page 202 o f file submitted on 24th August) and “In

       the interests o f fairness and justice this policy will apply to all requests received.”
       (letter 7th August, same file, page 206).


97    Mr M etcalf did not reveal, as we have recently been informed by a confidential
       source, that South Yorkshire Police Authority are funding the defence o f the present

       defendants; a fact which he might have thought it proper to disclose when he claimed

       a principled impartiality in the handling o f confidential materials, and when he

       asserted that neither he nor the Chief Constable was aware o f any conflict o f interest.


1990-1991; The role o f the Police Complaints Authority


98    On the retirement o f Geoffrey Dear at the beginning o f April 1990, the investigation

       supervised by the PCA was taken over by the Chief Constable o f the Cumbria police.

       Attached as Annex P are a number o f PCA formal reports o f August 1990, which

       suggest that officers from the Cumbria police force performed a central investigative

       role after April 1990.



99      On 11th July 1991 the Police Complaints Authority directed the South Yorkshire

       Police to bring disciplinary charges for neglect of duty against Duckenfield and

       Murray. On 26th July 1991, Mr Duckenfield, who had been suspended from duty in

       August 1989 after the interim report o f Lord Taylor, went on “sick leave”, though still


                                                29
       suspended.



100    On 10th November 1991, the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire retired Mr

       Duckenfield on health grounds, after a report had been submitted by a local police
       surgeon. Thereafter, South Yorkshire police asked permission to abandon the charge

       against Mr Murray, and were allowed to by the PCA, on the ground that it would be

       “unfair” to proceed against Mr Murray for what was in effect a joint charge. A public

       announcement to this effect was made on 13th January 1992. Subsequently, Mr
       Murray also retired on “health grounds”.



101    It is submitted that no proper legal basis can exist for claiming that documents,

       collected for the Police Complaints Authority by the Cumbria police, can be said to be
       the property o f South Yorkshire. Those reports must contain confidential material

       about the conduct o f South Yorkshire police officers. Can it possibly be said that
       Cumbria police or the PCA were the “agents” o f South Yorkshire police?


The law relating to access to police documents



102    There is no reason to impute bad faith to the Coroner for his decision o f 30(h October

       1990 not to disclose statements, though the decision was depressingly unhelpful: no

       doubt he was ignorant o f the fact that South Yorkshire had had copies o f the West

       Midlands material. If the Coroner had known that, it is impossible to imagine that he

       would have withheld access to those statements by the bereaved families.


103    There have been a number o f cases in the last twenty years in which the courts have

       considered the confidentiality o f papers acquired by police in the course o f

       investigations. In a letter to Sandra Stringer at Annex N above, the Coroner, Mr

       Dorries wrote on a date in 1993 that he was constrained by the case o f R v.

       Hammersmith Coroner, ex parte Peach [1980] Q.B. 211 to withhold information that
       had not been produced in the inquest, except where Rule 57 required him to supply

       copies o f documents put in evidence at the inquest.


                                               30
104   It is submitted that this approach by Mr Dorries, advanced in good faith, is wrong.

      The Peach case decides only that where documents have been compiled or created by
      a police force in the course o f a disciplinary enquiry into its own officers, those
      papers remain the property o f the police force. In this case, Jones was appointed by
      the Coroner from the outset to act as his, the Coroner’s, agent.



105   A series o f decision after 1981 dealt with the question o f access to documentation for

      civil proceedings which was in the possession o f the police. The principal cases are
      Neilsen v. Laughame [1981] Q.B. 736, Campbell v. Tameside [1982] 1 Q.B. 1065,
      Hehir v. C hief Constable o f Police for the Metropolis [1982] 1 W.L.R. 715, Peach v.

      Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis [1986] 1 Q.B. 1064, Evans v.. Ciief

      Constable o f Surev [1988] 1 Q,B. 588. Makanjuola v. Commisioner o f Police for the
      Metropolis [1982] Q.B. 455, Marcel v. Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis
      [1992] 2 W.L.R. 50, and R v. Chief Constable o f West Midlands Police . ex parte
      Wiley. [1995] A.C. 274.



106   This is not the occasion for a consideration as to whether the Chief Constable o f South
      Yorkshire Police can claim public interest immunity for the archive he holds.

      However, until the Wilev case, it seemed clear that if documents had been collected or

      obtained for the purpose, principally, o f a disciplinary investigation into complaints

      against police officers, public interest immunity attached to those documents on a

      “class” basis. Hence, if it could be claimed that a police force was taking statements
      for the primary purpose o f investigating complaints, it was very hard for members o f
      the public or interested parties to obtain copies.



107   However, the existence o f this line o f cases suggests that the South Yorkshire police

      believed that they could claim possession o f the entire archive on the ground that they

      had appointed West Midlands police to investigate matters o f a disciplinary character;
      that West Midlands police had therefore been its “agents”; and that, as a further

      advantage, public interest immunity attached to the contents o f the archive.




                                              31
108   It is submitted that such a claim would be wholly wrong, even absurd, and that the

      prosecution is being wrongly frustrated in its legitimate desire to obtain sight o f

      probative statements to give further support to its case. The documents are not the
      property o f South Yorkshire: they surely “belong to” one or more o f the various
      official bodies that have inquired into the case.



109   However, the very claim of ownership by South Yorkshire, and the alleged

      relationship o f principal and agent, demolish by themselves the contradictory claim

      that the previous inquiries have been served by an independent force. South Yorkshire

      police can be said to “own” the archive only if West Midlands police were working,
      not independently, but in reality as agents for South Yorkshire police from 16(h April
      1989, whatever their other responsibilities.



               Public interest and “interests o f justice "factors: (c) publicity


110   The solicitors for Mr Duckenfield advance the adverse publicity o f the 1996

      McGovern drama-documentary as a factor in this review. It is submitted that the effect
      o f publicity over the years must be a matter for the judge or magistrate considering an

      abuse o f process application to consider “in the round”, together with all other relevant

      factors. Any prejudicial publicity in this case towards the defendants is minor
      compared to that against defendants in the cases o f Rosemary West, Kevin and Ian

      Maxwell, the James Bulger defendants, the Kray brothers, the Guinness trial, the

      proposed Lockerbie defendants, the Moors murderers, and many others. In fact, as
      Lord Taylor found, there was widespread, false and defamatory propaganda put about

      in 1989 by South Yorkshire police officers to the prejudice o f Liverpool supporters.

      This prejudice has never been completely dispelled.




                                              32
                         The limitations o f the Stuart-Smith report


111   The defendants invite the CPS to heed the conclusions o f the “Scrutiny”. It is
      submitted that the conclusions o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in relation to “new

      evidence” are not significant in this review. That report upheld the general approach of
      Lord Taylor, on which the prosecution relies, but its review o f “new evidence” was

      confined to the evidence tendered as new in 1996. However, that exercise was

      necessarily a limited one, because the Liverpool families had been starved o f evidence
      for years. The existence o f the edited statements was unknown. One example only,
      P.C. Frost, was offered to the “Scrutiny” by a third party. The scale o f the editing, now
      revealed, exceeds anything shown to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.



112   Further, it is submitted that caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in

      the report. It has been pointed out that the conclusions about the edited statements are
      seriously wrong. The dates on page 1, in paragraphs 4 and 5, should read 1 I th July

      1991 and 19th November 1991. Duckenfield did not retire at the beginning o f the

      main inquest. He gave evidence to it in full uniform. The “autumn o f 1990" in

      paragraph 6 should read “30th August 1990”. In paragraph 15, page 87, it is wrongly
      asserted that the main inquest began in March 1991: in fact it began on 19th November
      1990.



113   The South Yorkshire policy o f making statements available to relatives, described at

      pages 89-90, is inconsistent with the history o f difficulty experienced by, for example,

      Sandra Stringer (See Annex N . above). The discussion o f the decision not to

      prosecute for manslaughter (page 10, paragraphs 53, 56 and 57) uses the word

      “recklessness”. There is no recognition o f the significance of the decision in

      Adomako. which replaces the complicated “recklessness” test apparently applied in

      1990, and reinstated the gross negligence test.



114   The Stuart-Smith report is itself economical with information. For example, only

      small parts o f the advice o f counsel in 1990 are set out. The provision o f the whole
      advice is required, so that the whole reasoning is apparent, rather than a few snippets.
      Clearly, privilege has been waived by the provision o f that report to the “Scrutiny”.

      Why do South Yorkshire police have the advice and the West Midlands police report?
      If the CPS advises that a driver should not be prosecuted for manslaughter, a copy of
      that advice is not sent to him or his employer. Why does the Coroner have the West

      Midlands police report in addition to the statements? Does he have the advice o f

      counsel? Why in these circumstances is the prosecutor in this case not given access to
      these documents?



115   The terms o f reference o f the “Scrutiny” are set out at pages v and vi. They called

      upon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine whether any evidence existed which was

      not available to, among others, the DPP. The knowledge available to the HFSG now.

      from the 35 statements, the Master Witness List, and the edited statements, proves that
      material was not available, and information o f a critical kind had been withheld.



116   There is no evidence that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith saw the Master Witness List, or

      knew what material the DPP had considered. There is no ground to believe that he

      sought to compare the evidence available to the Director with the total evidence
      available. He looked only at the comparatively small pieces o f new evidence then

      known to the families. A “Scrutiny” is an unusual legal animal. Absolutely no

      opportunity was given to the HFSG, before it was published, to see the edited and

      unedited unsworn statements. The Group was even denied access to the statement of

      P.C. Bichard, whose account was at the centre o f the matters under investigation.

      Control over the archive was maintained.



117   If the HFSG had known then what the Home Secretary has allowed it to discover

      since, it is submitted that the result o f the “Scrutiny” would have been very different,

      and that the flaws and partiality o f previous investigations would have been exposed.

      A “Scrutiny” is an inquiry, it seems, with little opportunity for those whose concerns

      have prompted its establishment to ask questions, only to be questioned. The account

      given by Roger Houldsworth is set out in full, and his evidence criticised. The report


                                              34
      does not even mention the conversations Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had with the
      defendants in the present case, which the HFSG know took place, because Lord
      Justice Stuart-Smith referred to them casually in discussion with one o f the families.


               The frustration o f the Home Secretary's order fo r disclosure



118   The HFSG does not have copies o f the West Midlands police report nor the advice of
      counsel. It is submitted that justice requires that they should be disclosed to the

      Group. In R v. Saunders [1996] 1 Cr. App. R. 463, Lord Taylor CJ pointed out at page

      479B-C and 485C that the Serious Fraud Office and Department o f Trade and
      Industry had disclosed in that appeal quantities o f documents that would normally be

      expected to attract claims o f public interest immunity and legal professional privilege.

      Public bodies are usually prepared to disclose matters when they have nothing to hide,

      considerations o f confidentiality notwithstanding. When the documents they possess
      are embarrassing, they seek to withhold them by invoking the “public interest” and
      “privilege”.



119   The recent secrecy o f the South Yorkshire police, acting under the advice of

      Hammond Suddards, merely intensifies the justified belief o f the Liverpool families

      that they have been manipulated and cheated over the years, that the DPP was misled

      in 1990 when he took his decision on the basis o f carefully selected material, and that

      the course o f justice has been perverted.



120   Copies o f these submissions and supporting documents will be sent to the Home

      Secretary and Attorney-General, who was included in the terms o f reference set out in

      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, and to those Liverpool Members o f Parliament

      who have supported the HFSG this year in attempting to obtain fuller access to the

      materials considered in the “Scrutiny”, as promised by the Home Secretary.




                                              35
      does not even mention the conversations Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had with the
      defendants in the present case, which the HFSG know took place, because Lord
      Justice Stuart-Smith referred to them casually in discussion with one o f the families.



               The frustration o f the Home Secretary's order fo r disclosure



118   The HFSG does not have copies o f the West Midlands police report nor the advice of
      counsel. It is submitted that justice requires that they should be disclosed to the

      Group. In R v. Saunders [1996] 1 Cr. App. R. 463, Lord Taylor CJ pointed out at page

      479B-C and 485C that the Serious Fraud Office and Department o f Trade and
      Industry had disclosed in that appeal quantities o f documents that would normally be

      expected to attract claims o f public interest immunity and legal professional privilege.

      Public bodies are usually prepared to disclose matters when they have nothing to hide,

      considerations o f confidentiality notwithstanding. When the documents they possess

      are embarrassing, they seek to withhold them by invoking the “public interest” and
      “privilege”.


119   The recent secrecy o f the South Yorkshire police, acting under the advice o f

      Hammond Suddards, merely intensifies the justified belief o f the Liverpool families

      that they have been manipulated and cheated over the years, that the DPP was misled

      in 1990 when he took his decision on the basis o f carefully selected material, and that

      the course o f justice has been perverted.



120   Copies o f these submissions and supporting documents will be sent to the Home

      Secretary and Attorney-General, who was included in the terms o f reference set out in

      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, and to those Liverpool Members o f Parliament

      who have supported the HFSG this year in attempting to obtain fuller access to the

      materials considered in the “Scrutiny”, as promised by the Home Secretary.




                                              35
121    It would be a most serious injustice to discontinue this prosecution.




Quis custodiet ipsos cuslodes'?




3 Raymond Buildings                                                      a   .
Gray’s Inn                                                         ^         ^   ^

London WC1




24 September 1998                                                      Alun Jones QC




                                              36
                       ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY




     REPRESENTATIONS TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                          ON BEHALF OF MR. BERNARD MURRAY




1.1      In 1996-7, the HFSG pretext for re-opening the investigation was a claim that ‘new evidence’
existed to undermine the previous findings and decisions. That claim was emphatically rejected by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny. It was inevitable that any post-Scrutiny attempt to justify a prosecution
would include another claim that further fresh evidence had come to light.

1.2      We are now able to respond to the ‘new evidence’ claim, as well as to the variety of other claims
in the prosecutor’s representations.

1.3     There are also important points to be made about the declared CPS/DPP policy on the provisions
of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.

CPS/DPP Policy - evidence
2.1     The CPS letters to HFSG on 27 July and 4 August 1998 set out Policy. They refer to evidence,
public interest and the interests of justice. The latter is one specific aspect of public interest. This is not
the moment for detailed argument about policy, but we indicate our concerns.

2.2      The evidence criterion for intervention is wrong. (We do not accept that the private prosecutor
can make out a case to answer. What follows is addressing the principle behind the policy.) It cannot be
right to restrict the Director’s scope for intervening on evidence grounds to cases where there is ‘clearly
no case to answer’.

2.3     First, it has the effect that the Director will only intervene in cases where the Court would be
bound to stop the proceedings in any event, either by refusing to issue summonses, or by refusing to
commit for trial. To that extent, intervention on evidential grounds would never serve to achieve more
than an acceleration of the inevitable.

2.4      Second, in rare cases such as the present, it has a potential for undermining the public’s
perception of the authority of the Director, as well as that of the Attorney-General. For more than eight
years, the Director has publicly asserted that there is no realistic prospect of conviction of any person on
the charges now levelled against the two defendants. This after the most detailed, thorough, responsible
and high-level assessment of the position it is possible to imagine, carried out more than once, and
coupled with the clear conclusions of the Scrutiny of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, which have in turn been
publicly accepted by the Director, the Attorney-General and the Home Secretary. The policy
contemplates that the Director may conclude that because it is not clearly demonstrated that there is no


                                                                              Mr Murray's representations - 1/5
case to answer, all that has gone before must count for nothing, and that the publicly appointed body
responsible for criminal prosecutions must stand aside and leave it to a private prosecutor. That such an
outcome is theoretically possible suggests that the underlying policy is flawed. Particularly in the unique
circumstances of this case, where an independent Scrutiny Inquiry under a Lord Justice of Appeal has
been set up by Ministers of the Crown to examine whether there is any basis for reviewing the decision
not to prosecute.

2.5     We mention the position of the Attorney-General at this stage because there is a need to
coordinate the roles of the principal officers responsible for the criminal process. Were there to be a
committal for trial to the Crown Court, the Attorney’s power to enter a nolle prosequi would be called
upon by the defence. Ex hypothesi, such intervention only arises after it has been found that there is a
case to answer. It cannot be right that the Director is unable to intervene on evidential grounds if there
may be a case to answer, when it is plain that the Attorney can do so in a case where there undoubtedly
is a case to answer. We note section 3(1) of the 1985 Act. In any case where the Attorney would enter
a nolle prosequi, notwithstanding that there is or might be a case to answer, there is nothing in law or
principle to preclude the Director from intervening to the same effect at an earlier stage, acting either
independently or under the Attorney’s superintendence.

CPS/DPP Policy - public interest
3.1     The public interest factors to be taken into account when considering whether to take over and
discontinue a private prosecution will not be different from or less than those factors which the Code for
Crown Prosecutors requires to be taken into account when deciding whether to prosecute.

3.2    Without repeating 2.4 above, the public pronouncements from the office of the Director, from
the Law Officers and Ministers of the Crown have created a legitimate expectation in the defendant that
there will be no prosecution. It is unthinkable that this should effectively be overridden by the
commencement of a private prosecution. It would set at nought the assurance contained in §10.1 of the
Code. There is no basis for invoking the exceptions in §10.2.

3.3    Material public interest factors against prosecution as identified in §6.5 of the Code are:
        (d) long delay, and
        (f) significant ill-health of the prospective defendant.
Both apply here. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found significant instances of altered recollections in
witnesses upon whom the prosecutor would rely.

3.4     Assessment of culpability. We do not propose to argue issues of substantive law at this stage. For
present purposes it is sufficient to refer to the quotation which Lord Taylor chose to cite prominently,
with obvious approval, in his Interim Report, PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN? [p.20]:
        “Events o f the magnitude o f Hillsborough don’t usually happen just for one single reason, nor
        is it possible to pin the blame on one single scapegoat... Disasters happen because a whole series
        o f mistakes, misjudgments and mischances happen to come together in deadly combination.”
        (The Archbishop o f York.)
Lord Taylor’s Report, read as a whole, found the disaster was caused by a series of factors: ultimately
a failure of systems as well as of single individuals, involving the Police as a Force, Sheffield
Wednesday as a Club, their consulting engineers, the Health & Safety Executive, the Local Authority and
the Football Association.

3.5      Regrettably, HFSG has become a campaigning pressure group for what is now a relentless pursuit
of these ex-police officers. Their lives have been and will continue to be seriously afflicted by their
knowledge that they were involved at the epicentre of the disaster. A fair and dispassionate assessment
of the position of the two proposed defendants would see them as having been seriously affected by their
involvement in the tragedy. But there is no prospect of this private prosecution being carried on and

                                                                                Mr Murray's representations - 2/5
conducted with any regard to the broader concepts of fairness and balance of public interest factors which
any defendant in a criminal trial in this country is entitled to expect.


CPS/DPP Policy' the private prosecutor.
4.1     Even if there were to be a defensible evidential basis for continuing the proposed prosecution,
it would be wholly wrong for the public prosecuting authority to abandon responsibility for the conduct
of what undoubtedly would be a serious, complicated and important ‘high-profile’ case. Section
3(2)(b)(i) of the 1985 Act imposes a duty on the Director to institute and have the conduct of proceedings
where it appears that:
        “the importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate that proceedings should
        be instituted by him...”.
Although this duty is distinct from the duty to “take over” the conduct of proceedings, it is not a duty
which the Director can ignore. Parliament did not envisage that important or difficult cases (this would
be both) should be left to private prosecution. The scope for intervention by a private prosecutor in such
cases must clearly be confined to situations where inertia, partiality or improper action on the part of the
public prosecutor can be demonstrated.

4.2      Although section 6( 1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 expressly preserved the right of
private prosecution, it is clearly not an unfettered right. The purpose in preserving private access to the
criminal courts was stated by Lord Wilberforce in Gouriet-v- Union o f Post Office Workers [1978] A C
435 at 477:
         “This historical right..., though rarely exercised in relation to indictable offences, and
         though ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by taking over the
         prosecution and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi) remains a valuable
         constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality on the part of authority.”
See also: Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Cmnd 8092 (1981)): it provides a
useful and effective safeguard against “improper action” by the prosecuting authority: cited by Lloyd L.J.
in R -v- Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and Another, (1993) 96 Cr.App.R. 405.

4.3     The lengthy history of public investigations into the circumstances of the Hillsborough tragedy,
carried out at all stages under the auspices of the Home Secretary and the Law Officers, clearly
demonstrates that this is not an appropriate case for private prosecution.


HFSG - 1998 Representations to D.P.P.
5.1      Fundamentally, the HFSG representations amount to claims that, by reason of fraudulent
interference with and /or concealment of evidence by the South Yorkshire Police and/or the West
Midlands Police, the Taylor Inquiry, the D.P.P., the Police Complaints Authority, the Inquests, and Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith were all in their turn deceived about the culpability of the South Yorkshire Police
Force in relation to the tragedy of Hillsborough. These claims are presumed to be true, then translated
simplistically into a justification for prosecuting the two proposed defendants.

5.2     To overcome the objection that these were the very claims expressly considered and rejected by
the Scrutiny, HFSG contends that it is only post-Scrutiny that material has been released for their
consideration which now enables them to demonstrate the truth of their assertions. It is necessary to
examine this material with close attention to detail, for the claims based upon it are wholly spurious.

5.3     When viewed in conjunction with the serious allegations which were made to Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith. the present claims are seen as the continuation of a series of unfounded allegations made
in support of the long-standing conspiracy theory which has become entrenched in the thinking of the


                                                                           Mr Murray's representations - 3/5
HFSG, and which now dominates the presentation of all their arguments. A summary of certain
allegations together with the findings of the Lord Justice is set out in the following table.




                       ALLEGATION                              FINDINGS OF STUART-SMITH L.J.

   1   Video tapes were stolen by S.Y. police as part   There is no evidence for this suggestion. §22.
       o f a ‘cover-up’, p. 18, §22.                    One tape would have been blank. The other showed
                                                        turnstiles 9 to 16. §21.

  2    Police blamed failure to see overcrowding in     “Quite untenable,” p.26, §61. Note also:
       pens 3 and 4 on fact that camera 5 defective.    [a] pp.24-5, §§51 and 52: Mr Murray had given
       This was deliberately false, p.20, §33.1         evidence to the opposite effect. Ignored by HFSG
                                                        and not drawn to the attention o f Stuart-Smith L.J.
                                                        [b] Mr Houldsworth (upon whom HFSG relied)
                                                        said police would not rely on cameras; they had a
                                                        good view out o f the window: p.25, §55.
                                                        [c] When consulted by Stuart-Smith L.J., counsel
                                                        for the families at the Inquest said it had never been
                                                        the police case that they could not see pens 3 and 4
                                                        were full because CCTV not working: p.26, §58.

  3    Evidence from video tapes o f what was filmed    There was never any disappearance or concealment
       by camera 5 deliberately supressed and           o f video footage from camera 5: p.27, §63. “There
       concealed (by S. Yorkshire police and/or West    is no new video evidence...” pl0 4 §7
       Midlands), p.20, §33.2                           Allegation that police hid videotape evidence is
                                                        completely unfounded. There was no suppression
                                                        or disappearance o f footage from the vital tapes ...
                                                        which were at all times ... available to be seen by
                                                        legal representatives o f the families: p.30, §77.

  4    Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately          Importance o f his evidence exaggerated out o f all
       withheld from Inquest jury, p.20, §33.5          proportion. His existence and evidence were known
                                                        to Taylor Inquiry and to Coroner: p.36, §97.

  5    Inquest verdicts procured by fraud,              Submissions unfounded: p.48, §53.
       suppression of evidence or insufficiency of      “The suggestion that the evidence now put before
       inquiry; fraudulent concealment o f evidence:    me ... was deliberately suppressed and those
       p.48, §52.6                                      concerned acted in bad faith is ... wholly
                                                        irresponsible”: p.52, §70.
                                                        [fraudulent concealment o f evidence]: “ suggestion
                                                        is false and I regard it as wholly irresponsible” :
                                                        p. 104, §12.



5.4      The prosecutor continues to assert that the South Yorkshire Police and/or West Midlands
carefully withheld important material from the Director and the Coroner, such that the 1990 decision not
to prosecute and the Inquest verdicts were reached on an incomplete assessment of material evidence.
These claims are dealt with in detail in Schedule A. An illusion of incomplete consideration is created
by highlighting the fact that not all statements were considered and not all witnesses were called. Of
course they were not. For obvious reasons, many witnesses were repetitive of others, many were unable
to speak about the focal matters under inquiry. Some sifting process to extract representative sample
witnesses on critical issues was essential, otherwise the Hillsborough Inquiry and the Inquests would
have been unmanageable. Evidence now relied on by the prosecutor as being new and previously

                                                                             Mr Murray's representations - 4/5
unconsidered is substantially the same evidence as has already been thoroughly considered, but from
different sources. This is analysed in Schedules B and C.




Mr Murray’s representations - accompanying Schedules.
6.1      To assist the Director to give detailed consideration to the points and counter-points arising out
of the HFSG representations, we have prepared responses in the form of three Schedules:
         A - responses to the 40-page representations of Mr Jones Q.C. (24 September 1998);
         B - an analysis of the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the witness statements referred
to in the HFSG letter to CPS (24 August 1998); (these statements were withheld from us until late
September when they came with the representations);
         C - an analysis of the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the 22 statements in Annex D
to the representations.
We respond to the claims made about the 38 statements served in support of the summonses in schedule
A. Most of these are general in nature.

6.2      Our submission is that none of the statements relied on establishes anything of material
significance, that is, which has not been known of or available before from other sources. The
prosecutor’s presentation relies on bulk without substance.

6.3     For brevity, we have adopted short-form responses where the same response can be made to
claims about witnesses or points about their evidence, (or deletions or amendments where those
allegations are made). The meaning of the notation we have adopted is as follows:
         NOT NEW - the witness says nothing which has not been established before by other evidence;
         INQUIRY, INQUEST, or SCRUTINY - indicates that the evidence, point or argument was fully
         taken into account by the relevant body, albeit as a result of evidence from other sources;
         AFTERMATH - this indicates that the evidence or argument relates to events after the tragedy
         had occurred, which are not material to the charges against Mr Murray;
         NOT MATERIAL - this indicates that the evidence or argument is not material to the charges
         against Mr Murray.

6.4    Accompanying these Representations.
       [1] The judgments of the Divisional Court in R -v- H.M.Coroner fo r South Yorkshire, ex
       p.Stringer, (see Schedule A, response to §§ 54-55).
       [2] Yorkshire Evening Post report of 17 September 1998, (see Schedule A, response to § 110).




                                                                    Michael Harrison Q.C.

                                                                    Simon Myerson.


Park Court Chambers
40, Park Cross Street
LEEDS, LSI 2QH.

7 October 1998


                                                                           Mr Murray's representations - 5/5
SCHEDULE A: RESPONSE TO PROSECUTOR’S REPRESENTATIONS: 24 September 1998.


  §                                 H FSG A R G U M E N T                                                                    R E SPO N SE

   5    [a] CPS Code borne in mind.                                                    [a] Its principles have not been applied.
        [b] Realistic prospect o f conviction on basis of Taylor findings alone        [b] If true, this was the position in 1990, so the implication is that counsel then
        (supported by proper basis o f witness statements).                            advising the DPP, and the Director himself, were wrong. They were not.
        [c] Prospect o f conviction enhanced by Adomako.                                              [c] It is not. The fundamental principles o f law are the same. In any
        [d] Private prosecutor entitled to apply less strict test. Approach o f CPS    event, it would be contrary to principle and practice to prosecute after 9 years on
        now.                                                                           basis o f a change in interpretation o f the common law.
                                                                                       [d] Wrong. A private prosecutor who does not believe in a realistic prospect of
                                                                                       conviction ought not to prosecute. The declared CPS policy o f not intervening with a
                                                                                       view to discontinuing is a different issue; as to which see §§2.2-2.5 o f the
                                                                                       accompanying representations.
 6-7    [a] Public interest factors and basis for taking over a private prosecution.   [a] See §§ 3.1 - 4.3 o f accompanying representations.
        [b] Prosecutor may decide to raise an abuse o f process argument.              [b] Bizarre.

 9-10   [a] Mass o f new evidence made available since Scrutiny, hitherto              [a] There is no ‘new ’ evidence o f substance. It is the same evidence from different
        concealed by SYP.                                                              sources. See detailed analysis in Schedules B and C.
        [b] Significance ‘difficult to overstate’; disclose manipulation of            [b] An extravagant claim in every respect.
        evidence to the past benefit o f the Defendants and SYP in general; cause
        all aspects o f investigation, statements etc to be examined differently.

  11    Implies: [a] that the defendants rely upon previous                            Wrong. The issue is whether there is any basis for the DPP to reconsider the 1990
        inquiries/investigations, and [b] that propositions (a)-(e) are relevant to    decision, sufficient to override the S-S conclusion that there was none. The corrupt
        that, (presumably to undermine reliance).                                      conspiracy fixation o f the private prosecutor was repudiated in SCRUTINY. See also
                                                                                       INQUIRY §16, Lord Taylor, and tribute to fairness and thoroughness o f police
                                                                                       investigation from Secretary o f Football Supporters’ Association.

  12    [a] As pointed out in previous submissions, Taylor findings in themselves      [a] In §5 ante, it is claimed the same findings alone disclosed a realistic prospect o f
        amount almost to a prim a facie case.                                          conviction.
        [b] The decision was taken by Duckenfield, with the agreement o f              [b] This identifies the prosecutor’s alleged basis for manslaughter against Mr
        acquiescence o f Murray.                                                       Murray.




                                                                                                                                                           SCHEDULE A - 1/7
13   Witness statements already provided to the defence...provide cogent           This must refer to the 38 witness statements Hilton (1) to Lang (38). The statements
     evidential support for manslaughter/misfeasance allegations, combined         do not support the claim to cogent evidence o f manslaughter or misfeasance. There
     with admissions o f fact by each defendant. The same is repeated as to        is nothing ‘new ’ in the statements.
     negligence in §16.                                                            The defendants’ statements and evidence have always been available. Fully
                                                                                   considered by INQUIRY, DPP (1990), SCRUTINY.

14   Elements o f manslaughter.                                                    No admission as to individual criminal liability in respect o f any element.

15   Taylor found, and inherent in acceptance o f liability by SYP in negligence   Muddle. Admissions by SYP in civil proceedings have no relevance to prosecution
     cases, that police were under duty, in breach, and causation. Frost.          o f individuals. Corporate civil liability is different from individual culpable
                                                                                   homicide.




                                                                                                                                                      SCHEDULE A - 2/7
17   ‘Conspicuous features’ in 35 (sic) statements:                                 [a] Not new. Fact well-known to INQUIRY: §230 “Since pens 3 and 4 were full by
     [a] 1988 - police diverted spectators from tunnel;                             2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been closed off whether gate C was to be opened or
     [b] “The unedited statements o f White and Lang ... prove the same, and        not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out in 1988 ...
     suggest that it had been the practice o f senior officers to ensure that the   Unfortunately, the 1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers
     tunnel was closed when the pens were full... ”;                                on duty at the time. It did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no
     [c] could easily be seen from steps near control box;                          influence on the planning for 1989.”
     [d] this evidence ‘suppressed’ until 1998.                                     [b] A most serious distortion o f what the statements said. Insp. WHITE: (p. 100-101)
                                                                                    “Although on rare occasions in the past I have used the gates nearest the concourse
                                                                                    to control flow away from the tunnel around to the south pen. I did this only for a
                                                                                    few moments as a psychological support to turn the fans round to the south pen. 1
                                                                                    would not use them for any length o f time as when they are in the closed position
                                                                                    they would be an obstruction in an emergency evacuation situation as they would
                                                                                    have to be opened against the crowd and also because this is the only ingress/ egress
                                                                                    for fans in the central pens to get to the snack bar and toilet.” SCRUTINY, p.208.
                                                                                    P.C.LANG: (p. 165) [1988] “From approximately 2.30pm (1430) the area outside the
                                                                                    pens contained a large number o f people and at the stairs there was an occasional
                                                                                    ‘rush’ but sufficient stewards were on duty to funnel the fans into a fairly orderly
                                                                                    queue. Sometime between 2.45 (1445) and 2.50 (1450) I received an order to close
                                                                                    the gates at the top o f the tunnel leading to the central pen and remain at these gates
                                                                                    to prevent entry by any further fans into the central pen. I closed the right hand gate
                                                                                    and remained at this post directing fans to the wing entrance. ... I do not know who
                                                                                    gave the order to close these gates or why the order was given.”
                                                                                    [c] Not new. View from control box was established by IN Q U IRY : §231. This is
                                                                                    accepted by HFSG in § 19.
                                                                                    [d] The facts were not suppressed.

18   [a] Evidence o f how fans entered the tunnel and the central pens after        [a] None o f this is ‘new evidence’.
     Gate C opened.                                                                 [b] This is not what Guest said. The words in our italics have been added. The
     [b] “ P.C.Guest said that at 2.40 it was not going to be possible to           witness is dead. His statement will not be admissible.
     accommodate the crowd outside the Leppings Lane entrance in those
     pens.”

19   Murray had been on duty in 1988 in the Control Box. He culpably failed         The first sentence asserts nothing new. Mr Murray’s position in 1988 and 1989 has
     in 1989 to give the proper and obvious advice.                                 been known throughout. The second sentence is assertion not proof.

20                                                                                  Nothing new. All o f this has been well known throughout.


                                                                                                                                                       SCHEDULE A - 3/7
  23    Further witnesses.                                                           Not disclosed.
  24                                                                                 None o f this can affect the Director’s decision. The advice to SYP has come from
                                                                                     CPS and conforms with authority.
  26    “ It has been an important part o f the prosecutor’s approach to the         This is a spurious justification. Nothing that HFSG has now which it did not have
        Director’s current review, and o f our justification for bringing criminal   pre-Scrutiny adds anything o f material significance to the facts which have been
        proceedings in 1998, that the HFSG has been deprived o f critical            established since the INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT (August 1989). See Schedules
        information, statements and documents about the disaster for nine years.”    analysing the statements upon which the private prosecutor relies.

 31     [a] Documents made available by Home Secretary in 1998 permitted             [a] This is the SCRUTINY material, all examined by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
        HFSG to embark with confidence on prosecutions.
        [b] Information now available undermines Inquest verdicts o f accidental     [b] The SCRUTINY conclusion after consideration o f the same material was exactly
        death, and calls into question validity o f previous investigations.         the opposite.

32-35   The decision to prosecute.                                                   These paragraphs expose the reality o f the prosecutor’s approach, and demonstrate
                                                                                     the implausibility o f the current claims to have further new evidence:
                                                                                     ■          the Scrutiny conclusions were rejected and ignored, §31; (by implication,
                                                                                                so were the views o f the Home Secretary, the Director and the A-G as to the
                                                                                                finality o f the Scrutiny Report);
                                                                                     ■          the decision to prosecute was taken before considering any o f the Scrutiny
                                                                                                material which was to be made available, (despite conceding the importance
                                                                                                o f not making any decision without first doing that), §32;
                                                                                     ■          Leading Counsel advised that prosecutions were justified on the basis o f the
                                                                                                INQUIRY findings, §33; (this involves that his advice purported to override
                                                                                                the 1990 advices o f leading counsel to the DPP, the decision o f the DPP,
                                                                                                and the Scrutiny conclusions);
                                                                                     ■          after counsel was instructed to formulate charges on the basis o f the Taylor
                                                                                               findings, examination o f the Scrutiny material disclosed sustained
                                                                                               suppression o f the truth beyond the allegations which had led to the
                                                                                                SCRUTINY, §35.
                                                                                     It is obvious that some pretext o f further, post-SCRUTINY, fresh evidence would
                                                                                     have to be claimed in purported justification o f private summonses.




                                                                                                                                                        SCHEDULE A - 4/7
36-37   Editing o f statements: 24.8.98 documents and Annex D                        This argument is contrived to overcome the two factors which most clearly show the
 39     [a] led to DPP and counsel being misled in 1990;                             prosecutions to be unjustified: the 1990 decisions and the SCRUTINY conclusions.
        [b] Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also misled on subject;                        The spurious nature o f the claims is demonstrated by careful analysis o f the
        [c] policy o f withholding information on negligence from INQUIRY and        Statements now relied on: see SCHEDULES B and C.
        PC A.

40-42   Sharpies and j                                                               [a] Sharpies’ statement does not seek to exculpate either defendant. Inconceivable
        [a] deliberate plot to place Sharpies’ statement between those of            that experienced leading counsel and the DPP were influenced by juxtaposition, or
        Duckenfield and Murray in Master Witness List to influence reader            that anyone could have thought they might be.
        against prosecutions;                                                        [b] Something sinister seems to be hinted at here, but the author does not seem to
        fbl (          Undisclosed statement was placed last but one in M W I..      know what. The MWL position seems to contradict the theory advanced in §41.

43-48   Philips Report                                                               Fanciful speculation that the report o f a witness for SYP in contribution proceedings
        [a] Report is dated ‘August 1990', same month as DPP decided not to          has influenced the 1990 decisions not to prosecute.
        prosecute, §43; date o f report is significant. Counsel advised against      [a] An irrational association o f unrelated events, based upon coincidence o f timing.
        prosecution on 6 August 1990, but “contribution hearings” pending.           [b] Persistent speculation in the face o f contra-indications.
        [b] Not known to HFSG whether DPP saw report. Not on list of                 [c] Unsubstantiated speculation. Irrelevant issue.
        documents considered by DPP in 1990. Maybe DPP saw other
        documents. Maybe report incorporated into W/Midlands Report.
        [c] Philips misled.

49-53   Selective supply o f information to DPP                                      [a] The statements were edited to exclude opinion. This could not have influenced
        [a] edited statements;                                                       DPP because not admissible.
        [b] provisional selection for committal: only 7 in MWL, 8 at Inquest, 2 at   [b] the illusion o f ‘new evidence’ by suggesting the committal will be based largely
        Inquiry;                                                                     on evidence not considered before; there is nothing ‘new ’ in the 38 statements; [in
        [c] DPP only considered about 12% o f statements generated in Inquiry;       fact 4 gave evidence to the Inquiry];
        [d] partial (=.biased) selection o f documents submitted to DPP;             [c]/[d] an illusion o f inadequate consideration based on an (inaccurate) manipulation
        [e] SYP have carefully withheld important material from DPP and              o f statistics; inconceivable that DPP and counsel did not have an appropriate sample
        Coroner, adverse to SYP and the defendants.                                  o f statements in 1990; (see § 5.4 o f our accompanying representations).
                                                                                     [e] prejudicial speculation.
                                                                                     The whole question o f editing o f statements, using sample statements and witnesses,
                                                                                     the decision o f the DPP in 1990 was considered thoroughly by the SCRUTINY.




                                                                                                                                                       SCHEDULE A -5 /7
54-55   Selective supply o f information to Coroner                                  Continuation of a long-running campaign to challenge the Inquest verdicts.
                                                                                     [a] Judgments in R -v- H.M.Coroner fo r South Yorkshire, ex p. Stringer [5 November
                                                                                     1993] are attached.
                                                                                     [b] The conduct of the Inquests was carefully reconsidered by the SCRUTINY.

56-91   Control o f material                                                         Mr Murray cannot comment.

92-95   Further significance o f Phillips                                            [a] The conclusion does not follow from the stated facts.
        [a] “ In this way, the inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is   [b] It is a relevant part o f the background that Inquest verdicts did not find unlawful
        now shown to have been manipulated by South Yorkshire police for their       killing. The defendant is entitled to rely upon that as part o f his argument to the
        own ends, and by West Midlands police.”                                      DPP.
        [b] “ For this reason, the defendants are not entitled to rely upon the      The extravagant rhetoric in §95 is o f concern.
        inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.”

96-     Further argument about disclosure to a private prosecutor.                   Mr Murray cannot comment.
109




                                                                                                                                                         SCHEDULE A -6 /7
no      Prejudicial Publicity                                                  [a] Factors affecting whether defendants will have a fair trial under a private
        [a] matter forjud g e or magistrate;                                   prosecution are relevant to the Director’s power to intervene and discontinue. The
        [b] “minor” compared to that West, Maxwells, Bulger case, the Krays,   McGovern dramatisation was apt to prejudice the public’s perception o f the role of
        Guinness, proposed Lockerbie defendants, Moors murderers, and many     police officers in the tragedy.
        others;                                                                [b] There are clear indications that further public prejudice against the defendants
        [c] 1989 prejudice against Liverpool supporters never dispelled.       will be deliberately created in the period leading up to committal hearings and any
                                                                               subsequent trial:
                                                                               ■         The Manic Street Preachers. On 14 September 1998, this very well known
                                                                                         pop group released an album containing a track entitled “ S.Y.M.M.”, whose
                                                                                         lyrics refer to ‘South Yorkshire Mass M urderer’, with an undoubted link to
                                                                                         the Hillsborough tragedy by reference to the McGovern dramatisation o f the
                                                                                          1989 events. This group featured prominently in events run by HFSG in
                                                                                         May 1997 to raise funds in support o f the prosecutions.
                                                                               ■         A splinter group called Hillsborough Survivors and Relatives and
                                                                                        Supporters fo r Justice Campaign has recently been formed. On 17
                                                                                         September 1998, the Yorkshire Evening Post (circulation in the Leeds and
                                                                                         West Riding areas) reported a message inviting support from people living
                                                                                         in Yorkshire. A spokesman was quoted as saying the Group aimed to take
                                                                                        “a more proactive approach”, and the report added that the group is
                                                                                        planning to demonstrate outside Leeds Magistrates’ Court next month at the
                                                                                         next stage o f a private prosecution against two former senior police officers
                                                                                         by families who hold them responsible for the tragedy. The pressure group
                                                                                         message amounts to an invitation to persons in Yorkshire to support the
                                                                                        demonstration now that proceedings are to be in Leeds, and not in Liverpool
                                                                                        as the HFSG intended when summonses were issued in Sefiton.
                                                                               [c] This ‘tit for tat’ argument is unbecoming.

111-7   Limitations o f Stuart-Smith Report




                                                                                                                                                  SCHEDULE A -7 /7
 111   Scrutiny conclusions on “new evidence” are not significant, because            Entirely wrong and seriously misleading. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith examined
       confined to that tendered as new in 1996 when existence o f edited             approximately 100 amended statements. In 74 the amendment was of no
       statements was unknown; starved o f evidence; one example only (Frost)         consequence. In 26, comment and opinion had been excluded. In 5, factual matters
       offered to Scrutiny by a third party; scale o f editing now revealed exceeds   were excluded which arguably should not have been. In 4, factual matters implicit in
       anything shown to Stuart-Smith L J.                                            comment arguably should not have been excluded. See SCRUTINY Report §§78-88,
       Also § 112: conclusions about edited statements seriously wrong.               pp.78-80. See further detail in SCRUTINY, Appendix 7, pp.205-210; Appendix 8,
                                                                                      pp.211-12.
                                                                                      Note im p o rta n t conclusions a t §§104,105, p.64.

 112   Caution in accepting facts in Report.                                          Nit picking.

 113   [a] Sandra Stringer.                                                           This § contains unrelated propositions.
       [b] Adomako.                                                                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not misunderstand the law.

 114   “The Stuart-Smith report is itself economical with information.”               We do not speculate as to what is implied by this comment. If the complaint is that
                                                                                      the 1990 Advice o f counsel has not been disclosed, that could have been shortly
                                                                                      stated, but the explanation is obvious.

 115   “The knowledge available to the HFSG now, from the 35 (sic) statements,        This proposition cannot stand in the face o f the Scrutiny examination of statements,
       the Master Witness List, and the edited statements, proves that material       the conclusions, and the analysis o f the so-called further ‘new evidence’ relied on to
       was not available [to the DPP], and information o f a critical kind had        justify the prosecutions.
       been withheld.”

 117   [a] Result o f SCRUTINY would have been very different; flaws and              [a] There is no basis for this assertion.
       partiality o f previous investigations would have been exposed.                [b] The prosecutor has been asked to say whether it is intended to call Houldsworth
       [b] Account given by Houldsworth set out in full, and evidence criticised.     either at committal or at any subsequent trial. Response awaited.
       [c] Report does not mention conversations                                      [c] Factually wrong. The Lord Justice spoke to neither defendant.

118-   Frustration o f Home Secretary "s order fo r disclosure.                        [a] The whole purpose o f the Scrutiny was to investigate allegations o f this sort. It
120    [a] 119. Justified belief o f the Liverpool families: manipulated and          did so thoroughly and found no basis for the beliefs which leading counsel describes
       cheated over years; DPP misled in 1990; course o f justice perverted.          as justified. Nothing revealed since warrants the conclusion that the beliefs are
       [b] 120. Distribution.                                                         justified.
                                                                                       [b] The distribution to members o f parliament smacks o f an attempt to bringfng
                                                                                      political pressure to bear on the decision.

121                                                                                   It would be a serious injustice to allow the prosecution to continue.



                                                                                                                                                         SCHEDULE A -8 /7
SCHEDULE B - RESPONSE TO CLAIMS ABOUT WITNESSES IN LETTER 24.8.98


 Witness [ ta b ]                        Claim - per letter 24.8.98                                                              Response
[4] Holmes          ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’             In context, this is a comment about lack of contact with Police Control or a senior
                    Page 24, last sentence.                                                   officer about action required in the confusion following the events which took
                                                                                              place. AFTERMATH. INQUIRY.

[5] K.Frost         ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’ Page 35,    AFTERMATH. INQUIRY.
                    Penultimate sentence. Comment about nobody organising the injured.

[6] Wilson          ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’ Page 50,    N O T MATERIAL. INQUIRY.
                    third sentence. Impression about number o f foot officers at Leppings
                    Lane and on train escort.

[7] Guest           At pages 63 and 68. Obvious at 2.40pm that crowds outside L/Lane          This witness died before the Inquest. He was never cross-examined. His
                    could not be accommodated. Would have been obvious to Defendants.         statement would not be admissible at committal or in a trial.
                    SYP case at Inquest that overcrowding not evident before 3.00pm.          ‘Not sufficient room for all to be accommodated’ is ambiguous. The witness
                    Coroner took that view.                                                   never said "in those pens ” [implying the central pens] as claimed by leading
                                                                                              counsel in submissions §18. The Inquiry found that the tragedy occurred because
                                                                                              the Gate C crowd were admitted to the tunnel and thus to the central pens. It was
                                                                                              never found that they could not have been accommodated in the West Stand at all,
                                                                                              which is what Guest’s statement suggests. INQUIRY.

[8] Titterton       Removal o f important factual observations ... going to heart o f all     The material ‘removed’ at pages 85-89 adds nothing at all to the evidence fully
                    investigations.                                                           considered by INQUIRY.

[9] White           Deletion o f passages on pp 100-101. White would always monitor build     Evidence has always established that there was a view o f the pens from the
                    up in L/Lane pens by climbing steps to control box (occupied ... by the   Control Box. INQUIRY. INQUEST. SCRUTINY [§51. Extract from M r Murray
                    two defendants and others) to get a good view. Can be no honest           at Inquest: “ We had a good view o f the terraces from the Control Box...” . §52.
                    reason for deletion o f this evidence. [See also Claims under             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith expressed surprise that Counsel had not seen fit to draw
                    Woodcock.]                                                                this passage to his attention.]




                                                                                                                                                        SCHEDULE B- 1/2
[10] Woodcock     Demonstrates central importance of deletions from White. White               Woodcock says: “ He told me that his serial usually got the jo b o f putting the
                  (p. 112) normally diverted spectators from central pens, but on this         crowd in the different pens at the rear o f the goalmouth, working from the outside
                  occasion was told not to. If true proves statement o f Bettison wrong.       to the centre, but for some reason he’d been told to let the fans find their own
                  Issue at heart o f case. SYP claim 1988 diversion from central pens          level, on this occasion, resulting in too many going into the area immediately
                  unknown to senior officers. 1988 events prove foreseeability: Obvious        behind the goal.” (p. 112)
                  relevance to manslaughter. Honest course would have been to ask              What Woodcock says White told him is not proof o f anything against Mr Murray.
                  White about W oodcock’s account. Instead, passages in both were              The prosecutor’s complaint about how these statements were handled is not proof
                  excised and truth suppressed. Seven page statement of White is in            either.
                  MWL. May have been first statement submitted with lines deleted.
                  [Further argument based on Wilson.]

[11] Pattison     Important deletions of factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.    P. 123 Penultimate para. AFTERMATH.

[12] Tissington   Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.   P. 141 “ I rem ember saying ... lynched through it.” P. 144 last para.
                                                                                               AFTERMATH.

[13] Lang         ‘Neither the important matters at the end o f page 163 in the six page       [A] It is correct that the last 7 lines on page 163 are not repeated in the statement
                  statement’ (sic, there are fiv e pages), nor any of the statement o f 2nd    at pages 167-171. There are two points: [a] comment that opening Gate C
                  June 1989, appears in the five page amended report at pages 167 to 171       transferred the problem inside the ground and would need a lot more PC’s to
                  o f the file.’                                                               control it; (this adds nothing to the conclusions of INQUIRY, INQUEST or
                  M W L shows 5 (possibly 4) page statement sent to DPP.                       SCRUTINY), and [b] comment that one Serial was employed in 1989 against two
                                                                                               in 1988.
                  (See also HFSG Representations §17; reference WHITE & LANG;                  [B] The contents of the statement 2 June 1989 about 1988 control of the tunnel
                  argum ent that evidence suppressed.)                                         and the order to close the gates to the central pens were not deletedfrom that
                                                                                               statement. Although the 1988 evidence is not contained within the subsequent
                                                                                               statement at pages 167-173, it is substantially repeated in the statement at p. 166
                                                                                               (dated 30 June 1990).

[14] Kennedy      Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.   P. 176 “Several senior officers...lacking in directing the officers there towards
                                                                                               useful purpose.” AFTERMATH.

[15] Dunn         Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.   P. 189 “ I was on duty at the same Semi-Final...unable to assess the situation
                                                                                               correctly and out swiftly from I...” (sic) Adds nothing to findings o f INQUIRY,
                                                                                               INQUEST or SCRUTINY. Comment about observations from control room add
                                                                                               nothing.

[16] Royle        Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.   P. 198 - last 4 lines. Adds nothing.


                                                                                                                                                            SCHEDULE B- 2/2
SCHEDULE C - RESPONSE TO CLAIMS ABOUT SPECIFIC WITNESSES: ANNEX D


   Witness                      Claim - [-] page reference in Annex D                                                       Response
(1) Booth       [1] [a] deletion at [3].                                                   [a] Immaterial.
                [b] deletion at [7-9]: references to 1988 in statement 1.6.89 not          [b] Observations not new material. The 1988 circumstances were fully
                incorporated into amended report [10-13],                                  considered at INQUIRY.

(2) Beresford   [14] [a] deletion and 2 amendments [21]                                    [a]Not new. Communications issues were fully considered at INQUIRY.
                [b] am endm ent and deletion [22 and 31; 23]                               [b]Changes and deletion o f no substance. Aftermath.

(3) Bradley     [33] deletion and amendment.                                               Aftermath.

(4) Hubbard     [40] [a] deletion re Wain.                                                 [a] Immaterial.
                [b] report not incorporating 1988 experience. Implication o f a queuing    [b] Nothing new in this. INQUIRY fully considered 1988 policing: §214-5.
                system.

(5) McDonnell   [56] [a] amendment; [b] deletion                                           [a] No change o f substance; [b] aftermath

(6) Powell      [65] deletion                                                              Not new. Issue fully considered by INQUIRY/SCRUTINY

(7) Eustis      [76] deletion. Complaint that Stuart-Smith LJ did not comment on           SCRUTINY p.208. As indicated at [76], the Report quoted the passage
                “how Liverpool fans always congregate very heavily behind the goal         describing the witness’s impressions o f 1988 conditions in the pens where
                area”.                                                                     Liverpool fans had congregated. Stuart-Smith LJ must have been fully
                                                                                           aware o f the rest o f the deletion, which adds nothing to the substance o f
                                                                                           what was quoted. This witness was fully considered by the SCRUTINY.

(8) Crawford    [86] [a] deletion.                                                         [a] The claim is unfounded. Scrutiny Report (p.209) does not quote the
                None o f statement 31.5.89 (dealing with 1988) was incorporated into       passage cited, but it does refer to it: “But his past experience relating to the
                am ended report.                                                           shutting o f the centre pens is a question o f fact” .
                Complaint that Stuart-Smith LJ fails to refer to deletion o f passage      Clear that Stuart-Smith LJ fully considered the point.
                [94]:                                                                      INQUIRY: §230 - fully aware that tunnel had been closed o ff in 1988.
                “At 1450 hours we had an instruction believed verbal, that no more         SCRUTINY: p.219 §9: cited this passage from Inquiry Report.
                fans were to be allowed into the central pens, therefore, the wooden
                gate at the rear o f the tunnel was closed denying access. This was done
                by PC 1278 Lang.”                                                          [b] Involves no material change.
                [b] amendment.


                                                                                                                                                       SCHEDULE C - 1/3
(9) Brookes    [102] [a] amendment: ‘stressed/adamant’ - Duckenfield.          [a] Not material.
               [b] deletion: officers’ distress.                               [b] Not material.
               [c] amendment: ‘centre section was now [too] full.              [c] Not new. INQUIRY: §184 - finding that by 2.52 pm “pens 3 and 4
               [d] amendment: 2.54 to 2.56.                                    were over-full even by this test. Many were uncomfortable. To allow any
               [e] deletion [107]                                              more into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream
               [f] deletion o f ‘observations’.                                was courting disaster”; §230 - “since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50pm, the
                                                                               tunnel should have been closed o ff whether gate C was to be opened or
                                                                               not” .
                                                                               No need for SCRUTINY Report to refer to distinction full/too full.
                                                                               [d] Not material.
                                                                               [e] Not new.
                                                                               [f] Not evidence. Comments about kick-off and capacity fully considered
                                                                               by INQUIRY. Comparison with Manchester United match was considered
                                                                               by SCRUTINY (P.208).

(10) Burgess   [118] [a] amendment,                                            [a] Establishes nothing new: was a factual correction o f an estimated time
               [b deletion.                                                    or a guess. INQUIRY §66 concluded request came between 2.40-2.45.
                                                                               Point is that it was established that the call came before gates opened.
                                                                               [b] Not new. Not material.

(11) Walpole   [131] [a] deletion: did not hear radio message; packed solid.   [a] Comment about radio message adds nothing. ‘Packed solid’ remained
                                                                               in the statement in an important sentence: [134] lines 4-7. Considered in
                                                                               SCRUTINY: P.207.
                                                                               [b] Opinion. All factors considered: INQUIRY, INQUEST, SCRUTINY.

(12) Groome    [143] [a] deletion: observations 1030-1230.                     [a] Irrelevant.
               [b] deletion: re Insp.Calvert.                                  [b] Irrelevant.
               [c] amendment: ‘over the air’ to ‘from the control room ’.      [c] Change o f no substance. Aftermath.
               [d] 3 deletions [148-149]                                       [d] Aftermath.
               [e] deletions numbered (l)-(3), (5)-(10).                       [e] (l)-(3), (5) and (7) considered by SCRUTINY, p.206; (6), (8)-(10)
                                                                               were comments fully considered in INQUIRY and SCRUTINY.
(13) Brophy    [157] deletions.                                                Nothing new.      All considered INQUIRY.




                                                                                                                                         SCHEDULE C - 2/3
(14) Sanderson   [166] [a] amendment ‘going o n’ to ‘being conducted’.   [a] Change o f no substance.
                 [b] 2 insertions.                                       [b] Neither is significant.
                 [c] amendment: changes re technical work done.          [cj The amendment is an expansion o f the technical work carried out. It
                 [e] amendment: laboutl440' to ‘about 1448'.             makes no change o f substance.
                 [f] insertion.                                          [e] Change unexplained. Relevance?
                                                                         [f] Adds nothing.

(15) Croot       [173] deletions.                                        Comment, nothing new.

(16) Huckstepp   [194] deletion.                                         Fully considered by INQUIRY (Huckstepp cross-examined); West
                                                                         Midlands and SCRUTINY (p.207).
                                                                         Per SCRUTINY, the unamended statement (7.5.89) was seen by
                                                                         INQUIRY and W.Midlands.

(17) France      [205] amendment.                                        No change o f substance.

(18) Cammock     [219] [a] amendment,                                    [a] No change o f substance.
                 [b] deletion.                                           [b] Irrelevant.

(19) Bennett     [240] [a] 3 deletions,                                  [a] Nothing new.
                 [b] amendment.                                          [b] No change o f substance.

(20) Ramsden     [257] deletions at [263] and [267-268],                 [263] Was expressly considered by Stuart-Smith LJ, SCRUTINY p.209.
                 Complaint that Scrutiny Report does not comment on      [267-8] was opinion which added nothing new.

(21) Hanson      [279] deletion.                                         Comment. Not new.

(22) A thom      [295] deletion.                                         Not new.




                                                                                                                                  SCHEDULE C - 3/3
                                                                                           NEWS 1f
                                                                                                                       m




^ Hillsborough
  tragedy group
  offers sui i h i >rt
                     BY PAUL R O B IN SO N            who have simply written 'Help         The group was form ed in
                                                      me’ on there.                      March because of dissatisfac­
                  A NEW Hillsborough dis­                “It is not just the bereaved    tion with the stance being taken
                  a ste r p re s s u re group         families who need help - it is     by the long-established Hillsbor­
                  today sent out a message            anyone who was there, who          ough Family Support G roup.'
                  to people living in York­           knows someone who was there           Mr Burkett said: “They have
                                                      or who feels affected by what      campaigned with quiet dignity
                  shire still struggling to           happened in any way.”              but in our view that is playing
                  come to terms with the                 Mr Burkett, who lives on The    into the hands of the people we
                  tragic events: “Join us -           Wirral, said the group was espe­   blame for the disaster.
                  we’re here for you.”                cially keen to hear from people       “We are aiming to take a
                     The Hillsborough Survivors,      who were in pens three and         more pro-active approach.”
                                                      four in the Leppings Lane ter­        The group is p la n n in g to
                  Relatives and Supporters for
                                                      races at Sheffield Wednesday's     demonstrate outside Leeds Mag­
                  Justice Campaign wants to give
                  fresh impetus in the fight for      Hillsborough ground.               istrates’ Court next m onth at
                  truth about the soccer ground                                          the next stage of a private pros­
                  tragedy, which claimed 96 lives
                                                               Crushing                  ecution against two formfer
                                                        It was there that fatal crush­   senior police officers by fami­
                  back in April 1989.
                                                      ing occurred after supporters at   lies who hold them responsible
                     But although the group has       an FA Cup semi-final between       for the tragedy.
                  already recruited 800 members,      Liverpool and Nottingham For­         David Duckenfield, 53, and
                  so far it has no one on its books   est were allowed into already-     Bernard Murray, 56, appeared
                  from Yorkshire.                     overcrowded enclosures when        in court last month to hear alle­
                     Organisers believe by joining    police opened extra gates.         gations that they unlaw fully
                  up, people who have suffered in       Mr Burkett believes there        killed Joh n A n d e rso n ajjd
                  silence for nearly a decade can     m ust have been dozens of          James Aspinall an d wilfully
                  be given some much-needed           people in those sections from      neglected to carry out a public
                  moral support and boost the         Yorkshire who have never spo­      duty. The case was adjourned
                  campaign into the bargain.          ken out about what they saw.       until October 13.             <
                     Terry Burkett, whose eldest        But he stressed the group           To contact the Hillsborough
                  son, 24 -year-old Peter, died at    would welcome anybody pre­         Survivors, Relatives and Sup­
 NIGEL H llllER
                  Hillsborough, said: "I have had     pared to back their efforts to     porters for Justice Campaign,
                  application forms from people       shed light on the events.          call 0151 645 4191.
                                         158'             JUSTICE OF; THE PEACE^ REPORTS j                                                              4 5 3   ;
EACE REPORTS               Vol.


                                                                  .S   >1                                                                             R. v. 1LM.
 he level o f sentence. W e can           ts. - : /*--                                                                                               Coroner for.., .' .
jncing remarks that he made                                                                                                                       South Yorkshire, >
  There is, in the judgment of                                                                                                                         ex parte’''’-'r •' 5.
. grounds o f appeal advanced                                                                                                                    Stringer and Other* r
  are not mindless o f the fact
  not expressly advert to the                                                                                                                     . Queen’s Benchj-
brought into effect only days                             *   "    ' ’ - . " ii- ”   f.'/   !NJ* I f i   f'~ .i   Tr*   V*V* *r 7 ‘    ■'              Division
was imposed, but they do not,                        •    Q U EEN S’- BENCH D IV ISIO N ^ •;
in any way vitiate the proper              • *’ -    "■       r.L-.A’ -yj                                                  .'.JVrt^r•;
 Judge arrived. This appeal is                                     V Nove mbe r 5?' 1 9 9 3 5 ; ^ -                      ^            ■■ '

                                                              (M cC owan^lT.J., T u rn e r,'J.)J , '

                                             R. v. H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire,
Esq., M.A., LL.M., Banister.                       ex parte Stringer and Others -

                                         Coroners law - apparent bias - direction on manslaughter -
                                             r.37 Coroners Rules 1984 - verdict o f lack o f care -
                                             narrative verdict.                 t .
                                              A total of 95 persons died at the Hillsborough Stadium in
                                         Sheffield at a football match in 1989. Inquests into the deaths of all                              D
                                         were held between April 18, 1989 and March 28, 1991, by the
                                         coroner for South Yorkshire, The verdict in respect of each was
                                         accidental death.
                                              An application was brought by relatives of six deceased persons
                                         to quash the jury's verdicts and perhaps order fresh inquests.
                                              On April 15, 1 9 8 9 Liverpool were playing Sheffield Wednesday
                                         in the semi-final of the Football Association Cup and kick-off was
                                         scheduled for 3 pm. There was build-up of supporters at the Leppings
                                         Lane entrance and at 2.52 pm the chief superintendent of police in
                                         charge of crowd control decided to let the gates be opened. There
                                         was an influx of about 2,000 supporters resulting in the build-up of
                                         intolerable pressure. Many supporters were crushed and 95 people
                                         were killed and 400 physically injured.
                                              On April 17, Taylor, L.J. (as he then was) was appointed to
                                         conduct an inquiry into the disaster. On April 18 the coroner fonnally
                                         opened and adjourned the inquest. The coroner was faced with the
                                         complication not only of the sheer number of deaths but the fact that
                                         the Taylor inquiry was proceeding and the D.P.P. was being asked
                                         to consider bringing criminal charges arising out of the incident.
                                         After discussions with the D.P.P. it was decided the coroner could
                                         proceed with determining "who" the deceased were and "when" and
                                         "where" they met their deaths but the question of "how" ought not
                                         to be dealt with for fear of prejudicing criminal proceedings. (See
                                         similarly the narrative of R. v. H.M. Coronerfor Inner West London,
                                         ex porte Lockwood-Croft ("The Marchioness Disaster") 157 J.P. 985).
                                  vih.        The families, who were distressed at having to wait an eternity
                                         for the hearing of the investigation into individual deaths, were
                                  t      supportive of the idea of holding 95 mini inquests. These lasted from
                                         April 18 to May 4, 1990. It was in September 1990 that the coroner
                                         was informed that the D.P.P. had decided not to prosecute and so he
                                         could continue to hear the main inquest, to determine 'h ow ' the
                                         deceased came by their deaths, on November 19, 1990. The jury’s
       454                               JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                         Vol.   158            JUSTICE O F l



     R. v. H.M.           verdict was "accident" in respect of all deceased.
    Coroner for                Counsel for the families applied for judicial review on seven                                   ju i
 South Yorkshire,         grounds and two supplementary grounds: that the coroner was
      ex parte            apparently biased in that his salary was paid by Sheffield City               L o r d Ju stic e M cC ow an:
Stringer and Others       Council; that the coroner’s direction upon manslaughter to the jury         1992 for judicial review in r
                          was wrong in law; that the coroner wrongly conducted mini inquests         M ajesty's Coroner for Sou
  Queen’s Bench           by reference to summaries; that the coroner failed to comply with           inquest held by him betwe
     Division             r.37 in strict detail in each of the 95 cases; that the coroner wrongly     1991 into the deaths of six
                          introduced a cut off point at 3.15 pm on that afternoon in respect of       the Hillsborough Stadium
                          evidence called, and wrongly refused to call Dr. Ashton and Mr.
                          Eccleston; that certain facts were omitted from the summaries at the       respect o f the verdict recorc
                          mini inquests; that the coroner should have left a verdict of "lack of     o f the inquest that all 95 v
                          care" to the jury; that the coroner did not give the jury an opportunity         The applicants are rek
                          to bring in a narrative verdict; that the coroner limited the inquiry      persons. The relief sought
                          and excluded matters pertaining to expediting the summoning of             the ju ry 's verdicts and alsc
                          emergency services.                                                        order fresh inquests.
                                                                                                           On April 15, 1992, th
                                                                                                     application for judicial rt
                               Held: (In dismissing all grounds). ,                                  applicants sent to the Attor
                          1.   The coroner was not blameworthy: he made a full inquiry.              behalf o f the applicants rei
                          2.   The coroner's conduct was scrupulous.                                 unc'er s,13(l)(b) of the Co
                          3.   The coroner's direction to the jury was impeccable.                   High Court for the inquest '
                          4.   The coroner's conduct showed no lack of fairness and no               series of inquests held. Tli
                               unreasonableness (in the Wedncsbury sense).                           decided to go for judicial
                                                                                                     under it the court wouid hav
                                                                                                     down the verdict without n
                             Cases referred to in judgment:                                          inquest. There followed the
                        R v. Gough (1993) 157 J.P. 612; (1993) 2 WLR 883.
                        R v. H.M. Coroner for Outer West London, ex parte Gray and                   the Attorney General refuse
                             Others (1987) 151 J.P. 209; [1987] 2 WLR 1020.                          the ground that he had concl
                        R v. Holloway and Others (Court of Appeal) May 20,1993,                      would justify authorizing ar
                      E     unreported.                                                              a new .nquest, as the appli
                        R v. H.M. Coroner for East Kent, ex parte Spooner (1988) 152 J.P.            prospect of establishing thr.
                             115 at 122 F.                                                           the interests o f justice f«
                        R v. H.M. Coronerfor Inner North London, ex parte Linnane (1991)             M eanwhile, the applicatio?
                             155 J.P. 343.                                                           proceedings had been adjoi
                        R v. H.M. Coroner for Hammersmith, ex parte Peach (1980) 1 QB                application for the fiat. It cat
                               211.                                                                  6, 1993 and he granted lea
                          R v. H.M. Coroner for Southwark, ex parte Hicks (1987) 1 WLR
                                                                                                           The ap plicants’and the
                      F      1624.
                                                                                                     Liverpool. On April 15, 198
                                                                                                     to Sheffield to watch Liverf
                                                                                                     the semi-final o f the Footb;
                          A. Jones, Q.C. and E. Fitzgerald, for the applicants.
                          T. Coglan, Q.C. and P. Preece, for the respondent.                         ground, Hillsborough Stadii
                          M. Kallipetis, Q.C., for South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.                scheduled for 3 pm. Prior tc
                                                                                                     up o f supporters outside th
                                                                                                     ground which caused pressi
                                                                                                     to get into the ground throi:
                               Per Curiam.* Even if a ground had been sustained the exercise         ch ief superintendent, who u
                          of the courts discretion in ordering a new inquest would be without        crowd control at the matci'
                          purpose. Four and a half years had passed. Merely quashing the             pressure at the turnstiles to 1
                          verdicts would be valueless.                   .     .       .             entrance be opened. The op
                                Moreover the interests of all concerned, including the interests
                          of all witnesses who would have to come back five years later to a         resulted in a sudden influx c
                      „   new inquest (to cast their minds back to events they must have been        gate C, the great majority o
                          trying to forget) must be considered.                                      and into spectator pens 3 ar

                                                                    i
ACE REPORTS                  Vol.   158          JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                4 5 5   ,




all deceased.                                                                                               R- v. ELM.
d for judicial review on seven                           . JU D G M E N T   _                              Coroner for
rounds: that the coroner was                                                                            South Yorkshire,
' was paid by Sheffield City            Lord Ju stice M cC o w an : T his is an application of May 5,        ex parte
 upon manslaughter to the jury       1992 for judicial review in respect o f various decisions of H er Stringer and Others
wngly conducted mini inquests        M ajesty’s Coroner for South Yorkshire in the course o f the
 coroner failed to comply with       inquest held by him betw een April 18, 1989 and March 28,              Queen’s Bench
rases; that the coroner wrongly      1991 into the deaths o f six nam ed persons, plus 89 others, at           Division
 on that afternoon in respect of     the Hillsborough Stadium on April 15, 1989; and also in
:d to call Dr. Ashton and Mr.                                                                            Lord MacCowan, LJ.
itted from the summaries at the      respect o f the verdict recorded by the coroner’s jury at the end
d have left a verdict of "lack of    o f the inquest that all 95 were cases o f accidental death.
not give the jury an opportunity           The applicants are relatives o f the six named deceased
:he coroner limited the inquiry      persons. The relief sought is an order of certiorari to quash
 expediting the summoning of        the ju r y ’s verdicts and also perhaps, but not necessarily, to
                                    order fresh inquests.
                                           On April 15, 1992, that is to say prior to making the
                                    application for judicial review, solicitors acting for the
s)-                                 applicants sent to the Attorney General a memorial (sic) on
:hy: he made a full inquiry,        behalf o f the applicants requesting him to grant them leave
ipulous.                            under s. 13(])(b) of the Coroners Act 1988 to apply to the
jry was impeccable,                 High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a fresh
i no lack of fairness and no        series of inquests held. T he applicants’ legal advisers then
•sbury sense).                      decided to go for judicial review as well on the basis that        D
                                    under it the court would have the alternative option of striking
                                    down the verdict without necessarily having to order a fresh
                                    inquest. There followed the present application. In the event,
993) 2 WLR 883.
t London, cx parte Gray and         the Attorney General refused the fia t on August 18, 1992 on
187] 2 WLR 1020.                    the ground that he had concluded that there was nothing which
t of Appeal) May 20, 1993,          would justify authorizing an application to the High Court for
                                    a new inquest, as the application would have no reasonable
parte Spooner (1988) 152 J.P.       prospect of establishing that it was necessary or desirable in
                                    the interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.
jndon, ex parte Linnane (1991)      M eanwhile, the application for leave to bring the present
                                    proceedings had been adjourned to await the outcome of the
h, ex parte Peach (1980) 1 QB       application for the fiat. It cam e before Macpherson, J. on April
ex parte Hicks (1987) 1 WLR         6, 1993 and he granted leave.
                                          The applicants and their deceased relatives are all from
                                    Liverpool. On April 15,1989 the deceased relatives had come
                                    to Sheffield to watch Liverpool play Sheffield Wednesday in
 r the applicants,                  the semi-final o f the Football Association Cup at the latter’s
the respondent.                     ground, Hillsborough Stadium. The kick-off of the match was
;hire Ambulance Service.            scheduled for 3 pm. Prior to kick-off there was a great build­
                                    up of supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance to the
                                    ground which caused pressure and discomfort to those trying
                                    to get into the ground through the turnstiles. At 2.52 pm the
lad been sustained the exercise     chief superintendent, who w as the police officer in charge of
 new inquest would be without       crowd control at the m atch, decided in order to relieve the
! passed. Merely quashing the
                                    pressure at the turnstiles to let the gates at the Leppings Lane
ncemed, including the interests     entrance be opened. The opening of one of the gates, gate C,
come back five years later to a     resulted in a sudden influx o f about 2,000 supporters through
■. to events they must have been    gate C, the great majority o f whom went on through a tunnel
                                                                                                       H
                                    and into spectator pens 3 and 4. These pens were capable of
                                         JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                   Vol.    158           JUSTICE O F 1
          456



     R. v. H.M.         holding just over a 1,000 persons each, but they were already            Director had decided not to
    Coroner for         full. The result was the building up o f an intolerable pressure         disaster.
 South Yorkshire,       on the supporters at the front o f the pens.                                   The m ain inquest beg
      ex parte                 This was so when the m atch started at 2.59 pm. It                coroner had made a provisic
Stringer and Others     intensified at 3.04 pm, when there was a further surge caused            a cut-off time for the evidei
                        by spectators’ responses to a near miss at goal by a Liverpool           the day of the disaster, bein;
  Queen’s Bench         player. Many supporters were crushed against the wall at the             ambulance, because he
      Division
                        front and by then, if not before, many had suffered severe               overwhelming pathologic:
Lord MacCowan, L J .    crush injuries from which they died. The m atch was stopped              permanent irrecoverable dai
                        at 3.05 p.m. and only then was the gravity o f the situation             all the deceased. In the abse
                        appreciated. In the result, 95 people were killed and some 400           o f counsel, appearing for 41
                        p h y s i c a ll y injured. The great majority o f those who had been    those making the present ap
                        killed had been in pen 3, but at least five were in pen 4.              off primarily on the ground
                                On April 17, 1989, Taylor, L.J- as he then was, was             the proposition that not all
                        appointed to conduct an inquiry into the disaster. On April 18,          by 3.15 p.m. The coroner, !
                        1989 the coroner formally opened and adjourned the inquest.             submissions, was not persi
                        From then and from time to time until M arch 28, 1991, he               and the inquest proceeded %
                        conducted the inquests into the deaths o f the 95 individuals,                 The application for ju.
                        sitting a total o f 96 days. His inquiry was assisted by an             leave was given contained
                        independent police force, namely the West Midlands                      however, Mr. Alun Jones f
                        Constabulary, who investigated the incident and gathered                add two more, and I have :
                        evidence The coroner faced the complications of the sheer               first o f these supplementa:
                     D number of deaths, plus the fact that the Taylor inquiry was              should have disqualified hin
                        proceeding. From the latter emerged an interim report in                invited an outside coroner t
                        August 1989. But then the coroner was told that the.Director            closely associated with Shu
                        o f Public Prosecutions was being asked to consider bringing            interested party appearing t
                        criminal charges arising oiit of the incident. Eventually he was        jury. The nature of the assc
                        told that while the D.P.P. m ade his mind up, he could resume           appointed and his salary pai
                        the inquest on a limited basis. This was that he could consider         clear to us that he was not si
                        three of the questions necessary under the Coroners Act,                bias. He submitted, howeve
                        namely who the deceased was and when and where he met                   (1993) 157 J.P. 612; [1993;
                         his death, but must not deal with how, for fear o f prejudicing        a real danger o f bias. For t
                         any criminal proceedings that the D.P.P. might decide to bring.        out that, once appointed, th
                                 What the coroner, therefore, decided upon was that who,        and that under s.3(4) o f the
                         when and where should be determined at a preliminary part              determinable only by the Lc
                         o f the inquests for each of the 95 individuals, with the issue        him for "inability or misb<
                         o f how being held over until a decision on criminal                   duty."
                         proceedings was reached. He also decided that the best way                   The real problem facing
                         to avoid the pitfalls o f prejudice to the criminal investigation      that from the start o f the
                         was that the factual evidence for the first part o f the inquiry       applicants’ legal advisers th
                         should be put in the form of sum m aries by the West Midlands          and his salary w as paid by
                         officers All this he explained to the solicitor, Mr. Fraser, who       time was any application m
                         was representing the relatives, and he agreed with the course          That is immaterial, submits
                         proposed. Indeed, the idea w as positively supported by the            a relative to stand by, with
                          families who were distressed at having to wait what must              facts amounting to apparen
                         have seemed an eternity for the hearing o f the investigation          and indeed until after verdi
                          into the individual deaths. There followed a serious of mini          to quash the verdict and ha
                          inquests, lasting from April 18 to May 4, 1990 with M r               of apparent bias.
                          Fraser representing the vast majority of the relatives. Then                The delay does not of cc
                          there was a pause while the D.P.P.’s decision was am ved at.          on May 28, 1991, and it was
                                                                                                that the suggestion o f bias v.
                      H Eventually in September 1990, the coroner was told that the
■EACE REPORTS              Vol.     15g            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                       4 5 7




 is each, but they were already     Director had decided not to prosecute anyone in respect o f the         A        R- v. HAL;
; up of an intolerable pressure                                                                                     Coroner for
                                    disaster.                                                                    South Yorkshire,,
)f the peps.                              The m ain inquest began on November 19, 1990, The                           ex parte
 latch started at 2.59 pm. It       coroner had m ade a provisional decision that he would impose               Stringer and Others
ire was a further surge caused      a cut-off tim e for the evidence he would hear o f 3.15 p.m. on
 ar m iss at goal by a Liverpool    the day o f the disaster, being the time of the arrival o f the first         Queen’s Bench
;rushed against the wall at the     ambulance, because he took the view that on the                                  Division
re, many" had suffered severe       overwhelming pathological evidence available to him                     B
  died. The m atch was stopped      permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered by                 Lord MacCowan, L J.
 s the gravity o f the situation    all the deceased. In the absence of the jury, Mr. T im othy King
ople were killed and som e 400      of counsel, appearing for 43 of the families, including five of
lajority o f those who had been     those m aking the present application, argued against that cu t­
it least five were in pen 4.        off primarily on the ground that there was material to support
jr, L.J. as he then was, was        the proposition that not all the victims were necessarily dead
• into the disaster. On \pril 18,   by 3.15 p.m. The coroner, however, having listened to those             C
 led and adjourned the inquest,     submissions, was not persuaded from his prelim inary view,
ime until March 28, 1991, he        and the inquest proceeded with the jury present on that basis.
; deaths of the 95 individuals,           The application for judicial review in respect o f which
s inquiry was assisted by an        leave was given contained seven grounds. Before this court,
tamely the West Midlands            however, Mr. Alun Jones for the applicants sought leave to
;d the incident and gathered        add two more, and I have regard first to those matters. The
lie complications o f the sheer     first of these supplementary grounds was that the coroner               D
rt that the Taylor inquiry was      should have disqualified himself from hearing the inquests and
■merged an interim report in        invited an outside coroner to do so on the ground that he was
jner was told that the Director     closely associated with Sheffield city council, who were an
 ng asked to consider bringing      interested party appearing by counsel before the coroner and
 lie incident. Eventually he was    jury. The nature of the association was that the coroner was
  his mind up, he could resume      appointed and his salary paid by that council. Mr. Jones made
This was that he could consider     clear to us that he was not suggesting actual, but only apparent        E
.ary under the Coroners Act,        bias. He submitted, however, on the authority o f R. v. Gough
; and when and where he met          (1993) 157 J.P. 612; [1993] 2 WLR 883 that there was here
th how, for fear o f prejudicing    a real danger o f bias. For the coroner, Mr. Coghlan pointed
 le D.P.P. might decide to bring,   out that, once appointed, the coroner is wholly independent,
 e, decided upon was that who,      and that under s.3(4) of the Coroners Act 1988 his tenure is
tennined at a preliminary part      determinable only by the Lord Chancellor, who could remove
  95 individuals, with the issue    him for "inability or misbehaviour in the discharge of his
.til a decision on criminal                                                                                 F
                                    duty."
ilso decided that the best way            The real problem facing Mr. Jones is that he has to accept
  e to the criminal investigation   that from the start o f the inquest it was known to the
for the first part of the inquiry   applicants' legal advisers that the coroner had been appointed
 nmaries by the West Midlands       and his salary was paid by an interested party, and yet at no
 o the solicitor, Mr. Fraser, who    time was any application made to him to disqualify himself.
  and he agreed with the course     That is im material, submits Mr. Jones. It is, he says, open to
is positively supported by the      a relative to stand by, with the necessary knowledge o f the            G
: at having to wait wliat must       facts am ounting to apparent bias, for 96 days o f an inquest,
 le hearing of the investigation    and indeed until after verdict, and then seek judicial review
ere followed a serious of mini       to quash the verdict and have a fresh inquest on the ground
 18 to May 4, 1990, with Mr.        of apparent bias.
 lajority of the relatives. Then          The delay does not o f course end there. The inquest ended
 .P.P.’s decision was arrived at.    on May 28, 1991, and it was not until the end o f O ctober 1993
D, the coroner was told that the     that the suggestion o f bias was ever advanced on b e h a lf o f the
                                      JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                     Vol.    158           JUSTICE OF T
         458      n


     R. v. H.M.           applicants. It was the view o f this court that that suggestion      oral evidence and question
    Coroner for           cam e far too late and had no merit. Accordingly, we refused         Jones over this ground is t
 South Yorkshire,         the application to add that ground.                                  1984, r.37(3)(c), which per
      ex parte                 The second new ground which Mr. Jones sought to add             evidence at an inquest pro\
Stringer and Others       was that the coroner’s direction upon the elements of the            that objection may be take
                          offences of manslaughter was wrong in law. What the coroner          Fraser, on behalf o f the
  Queen’s Bench           did was to direct them in terms of recklessness, in so doing,        contentment with the use oi
     Division                                                                                  Jones felt obliged to tell the
                          faithfully following the judgm ent of Watkins, L.J. in R. v.
                          West London Coroner, ex parte Gray and Others (1987) 151             not pursue this ground.
Lord MacCowan, L-J.                                                                                 The second ground al
                          J.P. 209[1987] 2 W LR 1020. He did so with the full
                          agreement of Mr. King representing the relatives. Mr. Jones          comply with r.37 o f the Co:
                          now says that this was a misdirection because by the                 through the laid dow n pro
                          unreported cases of R. v. Holloway ond Others decided in ihe         contents of summaries and :
                          Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) on May 20, 1993, the             objection to the proposed <
                          offence o f involuntary manslaughter is established if there is      Jones acknowledged that tl
                          proof o f a grossly negligent act or omission causing death.         accordingly abandoned it a
                               Assuming, without deciding, that there was a misdirection,           The next ground is tha:
                          no blame can attach to the coroner since he summed up as he          a cut-off point o f 3.15 pm
                          was told to do by the divisional court and with the approval         into the issue of how the de
                          of counsel for the relatives. That Mr. Jones accepts. What           result that there was no inqu
                          exactly is it that Mr. Jones would have had the coroner say?         deaths were caused in p:
                          He gave us a long passage ending with these words:                   emergency services and an'
                                                                                               the police and emergency se
                               "... that the attempted avoidance of the perceived risk,        gave his reasons for impos
                               namely by opening the gates, was attended by such a high        said:
                               degree of negligence that it justifies a conviction for
                                                                                                    "It is from my understar
                               unlawful killing."
                                                                                                    the overwhelming path
                          So directed, he submits, the jury could have found unlawful               the people died as a
                          killing. But there is nothing to say they would have done. The           asphyxia. Different wc
                          verdict they in fact brought in was a perfectly rational one.             always the same. The
                                W hat then, we asked, would be the point of sending the             poor men and wom en '
                          m atter back for another inquest? Mr. Jones’s answer was that,            to breathe.
                          whatever the verdict might prove to be, the function of the                     "That does not me
                          ju ry would have been fulfilled. He agreed that no prosecution            not in fact respire for
                                                                                                    heart beat thereafter,
                          o f any police officer would result because the decision was
                          taken as long ago as September 1990 (before the main inquest)             indeed both, Dr. Gum
                                                                                                    who dealt with this quf
                          that no one should be prosecuted. It is, he said, a point of
                                                                                                  - all in fact said, as I unde
                           legal purity. Mr. Coghlan said that a fatal flaw in the
                           application was that no notice of it had been given to the
                           South Yorkshire Police who, had they known of it, might well
                           have wanted to appear and to resist it. Consequently, if we         Then a little later:
                           granted the application, there would have to be an adjournment
                           with yet more delay. Once again this court considered that the            "The medical evidence
                           application was made far too late and that, if successful, it             verbatim - but the sen
                                                                                                     and, indeed, the others
                           would achieve nothing of value. Consequently, we also
                           rejected the application to add this ground.         ....                 was fixed so that respi:
                                                                                                     then irrecoverable bra
                                I turn to the first ground in the application, which is that
                                                                                                     four and six minutes.
                           the coroner wrongly conducted the mini inquests by reference
                           to summaries of the statements of eye witnesses which were
                                                                                                     In justification o f wh."
                      H    read out and whose contents could not therefore be tested by
JEACE REPORTS                 Vol.   158            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                        459



this court that that suggestion      oral evidence and questioning. The problem that faced Mr.             A;          R. v. E M .
lerit. Accordingly, we refused       Jones over this ground is the terms of the Coroners Rules                       ' Coroner for
>und.                                1984, r.37(3)(c), which' permits admission of documentary                    ■ South Yorkshire,
/hich Mr. Jones sought to add        evidence at an inquest provided the coroner first announces                        ex parte
 on upon the elements of the         that objection m ay be taken to its admission. In fact, Mr.                ' Stringer and Others
vrong in law. W hat the coroner      Fraser, on be h a lf of the relatives, expressed complete
                                     contentment w ith the use of the summary. Accordingly, Mr.                    Queen’s Bench
s of recklessness, in so doing,                                                                                       Division
lent of W atkins, L.J. in R. v.      Jones felt obliged to tell the court immediately that he could        b
e Gray and Others (1987) 151         not pursue this ground.                                                    Lord MacCowan, L J
0. He did so with the full                 The second ground alleges that the coroner failed to
inting the relatives. Mr. Jones      comply with r.37 o f the Coroners Rules in that he did not go
nisdirection because by the          through the laid dow n procedure o f first summarizing the
way and Others decided in the        contents of sum m aries and ascertaining whether there was an
vision) on May 20, 1993, the         objection to the proposed course. As with ground one, Mr.
jghter is established if there is    Jones acknowledged that this ground had no substance and              c
ct or omission causing death,        accordingly abandoned it also.
s;, that there was a misdirection,         The next ground is that the coroner wrongly introduced
jner since he summed up as he        a cut-off point of 3.15 pm at the outset of the main inquest
al court and with the approval       into the issue o f how the deceased met their deaths, with the
That Mr. Jones accepts. What         result that there was no inquiry into whether, or how far, their
uld have had the coroner say?        deaths were caused in part by the delay in calling the
ding with these words:               emergency services and any shortcomings in the response of
                                     the police and emergency services after 3.15 pm. The coroner
aidance of the perceived risk,       gave his reasons for imposing this cut-off. This is what he
es, was attended by such a high      said:
t it justifies a conviction for
                                           "It is from my understanding of the pathological evidence,
                                           the overwhelming pathological evidence is and was that
iry could have found unlawful              the people died as a result o f crushing or traumatic
say they would have done. The              asphyxia. Different words were used, but the sense was          E
i was a perfectly rational one.            always the same. The underlying problem which these
jld be the point of sending the            poor men and women were subjected to was an inability
t? Mr. Jones’s answer was that,            to breathe.
 ove to be, the function of the                  "That does not mean to say that some of them did
. He agreed that no prosecution            not in fact respire for a period of time or even have a
;sult because the decision was             heart beat thereafter, but the damage was done, and
• 1990 (before the main inquest)           indeed both, D r.G um p ert, Dr. Slater, Professor Usher,       F
uted. It is, he said, a point of           who dealt with this question in an overall point of view,
aid that a fatal flaw in the               all in fact said, as I understand their evidence, exactly the
 e of it had been given to the             same."
ad they known of it, might well
> resist it. Consequently, if we     Then a little later:
 ould have to be an adjournment
in this court considered that the          "The medical evidence was that once - I am not quoting          G
  late and that, if successful, it         verbatim - but the sense of what Professor Usher said,
 alue. Consequently, we also               and, indeed, the others as well, was that once the chest
d this ground.                             was fixed so that respiration could no longer take place,
n the application, which is that           then irrecoverable brain damage would occur between
J the mini inquests by reference           four and six minutes. That is the point."
ts of eye witnesses which were
 ould not therefore be tested by           In justification of what the coroner did, Mr. Coghlan,
        460                            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                     Vol.        158            JU STIC E OF -



     R. v. H.M.            appearing for him, drew to the court’s attention some words          ;         "I say at the outset of
    C oroner for           of Bingham, L.J. in R. v. Her Majesty's Coroner f o r East           i         can be made o f the re;
 South Yorkshire,          Kent, ex parte Spooner (1988) 152 J.P. 115 at 122F:                  j         by SYMAS or by the
      ex parte                                                                                            no represented party v
Stringer and Others                                                                            3
                                                                                                          only attack on SYMA5
                               "... the coroner is by law an inquisitor; the witnesses          :
                                                                                                          One claim ed that am
  Q ueen’s Bench               called are those whom he, under the statute, thinks it           j
      Division                                                                                            with sufficient equipr
                               expedient to examine, and he is very much the master of          ;
                       B                                                                                  triage. He w as proved
                               his own procedure.                                                         Unfortunately he had :
Lord MacCowan, L J .                 "These considerations are fortified here because the      I
                                                                                                          15 when he said more
                               coroner has immersed himself in a huge mass of material         >
                                                                                                          and equipm ent had l
                               which the court has not seen. We have scarcely glimpsed         ]
                                                                                                          proved wrong in fac
                               the top o f the iceberg of evidence with which he is             j
                                                                                                          ambulances, he cono
                               familiar. Very great weight therefore should be given to         !
                                                                                                          possible to say whethe
                               his judgment, although on questions of law he is of course       j
                                                                                                          com m ents on televisi
                               exercising a judgment, not a discretion.                         ;
                                                                                                          doctor complained of
                                     "It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct verdict     ;         satisfied on overwheln
                               but his responsibility is to conduct a fact-finding exercise,    j
                                                                                                          a defibrillator on the
                               not to apportion blame and not to decide civil liability.        j
                                                                                                          would have been higl"
                               In a case such as this the chain of causation may be of          j
                                                                                                          injury from the electr
                               almost infinite length. The coroner had to break it              j
                               somewhere to keep his inquiry within tolerable bounds.
                                                                                                    I should point out that Dr
                               He broke it at what I judge to be a reasonable and
                                                                                                    referred to, and Dr. Phi
                               sustainable point, particularly bearing in mind the
                                                                                                    para.297, Taylor L.J. said:
                               exhaustive public inquiry which had already been
                               conducted by Sheen, J."                                                    "I find that all three
                                                                                                          above responded proi
                                                                                                          u o u g h t appropriate e
                           I should say that that case was an application for judicial
                                                                                                          operated efficiently.
                       E   review in respect of the inquests into the capsizing o f the
                           Herald of Free Enterprise. Adapting those words to the present
                           case, it seems to me that on the face of it the coroner cut off
                           the evidence at a reasonable and sustainable point, particularly
                                                                                                          301. There was insuff
                           bearing in m ind the exhaustive public inquiry which had
                                                                                                          the police and the en
                           already been conducted by Taylor, L.J. I would add that it was
                                                                                                          SYMAS and -the fire
                           also a compassionate point from the aspect of the victims'
                                                                                                          earlier than they were
                       _   relatives.
                                                                                                          and extent o f the crus
                                 However, the applicants next point is connected, because       <
                                                                                                          began and the patheti
                           it is there said that the coroner wrongly refused to call a Dr.      I
                                                                                                          unable to breathe coi
                           Ashton and a Dr. Glyn Phillips, who had highly relevant             /j
                                                                                                          quicker recourse to th
                           evidence to give, because that evidence, or m uch of it, fell
                                                                                                          saved more lives."
                           after the cut-off point.
                                 It is necessary now to have a look at the interim Taylor
                                                                                                         We have been through
                           report. He found that the police had no alternative but to open
                                                                                                    inquiry in considerable d
                       G   the gates, but that the blunder they made was that the order             surprised that Taylor, L..
                           to open was not accompanied or followed by any other order               expressed. I do not think
                           to deal with the consequences, and, in particular, to prevent            difference to the result if he
                           those who entered from pouring through, the tunnel into the              Dr. Phillips seem s to hav
                           already crowded pens 3 and 4. He went on to deal with what               ambulance service and bot
                           he had heard from Drs. Ashton and Phillips. This appears at
                           para.296 of the report under the heading "First Aid and                  L.J.
                                                                                                         One other witness at t
                       H   Emergency Services":
iCE REPORTS                Vol.    158
                                                  JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                     4 6 1




>urt's attention som e words             "I say at the outset o f this chapter that no valid criticism            K -v.ILM .
tojesry's Coroner fo r East              can be made of the response by the St John Ambulance,                   Coroner for
                                         by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on April 15. Indeed,                 South Yorkshire,
52 J.P. 1-15 at 122F:                                                                                              ex parte
                                         no represented party ventured any criticism o f them. The           Stringer and Others
                                         only attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors.
n inquisitor; the witnesses              One claimed that am bulances did not arrive swiftly or                Queen’s Bench
under the statute, thinks it             with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of                   Division
: is very fnuch th e master of           triage. He was proved to be wrong in all three respects         B
                                         Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on April          Lord MacCowan, LJ.
 e fortified here because the            15 when he said more lives could have been saved if staff
 f in a huge m ass o f material          and equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being
 We have scarcely glimpsed               proved wrong in fact as to the times of arrival of
:vidence with which he is                ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not
herefore should be given to              possible to say whether lives could have been saved. His
tstions of law he is of -.ourse          comments on television were irresponsible. The other            c
i discretion.                            doctor complained o f the absence of defibrillators. I am
:he ju ry to a correct verdict           satisfied on overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use
iduct a fact-finding exercise,           a defibrillator on the pitch with people milling about
not to decide civil liability,           would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of
 ain of causation m ay be of
                                         injury from the electric charge."
: coroner had to break it
iry within tolerable bounds,       I should point out that Dr. Ashton was the first doctor there         ^
je to be a reasonable and          referred to, and Dr. Phillips the second. Continuing at
lrly bearing in m.rid the
                                   para.297, Taylor L.J. said:
  which had already been
                                         "I find that all three of the emergency services named
                                         above responded promptly when alerted, and that they
                                         brought appropriate equipment and that their personnel
, an application for judicial
                                         operated efficiently.                                           g
 ts into the capsizing of the
 ng those words to the present
face of it the coroner cut off
;ustainable point, particularly          301. There was insufficiently close cooperation between
: public inquiry which had               the police and the emergency services. It is clear that
>r, L.J. I would add that it was         SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been called
n the aspect o f the victims’            earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature
                                         and extent of the crushing, the time when police rescue         F
 t point is connected, because           began and the pathetically short period for which those
vrongly refused to call a Dr.            unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that
s, who had highly relevant               quicker recourse to the emergency services would have
jvidence, or much of it, fell
                                         saved more lives."
 a look at the interim Taylor           We have been through the evidence o f Dr. Ashton at the
lad no alternative but to open     inquiry in considerable detail and, for my part, I am not             G
hey made was that the order        surprised that Taylor, L.J. took the view o f him that he
 followed by any other order       expressed. I do not think it would have made the slightest
ind, in particular, to prevent     difference to the result if he had given evidence at the inquest.
: through.the tunnel into the      Dr. Phillips seems to have had only two criticisms of the
le went on to deal with what       ambulance service and both o f these were rejected by Taylor,
and Phillips. This appears at
:he heading "First Aid and               One other witness at the inquiry, it is suggested, should       H
         462                             JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                      Vol.



     R. v. H.M.            also have been called by the coroner, a Mr, Eccleston, a senior                15 minutes, Mr. He
    Coroner for            nurse manager, but I do not believe that the evidence he could                 being created arour
 South Yorkshire,          have given was such that it should have caused the coroner                     floor o f the terracim
      ex parte             to abandon his sensible cut-off point based, as it was, on the                 Paul William Carlile
Stringer and Others        plain and virtually unchallenged evidence of the pathologists                  blue in the face and.
                           as to when the deceased would have died.                                       resuscitate him by
  Queen’s Bench                 Mr. Jones does not suggest that the Taylor Report should                  resuscitation. Paul :
     Division              have been ignored by the coroner. As to the statutory position,                treatment and Mr. t
                           by s . l l ( 2 ) of the 1988 Act the coroner is required to call all           another casualty."
Lord MacCowan, L J .
                           persons who tender evidence as to the facts of death "whom
                           he considers it expedient to examine". That gives the coroner              He gave evidence at the
                           a discretion as to whom he calls to give evidence, based on
                           expediency. In the light of the contents of the interim Taylor                 "Q. What happened
                           Report, plus the pathological evidence, I am very far from
                           concluding that his exercise of discretion was plainly wrong.                  "A. The crush got wi
                                I turn next to consider what is in fact the seventh ground,               minutes I was awar
                           which reads:                                                                   right by where I was

                               "There is now available some evidence that the coroner                     "Q. Was the match
                               and his jury were not given a full picture of the evidence                 aware of this or car
                               o f some of the witnesses whose statements were partially
                               summarized at the mini, inquests, and that the result was                  "A. Yes, the match
                               that the proceedings were vitiated by the omission of
                               certain facts."                                                            "Q. This was in fac

                           Mr. Jones looked in turn at each of the six victims whose                      "A. T hat's right.
                           relatives have brought these proceedings. I begin with Paul
                           Carlile. Professor Alan Usher was the pathologist in his case.                 "Q. Being a charge r
                           His evidence is at p.59 of the applicants' bundle. Here I read                 pulse was going ar
                           this question coming from Mr. Fraser:                                          could?

                                "Q. Professor Usher, can you offer some reassurance to                    "A. Yes, but not at
                                the family about the timescale for this type of injury in
                                terms of the time that you think it may have taken for                    "Q. I realise that.
                                Paul to lose consciousness once the crushing that we have
                                heard about actually started to take place?                               "A. As soon as the

                                "A. Yes, the reason for Paul’s death was that his chest                   "Q. That is in fact m
                                was held so tightly that he could not breathe in or out                   before you were ab
                                and, once that had happened, then he would have been
                                unconscious in a matter of seconds, between 10-20                         "A. I really could nc
                                seconds. He would have died within a few minutes."                        seemed Jike for ever
                                                                                                          and tighter and you
                           From the form of the question it is to be observed that the aim                probably only a m a r
                           o f the advocate was to reassure the victim ’s relatives that the              or 10 minutes."
                           victim had not had to suffer long.
                                 Mr. Hollinghurst, an off-duty nurse, was in pen 4. At the
                           mini inquest his evidence was summarized by an officer called              Later he was asked:
                           Evans in these words:
                                                                                                          "Q. As I say, at tha
                                "After being subjected to this pressure for approximately                 to see whether there
                       H

                                                                                                  j
ZACE REPORTS                 VoU     158            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                     463



 ner, a Mr. Eccleston, a senior            15 minutes, Mr. Hollinghurst became aware o f a space                    R. v. E M .
 ve that the evidence he could             being created around him, and on looking d o w n to the                 Coroner for
 uld have caused the coroner               floor o f the terracing, he saw a man he now know s to be            South Yorkshire,-
                                           Paul W illiam Carlile. Mr. Hollinghurst saw that Paul was                 ex parte
 joint based, as it was, on the                                                                                Stringer and Others
i evidence of the pathologists             blue in the face and, on not detecting a pulse, he tried to
  have died,                               resuscitate him by heart massage and m outh-to-m outh                 Queen’s Bench;,
that the Taylor Report should              resuscitation. Paul failed to respond to the emergency                   Division
 r. As to the statutory position,          treatment and Mr. Hollinghurst then moved on to treat
zoroner is required to call all            another casualty."                                                  Lord MacCowan, L J
. to the facts of death "whom
.nine". That gives the coroner       He gave evidence at the main inquest and was asked:
 s to give evidence, based on
 ontents of the interim Taylor             "Q. W hat happened then? What did you see or notice?
 vidence, I am veiy far from
discretion was plainly wrong,              "A. The crush got worse rather than better and after a few      q
  is in fact the seventh ground,           minutes I was aware that somebody was on the ground
                                           right by where I was standing, by where I was positioned.

me evidence that the coroner               "Q. W as the match still in progress when you became
 a full picture of the evidence            aware o f this or can you not remember?
lose statements were partially
]uests, and that the result was            "A. Yes, the match was going on.                                D
 vitiated by the omission of
                                           "Q. This was in fact a young man?

ich of the six victims whose               "A. T h a t’s right.
 oceedings. I begin with Paul
/as the pathologist in his case,           "Q. Being a charge nurse you checked to see w hether his
pplicants’ bundle. Here I read             pulse was going and things like that, as soon as you
. Fraser.                                  could?

 ou offer some reassurance to              "A. Yes, but not at that particular moment.
 cale for this type of injury in
j think it may have taken for              "Q. I realise that.
once the crushing that we have
id to take place?                          "A. As soon as the crowd cleared ...
                                                                                                           F
m l 's death was that his chest            "Q. That is in fact m y next question. How long did it take
e could not breathe in or out              before you were able to get at this lad?
led, then he would have been
  of seconds, between 10-20                "A. I really could not put a tiinescale on it because it just
iied within a few minutes."                seemed like for ever. It seemed like it was getting tighter
                                           and tighter and you were fighting for your breath. It was
,t is to be observed that the aim          probably only a matter of 10 minutes at the m om ent, five      G
.• the victim’s relatives that the         or 10 minutes."
ong.
 uty nurse, was in pen 4. At the
 ummarized by an officer called       Later he was asked:

                                           "Q. A s I say, at that point that is when you had a look
this pressure for approximately            to see whether there was anything to be done for this lad? ^
         464                            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE R E I O RTS                Vol.       158             JUSTICE OF '



     R. v. H.M.                 "A. Yes.                                                           A little later he says:
    Coroner for
 South Yorkshire,               "Q. In fact I think you cam e to the conclusion that there               "I then tried to revive
      ex parte                  w a sn ’t, is that right?                                                and mouth-to-mouth r
Stringer and Others
                                                                                                         response so I then trie
                                "A. I tried, as well the lad who was immediately below                   was no response and e\
  Queen’s Bench
     Division                   me. There was somebody just a couple of feet further                     and said I ’d done what
                                away. He was also in the same condition.
Lord MacCowan, L J .                                                                               It seems fairly obvious t!
                                "Q. So you tried for both o f them?                                beyond revival.
                                                                                                         I turn next to Michael
                                "A. Yes, I was going back ..."                                     was Dr. John Clark and hi
                                                                                                   o f the applicant’s bundle.
                         Then he went on to say that he identified both the persons
                       q concerned as dead and that the younger one was in fact Paul                     "His face was rathe
                         Carlile.                                                              ;         discolouration. These
                              Last week the applicant’s legal advisers got from the            ;         mild in comparison to
                         coroner’s solicitors a statement by Mr. Hollinghurst dated May                  o f the other feature
                         5, 1989. It was in essence what he had said before. The rest                    haemorrhages on the si
                         of the story is that two police officers then tried to resuscitate
                         him and their attempts were taken over by an unknown                  !   He continued later:
                       D ambulanceman, but without success. There is no evidence of
                         any lack of care by that ambulanceman, and indeed at the mini                   "He had n't inhaled vc
                         inquest the deceased’s family, through Mr. Fraser, thanked the        \         internal or severe injur;
                         two policemen and the unknown ambulanceman for the efforts                      to account for his dec
                         that he had made. I can see no valid ground for complaint in                    crush asphyxia and for
                         respect of this deceased.                                                       rather mild."
                              Before leaving this deceased, Mr. Jones placed reliance
                         on a passage in the recently discovered statement by Mr.                  Later again:
                       ® Hollinghurst which read as follows:                                   !
                                                                                                         "He probably lost cons
                                "I was aware of a hand grabbing m y leg. I reached down        i         t.‘ Me, 10 or 15 secorn
                                and took hold of his hand. I was shouting to everyone that     j         about it after that."
                                someone was down but the crush was that bad no one
                                could move anyway. I was frantically trying to pull the                 At 3.08 pm the deceast
                                person up, grabbing at any part of him that I could but        j   3 in "obvious distress". Th
                       F        it was hopeless."                                              1   his case was given by Dete>
                                                                                                   other things he said this:
                           It looks clear that the person who was doing the grabbing was       j
                           Paul Carlile; obviously he was alive at that stage. But the                   "P.C. M aughan attem
                           answer, I am afraid, is to be found in the further passage in                 Leppings Lane end of
                           that statement:                                                               assisted spectators to c
                                                                                                         o f the ground where he
                       G       "After about 15 minutes I was suddenly aware of space                     Ambulance officer wh
                               being created around m e and when I looked down I saw
                                two men. The first was a white lad aged about 19 years."           Then he continued:

                           He then describes him and says:                                               "It is fair to say that 1/
                                                                                                         Maughan and following
                                "His face was blue in colour and he was bloated. I                       satisfied that it was act
                       H       checked for a pulse but there was none."                                  assist."




                                                                  i
                                  J
ACE REfORTS                Vol.   \       158             JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                   465
                                  N

                                  V


                                      I   A little later he says:                                                       R. v. E M .
                                                                                                                       Coroner for
 to the conclusion that there     ■ j           "I then tried to revive the younger lad by heart massage            South Yorkshire,
                                                                                                                         ex parte '
                                  j             and mouth-to-mouth resuscitation but I was getting no              Stringer, and Other:
                                   j            response so I then tried on the older man. Again there
.'ho was immediately below         !            was no response and eventually someone took hold o f me              Queen’s Bench
ust a couple of feet further                     and said I ’d done what I could and that I should get out."            Division
ime condition.
                                      |    It seems fairly obvious that by that stage he was in fact               Lord MacCowan, L.
f them?                                   beyond revival.
                                                I turn next to Michael Kelly. The pathologist in his case
                                          was Dr. John Clark and his evidence is to be found at p. 185
                                          of the applicant’s bundle. He said:
 identified both the persons      I
ounger one was in fret.Paul       !             "His face was rather congested and had a bluish                q
                                  \             discolouration. These changes, I have to say, were fairly
legal advisers got from the       i             mild in comparison to a lot of the other people and one
i Mr. Hollinghurst dated May      i             of the other features of asphyxia is to find little
he had said before. The rest      '             haemorrhages on the skin. These w eren't in fact present."
icers then tried to resuscitate
aken over by an unknown               1   He continued later:
:ess. There is no evidence of
 eman, and indeed at the mini                   "He h ad n’t inhaled vomit and he had not suffered any
ough Mr. Fraser, thanked the      I             internal or severe injuries and there was no natural disease
ambulanceman for the efforts                    to account for his death and so I still think he died of
alid ground for complaint in                    crush asphyxia and for some reason the signs o f that were
                                                rather mild."
d, Mr. Jones placed reliance
iscovered statement by Mr.                Later again:                                                         g
jws:
                                                "He probably lost consciousness within a short period of
bing m y leg. I reached down                    time, 10 or 15 seconds or so, and then knew nothing
.■as shouting to everyone that                  about it after that."
  crush was that bad no one
frantically trying to pull the                 At 3.08 pm the deceased was to be seen in a video in pen
 part of him that I could but             3 in "obvious distress". The summary at the mini inquest in
                                          his case was given by Detective Inspector Layton and among           F
                                          other things he said this:
i was doing the grabbing was
 alive at that stage. But the                   "P.C. Maughan attempted to resuscitate a man at the
;nd in the further passage in                   Leppings Lane end of the pitch but without success. He
                                                assisted spectators to carry the man to the Spion Kop end
                                                of the ground where he states he left him with a St John’s
vas suddenly aware of space                     Ambulance officer who has not been identified."                G
d when I looked down I saw
ite lad aged about 19 years."             Then lie continued:

                                                "It is fair to say that M ichael’s sister has since met P.C.
                                                Maughan and following that meeting I think they are both
our and he was bloated. I                       satisfied that it was actually Michael that he attempted to
re was none."                                   assist."                                                       H
                                        JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                  Vol.   158              JUSTICE OF 7
        466



     R. v. H.M.                At the main inquest this deceased’s sister asked the                "Q. What did you do
    C oroner for           coroner to call P.C. Maughan, and he did. I read certain                position?
 South Yorkshire,          passages o f that evidence to be found beginning on p. 196:
      ex parte                                                                                     "A We handed him to
Stringer and Others            "Q. You got on to the field just after three, about four
                               minutes past three, is that right?                            Mr. King cross-examined:
  Queen’s Bench
     Division
                               "A. Yes. The players were still on the pitch.                       "Q. I know it is difficu!
Lord MacCowan, L J .                                                                               man Michael Kelly for
                                                                                                   d id n ’t you?

                               "Q. He did not appear to you to be breathing at that                "A. That is correct.
                               stage?
                                                                                                   "Q. You were clearly c
                               "A. That is right.                                                  that you appeared to ha
                                                                                                   way?
                               "Q. He also looked blue, is that correct?
                                                                                                   "A. Yes, sir, I was.
                               "A. That is right.
                                                                                                   "Q. That was an expre
                               "Q. I think you then positioned him           and started           were describing it - 1 th:
                               resuscitation, is that right?                                       about it, haven't you?

                               "A. That is correct, sir.                                           "A. Yes.

                               "Q. In fact you thought you were successful, is that right?         "Q. And you used the e
                                                                                                   or something like that
                               "A. I did think I was successful."
                                                                                                   "A. That is right, I die
                           A little later he said:
                                                                                                   "Q. So it does sound c
                               "... with the help of some civilians we turned the man              y-Mir own mind when y
                               over, worked on him for a few minutes. He appeared to               put him in the care of
                               start to breathe again and then we got a hoarding and               at that stage was still
                               carried him to the ambulance area at the other end of the
                                                                                                   "A. I was quite confid
                               pitch.

                                "Q. Before you tell me about that you cam e on to the
                                pitch about three or four minutes past three. How long           The criticism ipade w:
                                w as the time interval before you got to this chap? Have     reconciled with the evidenc
                                you any idea?                                                Mr. M aughan’s attempt at
                                                                                             success". The suggestion rr
                                "A. Probably three or four minutes."                         Layton had been giving a 1
                                                                                             impression that Mr. Kelly
                            Again on p.198 he gave this answer:                              could have been done for
                                                                                                  Subsequent to the criti
                                "W e continued breathing for him for a w hile, then he       was given by counsel for
                                appeared to slip unconscious but he was breathing, it was    P.C. M aughan on February
                                ju st before we took him away to the other end of the        mini inquest, and which
                                                                                             Inspector Layton in the con
                                pitch.
                       H




                                                                i
\C E REPORTS                VoU    158              JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                 467
                                                                                                                       #


eceased’s sister asked the               "Q, What did you do with him when you got to that                      R -v. KM .
and he did. I read certain               position?              .                                              Coroner for
                                                                                                            South Yorkshire,
ound beginning on p.196:                                                                                         ex parte
                                         "A We handed him to the ambulancemen..."                          Stringer and Other*
just after three, about four
ght?                               Mr. King cross-examined:                                                  Queen’* Bench
                                                                                                                Division
till on the pitch.                       "Q. I know it is difficult, but you say you worked on the     B
                                         man Michael Kelly for a few minutes, I think you put it,          Lord MacCowan, LJ
                                         didn’t you?

ou to be breathing at that               "A. That is correct.

                                         "Q. You were clearly confident in your recollection and
                                         that you appeared to have won through, if I can put it that
                                         way?
:hat correct?
                                         "A. Yes, sir, I was.

                                         "Q. That was an expression which you used when you
sitioned him and started                 were describing it - I think you have spoken to Mrs. Kelly
                                         about it, haven’t you?

                                         "A. Yes.

ere successful, is that right?           "Q. And you used the expression ‘We have won that one’,
                                         or something like that?
sful."
                                         "A. That is right, I did.

                                         "Q. So it does sound as if you were quite confident in
ivilians we     turned the man           your own mind when you took the man over to where you
;w minutes.     He appeared to           put him in the care of the St John’s Ambulance, that he
nen we got      a hoarding and           at that stage was still breathing?
j area at the   other end of the
                                         "A. I was quite confident he was, sir."

ut that you came on to the
nutes past three. How long             The criticism made was that the summary could not be
 you got to this chap? Have        reconciled with the evidence because the summary had it that
                                   Mr. Maughan’s attempt at resuscitation had been “without
                                   success". The suggestion m ade was that Detective Inspector
ninutes."                          Layton had been giving a false picture in order to create the
                                   impression that Mr. Kelly was then dead and nothing more            G
swer:                              could have been done for him.
                                        Subsequent to the criticism being made by Mr. Jones, he
:>r him for a while, then he       was given by counsel for the coroner a statement made by
: but he was breathing, it was     P.C. Maughan on February 15, 1990, that is to say before the
vay to the other end of the        mini inquest, and which was no doubt used by Detective
                                   Inspector Layton in the compilation of the summary. Looking
        468                             JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                    Vol.        158             JUSTICE OF T:
                  •\


     R. v. H.M.        ^ at that statement I see these words:                                             "This case was highly i
    Coroner for                                                                                           fractures to the lary nx .!
 South Yorkshire,              "I saw that the m an was blue in the face and appeared not                 o f voice box fractures,
      ex parte                 to be breathing. I placed the man on the ground near to                    severity of the traumati
Stringer and Others            the goal nets and started to resuscitate him. After a while                in fact makes it virtua
                               the man started to breathe but kept slipping back                          have spoken by virtue o:
  Queen’s Bench
     Division                  unconscious."                                                              to the voice box, sir
                       i                                                                                  scientifically and medic
Lord MacCowan, L_J.        Having seen that, Mr. Jones fairly conceded that his criticism                 the person could have
                           of Detective Inspector Layton could not be sustained.
                               I deal next with Kevin Williams. In his case the                     Then he referred to cortical
                           pathologist was Dr. Slater and I take up his evidence on
                           p.248B of the applicant’s bundle:                                              "The coning indicates '
                                                                                                          again that would hav<
                                                                                                          damage which again w
                               "My examination of Kevin showed that the main finding                      communication.
                               was that o f asphyxia. This opinion was formed through
                               the extensive blueness on the face and upper part of the                   "Q. I have thought abou
                               chest. In addition there were small haemorrhages in both                   and there are several ex:
                               the face and internal organs, including the brain, heart and               and that the observer is
                               lungs ... This had also resulted in four fractures to the                  that has occurred to me
                               small bones in the actual voice box ... the compression                    please disagree if it is n<
                               of the neck or chest has occurred here and                                 ?t; it is possible, is it nc
                               unconsciousness occurs very rapidly, certainly within a                    moved or air or stomac:
                               few seconds, and there is one reported case of it occurring                might m ake a sound as
                               apparently instantaneously. Following unconsciousness                      possibility?
                               then there is no discomfort and no pain. Death then
                               occurs after approximately three to five minutes."                         "A. It is an interesting
                                                                                                          possibility that I cons
                       E                                                                                  certainly an explanatio;
                           At G:                                                                          been made which may
                                                                                                          bi:f it would not explai
                               "Q. Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I want
                               to put this to you because I would like to get your view             He added to the coroner:
                               on it, one officer will be dealing with the value of this
                               evidence in a moment but she [a woman Special                              "But it would explain     t
                       F       Constable called Debra Martin] says that at a point when
                               this lad was in the gymnasium, in other words he had                 Then Mr. Fraser said:
                               already been moved across the pitch, she says she helped        ;
                               him into the gym from the pitch, presumably she carried         *          "No questions, sir, but
                               him. He had stopped breathing. She gave him the kiss of                    for that sympathetic an
                               life, did some heart massage, he opened his eyes, said a
                               word and died. Now in the light of your pathological            1;         Then a Police Sergeant
                       G       findings, is that in fact a possibility, do you think?”              to give the summary in this
                                                                                                    this:
                           In answer the doctor made several comments, among them                         "Derek W illiam Bnide
                           these:                                                                         from the Merseyside P<
                                                                                                          match, recalls seeing a ;
                               "... this was certainly the most severe case o f traumatic                 Spion Kop/North Stanc
                               asphyxia that I actually dealt with.                                       having convulsions. M
ACE REPORTS                Vol.   158             JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                     4 6 9




ds:                                     "This case was highly unusual in that in fact it had four                  R. v. H.M.
                                        fractures to the larynx. It was by far the most severe case              Coroner for
in the face and appeared not            of voice box fractures. Not only does this indicate the                South Yorkshire,
 man on the ground near to              severity o f the traumatic asphyxia at the time but it also              “ ex parte
suscitate him. After a while                                                                                 Stringer     and Others
                                        in fact m akes it virtually impossible for the person to           - ■ • ..   ..i-„ .

5 but kept slipping back                have spoken by virtue of the fact that there were fractures           Queen’s Bench
                                        to the voice box, sir. So all I .can say, sir, that                      Division
                                        scientifically and medically I find that inconceivable that
' conceded that his criticism           the person could have spoken."                                     Lord MacCowan, L J
auld not be sustained.
■Villiams. In his case the        Then he referred to cortical coning and said:
 I take up his evidence on
                                        "The coning indicates the severity of the asphyxia and
                                        again that would have resulted in irreversible brain
                                        damage which again would totally prohibit any form of
 howed that the main finding            communication.
opinion was formed through
 e face and upper part of the           “Q. I have thought about this comment as well, of course,
  small haemorrhages in both            and there are several explanations; (1) that it didn t occur
including the brain, heart and          and that the observer is mistaken but another possibility
lted in four fractures to the           that has occurred to me and I want to put it to you and
jice box ... the compression            please disagree if it is not either right or you d o n ’t accept
  has occurred here and                 it; it is possible, is it not, that if a person having died is
y rapidly, certainly within a           moved or air or stomach contents might be expelled and
: reported case of it occurring         might m ake a sound as it escapes, so to speak. Is that a
  Following unconsciousness             possibility?
1 and no pain. Death then
 three to five minutes."                "A. It is an interesting comment, sir, because it is a
                                        possibility that I considered also myself and that is
                                        certainly an explanation for the noise which could have
                                        been m ade which may have mimicked the word ‘mum
                                        but it would not explain the opening of the eyes, sir."
;ked you was this, and I want
 would like to get your view      He added to the coroner:
;aling with the value of this
ut she [a woman Special                 "But it would explain the noise.''
tin] says that at a point when
 ium, in other words he had       Then Mr. Fraser said:
 he pitch, she says she helped
jitch, presumably she carried           "No questions, sir, but thank you very much Dr. Slater,
ing. She gave him the kiss of           for that sympathetic and detailed explanation."
e, he opened his eyes, said a
a light o f your pathological           Then a Police Sergeant Killoch was called by the coroner
assibility, do you think?"        to give the summ ary in this case. Among other things he said
                                  this:
;ral comments, among them               "Derek W illiam Bruder, an off-duty Police Constable
                                        from the Merseyside Police who was a spectator at the
                                        match, recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch near the
lost severe case of traumatic           Spion Kop/North Stand of the ground. The person was
lit with.                               having convulsions. Mr. Bruder went on the pitch and
                                 JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                   Vol.   158           JUSTICE OF TK
        470



     R. v. H.M.          gave mouth-to-mouth resuscitation aided by a St John s              virtually irreversible bra
    Coroner for          Ambulanceman who carried out cardiac massage.                       would fully support th:
 South Yorkshire,             “Mr. Bruder recalls that a friend of the casualty was          opening eyes and speaki
      ex parte           with him on the pitch. Resuscitation was continued and
Stringer and Others      they were joined by a St John’s Ambulancewoman who                  The coroner: "Does tha
                         took over from Mr. Bruder. After a short time the St
  Queen’s Bench          John’s Ambulancemen said that the casualty was dead.
     Division                                                                                Mr. Fraser: "I am sure
                         Mr. Bruder then left the scene.                                     to find the phrase to su
Lord MacCowan, L-J.           "Neither of the St John's Ambulance personnel or the           stage was beyond help
                         friend of the casualty had been identified. The person Mr.
                         Bruder tried to resuscitate is now known to be Kevin.               "A. Yes, that is right, :
                              "Special Constable Debra Martin went on the pitch
                         to assist and she helped to carry several deceased persons          "Q. And would feel nc
                         and many injured persons to the gymnasium. She assisted
                         to carry one youth who she now knows to be Kevin into               "A. Absolutely. He wc
                         the gymnasium where she rem ained with him.
                              "At 16.06 hours Dr. Curpen examined Kevin in the             A stage came, on May 4
                         gymnasium which had been established as a temporary           Sergeant Killoch and the s
                         mortuary. Dr. Curpen certified life extinct."                 account of the person havi:

                                                                                             "I then took his pulse
                      At p.252D, the coroner said:                                           pulse."

                                                                                           Then Inspector Saw en
                          "We have already mentioned the evidence of Special           beginning at p.264, about u
                          Constable Martin who said about the lad speaking. In no      Mr. Bnider:
                          way do I want to run poor Special Constable Martin down
                          because she had a very hard day but it is right she was            "He goes on to say as a
                          obviously from her statement very distressed.                      the incident he applie<
                                                                                             first-aid training withii
                          "A. I also wouldn’t want to criticise W.P.C. Martin in any
                          way but I have interviewed her twice, sir, and she was       At p.265B:
                          particularly upset as indeed m any people were but j t
                          affected her particularly badly the events of the day."            "He has given very c.
                                                                                             expression he used of hr
                                                                                             of his further training at
                          At p.253, Dr. Slater was recalled by the coroner and asked         about the incident was
                      about Mr. Bm der’s account of the m an lying on the floor              word that was applicable
                      having convulsions. He said:                                           specifically to having
                                                                                             what he originally des
                          "Unfortunately when people have not got enough oxygen              anything like an epilept
                          in the brain, as I said in my earlier evidence, which is           that if there was a part
                          really what the word ‘asphyxia’ means, individuals can             was his h e a d ' and tha
                                                                                             describes this m oveme
                          in fact have fits."

                                                                                       At D:
                      Later he said:
                                                                                             "On reflection, sir, he
                          "For somebody to have convulsions, this would imply that           skilful if he were requ
                          the amount of asphyxia is such that there must be                  and he cannot discount
EACE REPORTS               Vol.    158            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                     471



                                         virtually irreversible brain damage present and again this      A        R. v. H.M.
;citation aided by a St John’s                                                                                   Coroner for
 d out cardiac massage,                  would fully support the concept that the evidence for
                                         opening eyes and speaking is not really conceivable, sir."           South Yorkshire,
 t a friend of the casualty was                                                                               • '' ex parte
uscitation was continued and                                                                                 Stringer and Other:
ihn’s Ambulancewoman who                 The coroner; "Does that help, Mr. Fraser?
•.r. After a short time the St                                                                                 Queen’s Bench
i that the casualty was dead.            Mr. Fraser: "I am sure it does, Dr. Slater. It is difficult     ^       • Division
:ene.                                    to find the phrase to sum the situation up. Kevin at that
 s Ambulance personnel or the                                                                                Lord MacCowan, L .
                                         stage was beyond help. He was as good as dead?
;en identified. The person Mr.
 is now known to be Kevin.               "A. Yes, that is right, absolutely.
:bra Martin went on the pitch
a n y several deceased persons           "Q. And would feel nothing and know nothing?
3 the gymnasium. She assisted
: now knows to be Kevin into             "A. Absolutely. He would know nothing."                         c
 remained with him.
urpen examined Kevin in the            A stage came, on May 4,1990, when the coroner recalled
;n established as a temporary      Sergeant Killoch and the sergeant dealt with Mr. Bruder’s
ified life extinct."               account o f the person having convulsions, going on to say:

                                         "I then took his pulse in his neck. I could feel a slight
                                         pulse."                                                         D

                                       Then Inspector Sawers was called to give an account,
jned the evidence of Special       beginning at p.264, about what contact he had since had with
i about the lad speaking. In no    Mr. Bruder:
Special Constable Martin down
ird day but it is right she was          "He goes on to say as a result of feeling depressed about
nent very distressed.                    the incident he applied of his own volition for further         e
                                         first-aid training within Merseyside Police."
i criticise W.P.C. Martin in any
ed her twice, sir, and she was     At p.265B:
eed many people were but it
jadly the events of the day."            "He has given very careful consideration, sir, to the
                                         expression he used of having convulsions and in the light       p
                                         of his further training and what he now knows and thinks
called by the coroner and asked          about the incident was that ‘convulsions’ was not the
)f the man lying on the floor
                                         word that was applicable to these circumstances. He refers
                                         specifically to having seen epileptic fits and says that
                                         what he originally described as a convulsion was not
)le have not got enough oxygen           anything like an epileptic fit. He goes on to say later, sir,
my earlier evidence, which is            that if there was a part of the body that he saw move it
iliyxia’ means, individuals can          was his head and that the word that he best thinks
                                         describes this movement is that of a twitch."

                                   At D:

                                         "On reflection, sir, he feels he would be m uch more
ivulsions, this would imply that         skilful if he were required to perform this action again        H
  is such that there must be             and he cannot discount the possibility that he did not feel
        472                            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                    Vol.        158              JUSTICE OF


                                                                                              5
     R. v. H.M.                immediately in the right place for the carotid artery "        I        The coroner was not c
    Coroner for                                                                                    Dr. Gumpert, a consultin
 South Yorkshire,         At G:                                                                    consulting neurologist. He
      ex parte
Stringer and Others            "... he cannot be categoric it was a pulse. He feels he may     I         "Once this part of the fc
                               well be mistaken in that matter, sir."                          I         as you heard from Dr
  Queen’s Benc!>                                                                               !         minutes after depriva:
     Division
                      B   At 266B:                                                                        going to die."
Lord MacCowan, L_J.
                              "In his original statement he referred to vomiting and           ;   At p.279D he said:
                              thinking that Kevin had been sick. He has given this
                              matter some further thought and he is absolutely satisfied      j          "It seems clear to me
                              that Kevin was not sick. He did not see Kevin vomiting           i         was probably dead be"
                              and he did not see vomit on the ground or on his                 ;         he was standing. I \vc
                              clothing."                                                       i         think consciousness w;
                                                                                              ]
                                                                                              j    At F:
                          At C:                                                               i
                                                                                                         "... after people are br
                              "... he does have a clear impression in his mind, sir, of
                              a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he cannot discount       i
                              that that could be spittle or phlegm of some sort."                  Page 276A:

                                                                                              !          "... feeling the carotid
                                                                                                          who has got low blc
                          Then at p.267E:                                                                 here."
                              "It was at this point,'sir, that after approximately two
                              minutes o f the involvement of the woman St John's                        At p.313 in the bunc
                      E       Ambulance Office that the male St John’s Ambulance              ,•   Debra Martin made on M:
                              Officer stood up and said ‘H e ’s gone’. He referred to the          extracts from this. She sa:
                              expression being completely grey and would seek to
                              reaffirm that choice of words as his description of Kevin
                              at that particular moment in time. He says, sir, and I                       "My recollection of th
                              quote:                                                                       confused. As a resul'
                                                                                                           medication by my dc
                                   ‘There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now                      really upset by the wh
                                   and with the benefit of further training, that then at                  for about a week. The
                                   the moment the youth I had tried to save was dead,                      o f what I can onl;-
                                   certainly dead, and beyond any further help. I and St                   consciousness. 1 felt :
                                   John’s ambulance personnel would not have stopped
                                   if there had been any glimmer o f hope at all. There
                                   was none.’"                                                     She went on to say that sh
                                                                                                   she now knows to be Kev
                      ®       Then Mr. Fraser was given the opportunity of asking                  gymnasium. At the top of
                          questions but said he had none, but he added this, that Mr. and
                          Mrs. Williams "are appreciative both of the efforts the officer
                          has m ade and of his visit and they have no questions. They                      "I didn’t want to belie
   '                      have decided not to come today, sir."                               I            if he was dead or nc
                               Dr. Slater was again recalled and stuck to his original        I      ■     attempt to revive hirr
                          position. I do not think it would assist to go through his                       mouth but someone, :
                      H   evidence.                                                                        the shoulder and told
VCE REPORTS                 Vol.       158             JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                    473.



:e for the carotid artery "        i       The coroner was not content to leave it there. He called                   R. v. E M ..
                                       Dr. Gumpert, a consulting clinical neurophysiologist and                      Coroner for
                                                                                                                  South Yorkshire,,
                                       consulting neurologist. He spoke of the brain stem and said:                    ex parte
                                                                                                                 Stringer and Other*
vas a pulse. He feels he may       1         "Once this part of the brain is dead, and that death occurs,
tter, sir."                                   as you heard from Dr. Slater, in between four and six                Queen’s Bench
                                              minutes after deprivation of oxygen, then the person is                 Division
                                              going to die."
                                                                                                                 Lord MacCowan, L J .
                                   t
s referred to vomiting and             At p.279D he said:
en sick. He has given this
tnd he is absolutely satisfied               "It seems clear to me, sir, in this case that poor Kevin
did not see K evin vomiting                  was probably dead before he got out of the area in which
 on the ground or in his                     he was standing. I would agree with Dr. Slater. I would
                                             think consciousness was lost probably within 10 seconds."       C

                                       At F:

                                             "... after people are brain stem dead, they can twitch."
jression in his mind, sir, of
outh, but he cannot discount
 phlegm o f some sort."                Page 276A:                                                            D

                                             "... feeling the carotid pulse is quite difficult in somebody
                                             who has got low blood pressure, as would have been
                                             here."
at after approxim ately two
t of the w om an St John’s                  At p.313 in the bundle is to be found a statement by
male St Jo h n ’s Ambulance            Debra Martin made on M arch 17, 1990. I should read a few             E
e ’s g o ne’. He referred to the       extracts from this. She said, on the first page:
y grey and would seek to
5 as his description o f Kevin
n time. He says, sir, and I                   "My recollection of the events of that day are vague and
                                              confused. As a result o f the disaster I was prescribed
                                              medication by my doctor to assist me to sleep. I was
doubt in m y m ind, both now                  really upset by the whole incident and was on medication       F
further training, that then at                for about a week. The result being that I was in a state
 had tried to save was dead,                  o f what I can only describe as a state of semi­
>nd any further help. I and St                consciousness. I felt like a ‘zombie.’"
nnel would not have stopped
:immer o f hope at all. There
                                       She went on to say that she can recall carrying a youth who
                                       she now knows to be Kevin W illiams from the pitch to the
i the opportunity of asking            gymnasium. At the top o f p.315:
ut h6 added this, that Mr. and
both of the efforts the officer
ley have no questions. They                   "I didn’t want to believe the boy was dead. I didn’t know
', sir."                                      if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to
ad and stuck to his original                  attempt to revive him. I started to give him mouth-to-
lid assist to go through his                  mouth but someone, I d o n ’t know who, touched me on
                                              the shoulder and told m e he was dead. By this time my
                                        JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                     Vol.   158            JUSTICE OF T5
         474



     R. v. H.M.                head had gone, I w asn’t aware of what I was doing or            look at fresh evidence
    C oroner for               what was really happening.                                       circumstances in an applicati
 South Yorkshire,                                                                               event, I find it of far too ler.
      ex parte                                                                                  a new inquest. I note that in ;
Stringer and Others                                                                             London, ex parte Linnane
                               ... under the circumstances I cannot be positive that the        coroner was held to have :
  Q ueen’s Bench                                                                                applicant’s request to call a
      Division                 details are accurate. I have been quite badly affected by
                               the whole incident and I am trying to erase it from my           Court refused to order a re
Lord MacCowan, L J .           memory."                                                         verdict of the one that had c.
                                                                                                21 months since it had occ:.r
                                 It is to be noted that when a specific piece of evidence,      medical issues was not so :rr
                           or pieces of evidence, arose which might suggest that one of         considerations against held:
                           the deceased might have been alive after 3.15 pm, the coroner             As to Ian Glover, in :!
                           showed flexibility by going into it.                                 p.249 is to be found the e
                                 W e were told that some while after, Mrs. W illiams, the       pathologist in this case. He
                           deceased’s mother, made contact with Police Constable Bruder
                           and W om an Police Constable Martin, and they alleged that                 "I give the cause of d<
                           they had been pressurized into changing their stories and that             means he died because
                           they now stuck by their original versions. Where does the truth            it could not move in an
                           lie? I see no fault in the coroner in this matter. He made a full          not able to breathe prc
                           inquiry. He was not asked by the applicant's representative                way. Mercifully, anycr
                           to do more. There was overwhelming medical evidence that                   chest becom es fixed the
                           the deceased was in fact dead by 3.15 pm. In m y judgm ent                 early, betw een 10 ar.d
                           it would not be right to quash the verdicts and order a new                unconscious then he u
                            inquest on the strength of these allegations m ade against the            sensation subsequent :c
                            investigating police officers.                                            and six m inutes to act
                                 Before leaving this deceased, however, it would be
                           convenient to deal with a further point made by Mr. Jones
                           which concerns this deceased. This court agreed to look de                The sum m ary at the m:
                           bene esse at a letter written to the relative's solicitors by a      the m atch with his brother
                            pathologist, Dr. West. It is dated October 29, 1993. At their       were pushed forward by a s
                           request he had looked at the post mortem reports and                 pitch and, looking back, sa'
                           photographs. This was the first time he had seen them, some          four feet from the front of t
                            four and a half years after the deaths. He had not been present     saw his brother pulled frorr
                           at the post mortems or seen the bodies. No request had been          by two police officers. Tr.e
                           m ade to the coroner either at the mini or main inquest to call      account given at p.251 or
                            him. On the strength of a sight of the reports and photographs,
                            he doubts Dr. Clark’s diagnosis. He thinks there was                      "Joseph attempted to re
                            substantial damage to the neck, possibly caused by being
                                                                                                      placed on a temporary
                            crushed under people’s feet. This type of injury, he says, is
                                                                                                      pitch by a num ber of p
                            amenable to an emergency tracheotomy and there was a
                                                                                                      a temporary mortuary
                            realistic possibility that this young man was still alive after
                                                                                                           "Sir, I have to in
                            3.15 pm, though unlikely to have spoken the word "Mum" if
                                                                                                      Joseph this morning a
                            he had suffered convulsions.                                              gym nasium a doctor v.
                                  A s I have indicated, no question arises of the coroner
                                                                                                      Ian he did in fact find a
                            having refused to hear this witness. He is in no way at fault
                                                                                                      him for about 15 mir.t
                            in this respect. If the Attorney General’s/?af had been given,
                            the discovery of new facts or evidence could, under s. 13(1)
                            of the 1988 Act, have been held to make it necessary or              Then at E on that page:
                            desirable in the interests of justice that a new inquest be held.
                       H    I have grave doubts, however, whether there is any power to                "Q. I think it is only f




                                                                 I
                                                 JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                        475
VCE REPORTS              Vol.     158


                                                                                                                    R. v. HJV1.
                                  look at fresh evidence o f this nature and in these                              Coroner for
ire of what I was doing or        circumstances in an application for judicial r e v i e w But in any           South Yorkshire,
                                  event I find it of far too tenuous a nature to justify ord®n " |                   ex parte
                                  a new inquest. I note that in R. v. the C o r o n e r fo r Inner North       Stringer and Other*
                                  London ex parte Linnane (1991) 155 J.P^343, where he
                                  coroner was held to have been wrong to have refused the                        Queen’s Bench
cannot  be positive that the      applicant’s request to call a particular doctor, the Divisional                   Division
een quite badly affected by
                                  Court refused to order a new inquest, or even to quash the
 trying to erase it from my                                                                                    Lord MacCowan, L J .
                                  verdict of the one that had occurred, on the ground that was
                                  21 months since it had occurred and the resolution of.complex
                                  medical issues was not so important as to overcome the other
 specific piece of evidence,
h might suggest that one of       considerations against holding a new inquest.
                                       As to Ian Glover, in the coroner s documents vol.l at
■e after 3.15 pm, the coroner
                                   p 249 is to be found the evidence of Professor Usher, the
  it.                              pathologist in this case. He said:
 le after, Mrs. Williams, the
jvith Police Constable Binder
(artin, and they alleged that           "I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia. That
langing their stories and that          means he died because his chest wall was compressed so
ersions. Where does the truth           it could not move in and out. When that happens you are
n this matter. He made a full           not able to breathe properly and you die really in that
e applicant's representative            way. Mercifully, anyone caught in that position once the
ming medical evidence that              chest becomes fixed they become unconscious very, very
y 3.15 pm. In my judgment               early between 10 and 20 seconds. Once this boy was
ne verdicts and order a new             unconscious then he would have no knowledge or any
allegations made against the            sensation subsequent to that. He would take between four
                                        and six minutes to actually die.
sed, however, it would be
sr point made by Mr. Jones
This court agreed to look de            Tlie summary at the mini inquest showed he had gone to
the relative’s solicitors by a     the match with his brother Joseph. They were in pen 3 an
j October 29, 1993. At their       were pushed forward by a surge. He, Joseph, got out onto the
   post mortem reports and         pitch and, looking back, saw his brother in a distressed state
 ime he had seen them, some        four feet from the front of the enclosure. 20 minutes later he
aths. He had not been present      saw his brother pulled from the enclosure and onto the pitch
 bodies. No request had been       by two police officers. There then followed passages in the
: mini or main inquest to call      account given at p.251 of the bundle I have referred to:
  ihe reports and photographs,
osis. He thinks there was               "Joseph attempted to resuscitate his brother who was then
<, possibly caused by being             placed on a temporary stretcher and carried across the
lis type of injury, he says, is         pitch by a number of persons into the gymnasium where
jcheotomy and there was a               a temporary mortuary had been set up.
ung man was still alive after                "Sir, I have to include here that I have spoken to
•e spoken the word "Mum" if             Joseph this morning and he wishes to state that in the
                                        gymnasium a doctor was present and when he examined
jestion arises of the coroner           Ian he did in fact find a pulse and attempted to resuscitate
less. He is in no way at fault          him for about 15 minutes but was unsuccessful.
jeneral’s fiat had been given,
evidence could, under s. 13(1)
,eld to make it necessary or        Then at E on that page:
 ce that a new inquest be held,                                                                            H
whether there is any power to            "Q. I think it is only fair to say that Joe, when he made
         476                           JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                   Vol.        158            JUSTICE OF TI



     R. v. H.M.                his first statement, referred to the doctor?                             case then if he had be
    Coroner for                                                                                         severely brain damagec
 South Yorkshire,              "A. Yes, sir.
      ex parte
Stringer and Others
                               "Q. But he never mentioned anything about the pulse
  Queen’s Bench                being found?                                                             "Q. The other possibili
     Division                                                                                           been a mistake about t
                              "A. No, sir, that is something he brought to m y attention
Lord MacCowan, L_J.           this morning."                                                            "A. Yes. ... it really rr
                                                                                                        mistaken in thinking he
                              Inspector Layton was called, on p.252 and said:                           was severely brain dan

                              "Sir, in the summary you will see reference to                           Mr. Jones realistically a<
                              circumstances described by P.C. Fojut of the South                  the jury of any pulse was v
                              Yorkshire Police. He initially made an identification from          relies on. Mention has alre
                              clothing and felt that he at one stage had assisted to cany         seems that in September IS
                              Ian across the pitch."                                              a flow chart, which read in

                          At D:                                                                         "I saw a person who I
                                                                                                        assisted in carrying him
                                                                                                        he was alive at this st
                              "Sir, it is now apparent having spoken to Joe this
                              morning, his recollection is that no uniformed police                     carried him."
                              officers were present when Ian was carried across the
                              pitch.
                                                                                                       Last week the applicant
                              "Q. The evidence of P.C. Fojut was              based   on          made by P.C. Fojut dated 5
                              identification of clothing, as opposed to ...                       found at p.522 of the applic
                                                                                                  September 7, 1989 and it
                              "A. That is right, sir.                                             statement" that the applicant
                                                                                                  paragraph he says:
                              "Q. That is, of course, a relatively weak identification?

                              "A. That is right, sir."                                                  "1 am able to identify i
                                                                                                        Glover and from a pho
                                                                                                        as being the same male
                               At p.254 it is to be observed that the coroner recalled                  (by the Leppings Lan
                          Professor Usher to deal with the suggestion by Joseph of a                    assisted to carry off the
                          pulse being detected by a doctor at the gymnasium. He said,                   he was lying on the i
                          at the bottom of p.254:                                                       Liverpool fans two of u
                                                                                                        At this stage I' believei
                                                                                                        .main concern was to g
                              "I think the only way that could have happened would be        i          receive first aid treatme
                              if this lad had sustained severe brain damage but not quite    j          over, Glover was place<
                      G       got to the point where the respiratory and pulse centres       j          the group th a t had bet
                              faded out.                                                     f           assisted to carry Glover
                                                                                             \           Kop end o f the ground,
                                                                                             i
                              "Q. He did not say there was any respiratory effect. He        ,          stage as he was vomitin
                              said there was a faint pulse.                                  {■          to outside the gymnasiu
                                                                                             \           the ground and the hoan
                                                                                                         to feel for a pulse but c
                      H       'A . The two centres are close together. If that was the                   who stated she was a n
2ACE REPOSTS                      158            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPOSTS                                    477
                            VoL



                                        case then if he had been revived he would have been                     R. v. HJV1.
 to the doctor?                                                                                                C oroner for
                                        severely brain damaged.
                                                                                                            South Yorkshire,
                                                                                                               ' ex p a r te ' :
                                                                                                           Stringer and O thers
;d anything about the pulse
                                        "Q, The other possibility is, of course, there m ay have             Queen’s Bench
                                        been a mistake about the pulse?                                         Division •
ig he brought to m y attention
                                        "A. Yes. ... it really means that either the doctor was            Lord MacCowan, L-I
                                        m istaken in thinking he could feel a pulse or that this lad
d, on p.252 and said:                   was severely brain damaged and then went on to die."

 ou will see reference to              Mr. Jones realistically accepts that the evidence put before
 y P.C. Fojut of the South        the jury of any pulse was weak. It is another m atter that he
y made an identification from     relies on. M ention has already been made of P.C. Fojut. It
■ne stage had assisted to carry   seems that in September 1993, the Glover family learned of
                                  a flow chart, which read in respect of P.C. Fojut:

                                        "I saw a person who I now know to be Ian Glover. I
                                        assisted in carrying him to the gymnasium. I still thought
                                        he was alive at this stage as he was vomiting as we
 having spoken to Joe this
                                        carried him."
is that no uniformed police
i Ian was carried across the
                                       Last w eek the applicants were given a copy of a statement
\C . Fojut was      based   on    made by P.C. Fojut dated September 7, 1989. This is to be
 s opposed to ...                 found at p.522 of the'applicant’s bundle. It is a statement of
                                  September 7, 1989 and it begins: "Further to m y original
                                  statement" that the applicant had not seen. Then in the second
                                  paragraph he says:
latively weak identification?
                                        "I am able to identify in a photograph the deceased Ian
                                        G lover and from a photograph o f clothing shown to me
                                        as being the same male whom whilst I was on the pitch
ed that the coroner recalled            (by the Leppings Lane terraces) I went over to and
e suggestion by Joseph o f a            assisted to carry off the pitch. When I approached Glover
r at the gymnasium. He said,            he was lying on the grass surrounded by a group of
                                        Liverpool fans two of whom I believe were his brothers.
                                        At this stage I believed Glover was still alive and my
                                        main concern was to get him moved to enable him to
■uld have happened would be             receive first aid treatment. A hoarding board was brought
re brain damage but not quite           over, G lover was placed on this board and together with
espiratory and pulse centres            the group that had been originally surrounding him I
                                        assisted to carry Glover off the pitch and up to the Spion
                                        Kop end of the ground. I still thought he was alive at this
as any respiratory effect. He           stage as he was vomiting as we carried him. W e took him
                                        to outside the gymnasium by a sandpit and placed him on
                                        the ground and the hoarding board was taken away. I tried
                                        to feel for a pulse but couldn’t find one. Then a woman
                                                                                                       H
ose together. If that was the           who stated she was a nurse came over and checked him
                                        JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                   Vol.   158            JUSTICE OF
         478



                                o ver at my request to do so and I then moved away            However, in R. v. Southwt
    R. v. H.M.                                                                                 1 W.L.R. 1624, where a p
    Coroner for                 leaving the nurse whom I do not know with two men whu
 South Yorkshire,               I believe were Glover’s brothers with him."                   coroner refused to leave a
     ex parte                                                                                 because he thought such a
Stringer and Others                                                                           the Divisional Court quas
                                                                                              verdict of "lack of care" u.
  Queen’s Bench                  The problem that has faced the coroner's legal advisers,     caused by neglect of the c
     Division              we are told, and the reason for late delivery of statements to     of care" was not synonvrr
                           the applicants is that the statements are in the possession of     law duty of care but bore
Lord MacCowan, L J .       the investigating police force and have to be extracted from       are other authorities to tl
                           them. It is obviously unfortunate that this statement that we      necessary to refer to the
                           have seen was not put in evidence and Professor Usher asked        analysis by Mr. Coghlan
                           to comm ent upon it. I for my part would acquit the coroner        conveys the legal positior
                           o f blam e for this. As we have seen, he was scrupulous.           failure to provide care in t)
                           W henever a matter was brought to his attention suggesting that    shelter, etcetera, not with c
                           a victim might have survived the cut-off point, he investigated    in cases which are the ot:
                           it and in particular sought the reaction o f the relevant          such as starvation, hype
                           pathologist. He had done just that, as we saw, in respect of       provide medication."
                           the pulse. I have no doubt that he would have done the same             I conclude, therefore,
                           about the vomiting had the m atter been drawn to his attention.    been appropriate in this ca
                           I do not believe that Professor Usher would have been caused       Mr. Jones to concede this
                           to alter his whole opinion if given this information. A clue to    present case it may have b
                            his answ er may be afforded by the evidence which Dr. Slater      because there were no ci:
                            gave in respect of Kevin W illiams that if a person who had       time that the injuries causi:
                            died is moved, air or stomach contents m ay be expelled.          narrow down the applicat:
                                 This may, however, be an appropriate stage at which to       ‘lack of care’ the more yo
                            m ention that Mr. Jones asked me to record that he wishes to      allowed to give a narrat
                            reserve the right to argue in a higher court that the decision    primary and secondary cau
                            of the Divisional Court in R. v. Her M ajesty’s Coroner at        words is that the jury wen
                            Hammersmith, ex parte Peach [1980] Q.B. 211 that the denial       verdict, but that would not
                            by a coroner to a properly interested party of sight of the       documents vol.2, at p.642
                            statem ents of witnesses was not a breach of the rules of         this to the jury:
                            natural justice, was wrongly decided.
                                 As to Richard James and Peter Tootle, it is accepted that
                            the pathological evidence in each o f their cases was that they         "I will give you anoth
                            were dead before 3.15 pm. The way Mr. Jones puts it is to say           They are all basica
                            "In the first four cases we have now got evidence to suggest            variance. You could
                            that the pathological evidence may not have been correct,               result o f crush injurie
                            which raises doubt as to whether it may not also have been              if that is what you
                            wrong in the cases of Richard Jones and Peter Tootle." This             following overprowdi
                            is pure speculation and I do not find it persuasive.                    following the openin:
                                 That takes me on to the sixth ground which alleges that            else that relates to the
                            the coroner should have left the verdict of "lack of care" to           been found in relatior
                            the jury. Rule 42 of the C oroner’s Rules 1984 provides that:           ought to be included

                                "No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to appear        The following page at A:
                                to determine any question o f -

                                                                                                    "That is the way I wc
                               (a), criminal liability on the part of a named person, or
                       H                                                                            to you that in the fir
                               (b) civil liability."
                                 158            JUSTICE O F TH E PEACE REPORTS                                  479
CE REPORTS                Vol.


                                 However, in R. v. Southwark Coroner, ex parte Hicks [1987]                    R .v . ILM.
  and I then moved away                                                                                       Coroner for
ot know with two men whu          1 W.L.R. 1624, where a prisoner had died in custody and the
                                 coroner refused to lea ve a verdict o f "lack of care" to the jury        South Yorkshire,
lers with him."                                                                                                 ex parte • •
                                 because he thought such a verdict would offend against r.42,
                                                                                                          Stringer and Others
                                 the Divisional Court quashed the verdict. It was held that a
                                 verdict of "lack of care" was permissible where the death was              Queen’s Bench
  e coroner’s legal advisers,    caused by neglect o f the deceased’s condition and that "lack               ' Division
 i delivery of statements to     of care" was not synonymous with a breach of the common
its are ift the possession of    law duty of care but bore a more restricted meaning. There               Lord MacCowan, L J .
  have to be extracted from      are other authorities to the same effect but I do not find it
 ■.hat this statement that we    necessary to refer to them. In my judgment the following
 and Professor Usher asked       analysis by Mr. Coghlan of the verdict "lack of care" well
: would acquit the coroner       conveys the legal position, namely "it is concerned with the
 seen, he was scrupulous,        failure to provide care in the form of food, medicine, clothing,
 lis attention suggesting that   shelter, etcetera, not with carelessness, and is appropriate only
 jt-off point, he invesi.gated   in cases which are the other side o f the coin of self-neglect
   reaction of the relevant      such as starvation, hypothermia and persistent failure to
:, as we s a w , in respect of   provide medication."
 would have done the same             I conclude, therefore, that such a verdict would not have
)een drawn to his attention,     been appropriate in this case. Indeed, I understood, in the end,
er would have been caused        Mr. Jones to concede this, for I noted him as saying: "In the
 this information. A clue to     present case it may have been right not to leave ‘lack of care’
: evidence which Dr. Slater      because there were no circumstances of dependency at the
,s that if a person who had      time that the injuries causing death occurred, but the more you
ntents may be expelled,          narrow down the application of the acknowledged verdict of
 propriate stage at which to     ‘lack of care’ the more you promote the importance of being
 to record that he wishes to     allowed to give a narrative verdict, ie, one incorporating
:her court that the decision     primary and secondary causes." The impression given by those
 Her M ajesty's Coroner at       words is that the jury were not allowed to give any narrative
80] Q.B. 211 that the denial     verdict, but that would not in fact be accurate. In the coroner’s
ested party of sight of the      documents vol.2, at p.642, the coroner is to be found saying
   a breach of the rules of      this to the jury:
 ded.
:r Tootle, it is accepted that
 of their cases was that they          "I will give you another example of what you might say.
ly Mr. Jones puts it is to say         They are all basically the same but there is slight
ow got evidence to suggest             variance. You could say, ‘Died on April 15, 1989, as a
lay not have been correct,             result of crush injuries sustained     and you could add,
  it may not also have been            if that is what you thought the evidence said,
les and Peter Tootle." This            following overcrowding and/or crowd movement and/or
find it persuasive,                    following the opening of concertina gates,’ or anything
i ground which alleges that
                                       else that relates to the circumstances which you feel have
verdict of "lack of care" to           been found in relation to that death and which you think
3 Rules 1984 provides that;            ought to be included."

;n such a way as to appear       The following page at A:


                                       "That is the way I would tackle it but I do want to stress
>art of a named person, or                                                                            H
                                       to you that in the final analysis it is your decision."
                                      JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                    Vol.   158            JUSTICE OF T1
        480


                                                                                                   by rules made by statut
     R. v. H.M.           In passing I draw attention to the fact that at F on that page           prescribe.
    C oroner for          he went on to say:
 South Yorkshire,
      ex parte                                                                                     (6) At a coroner’s inqiu
Stringer and Others           "In this particular instance I have come to the conclusion           came by his death by mi
                              that there are three possible conclusions or verdicts which          the purpose of the pr
  Q ueen’s Bench                                                                                   finding of any person g
      Division                you m ight be able to return. These are unlawfully killed,
                              accident/misadventure - I will explain this to you in a              infanticide; and accord
Lord MacCowan, L J            moment - and, thirdly, an open verdict."                             in no case charge a pe:


                               The answer is, therefore, that he did give the jury the             I look next at the Coront
                          opportunity to bring in a narrative verdict but they chose not
                          to do so. Mr. Jones makes two further points on that, however.
                          He says, first, that what the coroner was suggesting was not             "(1) The proceedings a:
                          a true narrative verdict. He gave us some exam ples of what              directed solely to asc
                          he says would have been. I mention two of these. First,                  namely -
                          "Accidental death caused by the failure of the police to divert
                          the supporters away from the tunnel to other parts o f the
                          spectators" accommodation", to which he said might have been             (a) who the deceased v
                          added a second, for example, "A contributory cause o f death             (b) how, when and w'
                          was the failure to summons the ambulance service promptly".              death."
                               His second criticism was that the coroner was suggesting
                          to the jury the wrong box for the inclusion of the narrative
                          verdict. This conveniently takes me to the last ground which            Form 22 is the one presc
                                                                                             and the jury in these inques
                          is No.5, which reads:
                                                                                             one o f the inquisitions. Wit
                              "The coroner wrongly limited the inquiry into how the          the deceased, they were all
                              deceased m et their deaths so as to exclude inquiry into       said: "The following matters
                              whether lives could have been saved by calling the             o f deceased" and that was
                              emergency services sooner and providing better                 question who the deceased
                              emergency care for the injured thereafter.                     disease causing death" and
                                                                                             asphy^'a". Section 3 reads
                                                                                             or in which injury was sus
                          It is necessary to have regard to the terms of two subsections     "Died on April 15, 1989 as a
                          o f s . l l o f the Coroners Act 1988. Subsection (5) reads:       at Hillsborough Football Gr
                                                                                             coroner invited the jury, if
                                                                                             verdict. Mr. Jones says that
                              "An inquisition -                                              under s.4 which reads "Con
                                   (a) shall be in writing under the hand o f the coroner    the death". Here tha jury ans-
                              and, in the case o f an inquest held with a jury, under the    and place" in s.3 dealt with t
                              hands o f the jurors who concur in the verdict.                deceased came by his death,
                                   (b) shall set out, so far as such particulars have been   for the circumstances in whi(
                              proved -                                                       it there be asking for if not a
                                                                                             deceased came by his death'
                                                                                             Mr. Jones’s submission that
                                   (i) who the deceased was; and                             verdict was under s.4. T h a t:
                                   (ii) how, when and where the deceased cam e by his        in m y judgm ent, the jury wei
                                         death; and                                          did "Accidental death", havi
                                                                                             as we have seen, that threi
                                                                                             unlawful killing, accidental
                      H            (c) shall be in such form as the Lord Chancellor may
                                        158            JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS
VCE REPORTS                 Vol.


                                              by rules made by statutory instrument from time to time                 R. v. Hjvf.
: fact that at F on that page
                                              prescribe.                                                             Coroner for
                                                                                                                  South Yorkshire,
                                                                                                                       ex parte '
                                              (6) At a coroner’s inquest into the death of a person who        ? Stringer and Others
     come to the conclusion
la v e                                        came by his death by murder, manslaughter or infanticide,
Dnclusions or verdicts which                  the purpose o f the proceedings shall not include the               Queen’* Bench
These are unlawfully killed,                  finding of any person guilty of murder, manslaughter or                Division'
ill explain this to you in a                  infanticide; and accordingly a coroner’s inquisition shall
jen verdict."                                 in no case charge a person with any of those offences."          Lord MacCowan, L J


 at he did give the jury the                  I look next at the Coroners Rules 1984, r.36, which reads:
e verdict but they chose not
ther points on that, however,
 ner was suggesting was not                   "(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be
  us some exam ples o f what                  directed solely to ascertaining the following matter,
ention tw o o f these. First,                 namely -
railure o f the police to divert
unnel to other parts of the
hich he said might have been                (a) who the deceased was;
 contributory cause of death       ^       (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
nbulance service promptly",        S       death."
t the coroner was suggesting
 e inclusion o f the narrative
me to the last ground which        f          Form 22 is the one prescribed. It was used by the coroner
                                   |   and the jury in these inquests. We have been taken through
                                   ■   one of the inquisitions. With the exception of the names of
id the inquiry into how the        t   the deceased, they were all identical. In the inquisition it is
d as to exclude inquiry into       ■   said: "The following matters are found ..." Then comes "Name
been saved by calling the          £   of deceased" and that was completed. That answered the
er and providing better            ?   question who the deceased was. Next came s.2, ''Injury or
red thereafter."                   j   disease causing death" and the answer given was "Crush
                                        asphyxia”. Section 3 reads "Time, place and circumstances at
                                   i   or in which injury was sustained". The answer given was
he terms of tw o subsections       s   "Died on April 15, 1989 as a result of crush injuries sustained
3. Subsection (5) reads:           ’   at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield." Here it was the
                                        coroner invited the jury, if they chose, to add a narrative
                                   ;   verdict. Mr. Jones says that was wrong. It should have come
                                   |   under s.4 which reads "Conclusion of the jury/coroner as to
ider the hand o f the coroner           the death". Here the jury answered "Accidental death". "Time
t held with a jury, under the      I   and place" in s.3 dealt with the questions when and where the
icur in the verdict,               i   deceased came by his death, but the form also asked under s.3
s such particulars have been       j   for the circumstances in wlijch injury was sustained. What can
                                        it there be asking for if not an answer to the question how the
                                        deceased came by his death? I am unable, therefore, to accept
                                        Mr. Jones’s submission that the right place for any narrative
vas; and                                verdict was under s.4. That section is for the conclusion and,
re the deceased came by his             in my judgment, the jury were entitled to answerthere as they                                  *
                                        did "Accidental death", having been directed by the coroner,
                                        as we have seen, that three verdicts were open to them -
                                        unlawful killing, accidental death and an open verdict.            H
s as the Lord Chancellor may
                                       JUSTICE O F TH E PEACE REPORTS                     Vol.   158          JUSTICE o f t h :
        482



     R. v. H.M.                I would hold that the inquisition was correctly completed         to the causes and probable tii
    Coroner for           and the coroner’s direction to the jury as to the manner in            at the preliminary inquests, h
 South Yorkshire,         which they should approach its completion was impeccable.              evidence from the main inque
      ex parte            The proceedings were solely directed to ascertaining who the           to form a different conclusior
Stringer and Others       deceased was and how, when and where he came by his death,             to the extent that he could the
                          as they were required to be under the statute. Accordingly, I          evidence that might have p
  Queen’s Bench                                                                                  different conclusions than tlx
     Division             have discovered no good reason for ordering a new inquest
                          or for merely quashing the existing verdicts.                          inquests, but also recalled sc
Lord MacCowan, L J                                                                               or twice, in order to explore c
                                    If I had found such reason and had to exercise my            had become known since
                                                                                                 inquests. This was to enable
                          discretion the following matters would have weighed with me.
                                                                                                 presence of the jury altemat;
                          What would be the purpose o f fresh inquests? To get a verdict
                                                                                                 pathologists could have for
                          criticizing police? Such criticism has already been firmly
                                                                                                 conclusions. Having regard t
                          levelled by the Taylor Report. The police have admitted fault
                                                                                                 their evidence at the prelimin
                          and paid compensation. To get a verdict criticizing the
                                                                                                 recalled at the main inqu est,;
                          emergency services? I see no evidence to justify such
                                                                                                 evidence is that there was nc
                          criticism, and in any event it would be irrelevant if all six
                          were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination              of life beyond a period o
                                                                                                 occurrence of the injury whii
                          of the last minutes of their lives? I doubt that anything more
                          would be learned, but the process would be a very harrowing            but with the possible except
                                                                                                 Glover. But in his case, and
                          one involving large numbers of witnesses and lasting if not
                                                                                                 clear evidence that bodily fu:
                          for 96 days, for not far short. Moreover, irrespective of whose
                                                                                                 semblance of life when the
                          fault, if anyone's it is, the fact is that four and a half years
                                                                                                 renders the existence of life
                          have already passed since the tragedy occurred. As to the
                          a l t e r n a t i v e suggestion of a mere quashing o f the existing
                                                                                                      On the evidence to whic
                          verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would regard that as        on the hearing of this applica
                          absolutely valueless.                                                  there is nothing to show that
                                                                                                 or unreasonableness in the w:
                               Mr. Jones says that the families are pursuing this matter         the m anner in which the con
                          because they have a deep instinct to know the circumstances            so far from there being ar
                          in which their relatives died. I am perfectly prepared to accept       decision to call before him
                          that that is their motive and I respect it, but I hope they, for       of those facts", that is to say
                          their part, can understand that I have to take an objective view       it expedient to examine, the:
                          and that I have to consider the interests of all concerned                  No one having even
                          including those of all the witnesses who would have to come            circumstances of these deat
                          along five years later and try to cast their minds back to events      moved. It is of importance fo:
                          that they must have been trying to forget. Taking that objective       which can be provided in tlii
                          view, and considering the interests of all concerned, I would          by the law which we have to
                          in my discretion conclude that this was not a case in which            cases of procedural frregular
                          it will be right to order fresh inquests.                              decision. I agree with my Lor
                               For all these reasons I would dismiss the application.
                                                                                                 to raise any cogent argument
                                                                                                 three grounds and I, too, wc

     Turner, J.               M r. Ju stice T u r n e r : I agree and add a few words of my
                          own out of deference to the careful arguments to which we
                          have listened and out of respect to the concerns of the                Application dismissed.
                          applicants.                                                            No application for costs.

                              The essential complaint m ade against the coroner is that
                      H   having introduced evidence from the various pathologists as            Solicitors: Malcolm Gregg d




                                                                   /
                                                     JU STICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                      4 8 3
VCE REPORTS                Vol.



                                       to the causes and probable timescales of these several deaths                  R. v. ILM.
 on was correctly completed                                                                                          Coroner for •
;e jury as to the manner in            at the preliminary inquests, he proceeded to limit or exclude              South Y o rk sh ire ,...
ompletion was impeccable.              evidence from the main inquest which might have led the jury                    ex parte
:ted to ascertaining who the           to form a different conclusion. As my Lord has demonstrated,              Stringer and O thers
where he came by his death,            to the extent that he could the coroner not merely led further
r the statute. Accordingly, I          evidence that might have persuaded pathologists to form                     Queen’s Bench
 for ordering a new inquest            different conclusions than those expressed at the preliminary                  Division
 ng verdicts.                          inquests, but also recalled some of pathologists, either once
                                       or twice, in order to explore or further explore matters which                 T urner, J.

-i and had to exercise my              had becom e known since the time of those preliminary
'ould have weighed with me.            inquests. This was to enable the coroner to explore in the
sh inquests? To get a verdict          presence o f the jury alternative factual bases upon which the
                                       pathologists could have formed and then expressed their
m has already been firmly
,e police have admitted fault          conclusions. Having regard to all the pathologists who gave
                                       their evidence at the preliminary inquests and those who were • C
 t a verdict criticizing the
   evidence to justify such            recalled at the main inquest, the overwhelming burden of that
ould be irrelevant if all six          evidence is that there was no possibility of the prolongation
  obtain further examination           of life beyond a period of about 10 minutes from the
  I doubt that anything more           occurrence o f the injury which led to the asphyxia. I say this
; would be a very harrowing            but with the possible exception in mind in the case o f Mr.
witnesses and lasting if not           Glover. But in his case, and indeed in the others, there was
                                       clear evidence that bodily functions may continue and give a i
eover, irrespective of whose
                                       semblance of life when the prior occurrence of brain death
s that four and a half years
ragedy occurred. As to the             renders the existence of life unlikely, if not impossible.
 e quashing of the existing                On the evidence to which our attention has been drawn
jlace, I would regard that as         on the hearing of this application I, for my part, conclude that
                                      there is nothing to show that there was any lack o f fairness,
                                      or unreasonableness in the well-known Wednesbury sense, in             ^
lies are pursuing this matter         the m anner in which the coroner conducted the inquest; and
: to know the circumstances           so far from there being any sustainable criticism of his
 perfectly prepared to accept         decision to call before him "such persons having knowledge
;pect it, but I hope they, for        of those facts", that is to say of death, whom he considered
i v e to take an objective view       it expedient to examine, there was no error.
   interests of all concerned               No one having even a broad knowledge o f the
es who would have to come         i   circumstances of these deaths could be other than deeply           I
 st their minds back to events    i   moved. It is of importance for all to understand that the relief
 forget. Taking that objective    1   which can be provided in this court is tightly circumscribed
;ts of all concerned, I would     !   by the law which we have to apply. We can only interfere in
 lis was not a case in which      i   cases of procedural irregularity, legal error or unreasonable
quests.
                                  I   decision. I agree with my Lord that the applicants have failed
 d dismiss the application.
                                  ]   to raise any cogent argument to support relief on any of those
                                  |    three grounds and I, too, would dismiss this application.         C

 and add a few words o f my
:ful arguments to which we
-ct to the concerns of the             Application dismissed.
                                       No application for costs.

e against the coroner is that
1the various pathologists as           Solicitors: Malcolm Gregg & Co., Liverpool.
            48 4                                          JUSTICE OF THE PEACE REPORTS                                  Vol.   158             JUSTICE OF T I



      R. v. H.M.                    A    c lty Solicitors, Sheffield City Council.
 South^ Y o rk sh ire ,                  D itt L up t0 n B room head’ S h e ff ie ld ,
         ex p a r t e                   _
S tr in g e r a n d O th e rs            R e p o r t e d b y : P au l A. K n a p m a n , M .B ., B S ., D M J ., B arrister.

   Q u e e n ’s Bench
        Division                                                                                                                               Q U E E N 'S BE
                                    B
       T u r n e r , J.                                                                                                                                  Januar;

                                                                                                                                                    (Henry, L„

                                                                                                                                           R yan and Frer
                                                                                                                                                 Public P

                                                                                                                               Theft and handling - alterna:
                                                                                                                               o f handling justified when dej

                                                                                                                                   The appellants were jointly c
                                                                                                                               a dinghy which was found in
                                                                                                                               been stolen. The justices acquitt
                                D                                                                                              of handling. On appeal it was s
                                                                                                                               convicting them o f handling the
                                                                                                                               a fact that they were not the on
                                                                                                                               have done since the evidence v
                                                                                                                               handling. It was also submitted t
                                                                                                                               themselves to withdraw the cha
                                                                                                                               more consistent with theft.

                                E                                                                                                  Held (dismissing th e a p p e.
                                                                                                                               charges of theft and handling sti
                                                                                                                               the prosecution to prove that it
                                                                                                                               could be a conviction of handli:
                                                                                                                                   2. AHhough there were c.
                                                                                                                               withdraw a charge o f handling
                                                                                                                               charged, this was not such a case
                                                                                                                               was sufficient evidence to sup
                                F                                                                                              charge, it was for the justices tc
                                                                                                                               evidence and the inferences the
                                                                                                                               evidence as a whole, if either c!

                                                                                                                                    A ppeal: by A n d r e v Ryan
                                                                                                                               stated against their conviction by
                                                                                                                               goods.

                                G                                                                                              P. Noble , for the appellants.
                                                                                                                               J. Turner, for the respondent.

                                                                                                                                                          JUDC

                                                                                                                                   L o rd Ju stic e H e n r y : Th
                                                                                                                               This is an appeal by way of ca
                                                                                                                               by the Brighton justices m a d ’
                                H
                                                                                                                               are these. Mr. Verrell owned




                                                                                        /
                                                        Private Prosecutions




CHAPTER 7                    PRIVATE PROSECUTIONS



LIST OF CONTENTS


PRINCIPLE                                                               7.1


GUIDANCE


           G eneral                                                     7.5

           W here the private prosecutor asks the CPS                   7.8
           to take over

           W here the defendant asks the CPS to take                  7.11
           over

           W here a justices’ clerk refers to the                     7.14
           CPS

           W here the CPS learns of the private                       7.15
           prosecution in ano ther way

           A fter com m ittal                                         7.18

           A ppeals against conviction                                7.19

           A ppeals by the prosecutor                                 7.22

           Police officers                                            7.23

           R e-institution of proceedings                             7.26

           D PP consent                                               7.28

           Disclosure issues                                          7.29

           Rules about CPS disclosure of m aterial to                 7.30
           th ird parties

           Rules abo ut prosecutor’s duty to disclose                 7.35
           unused m aterial

           M isconduct by the private prosecutor                      7.39




Prosecution Manual                                                 14.03.97
Private Prosecutions




14.03.97               Prosecution Manual
                     Private Prosecutions




PROCEDURE                           7.42




Prosecution Manual               14.03.97
Private Prosecutions




14.03.97               Prosecution Manual
                                                                               Private Prosecutions




7           PRIVATE PROSECUTIONS


PRINCIPLE

1 .1       For the purposes o f this Chapter, a private prosecution is a prosecution started by
           a private individual who is not acting on behalf o f the police or any other
           prosecuting authority or body which conducts prosecutions.

7.2        Prosecutions by other agencies are covered in the Chapter entitled "Relations with
           other Prosecuting Agencies".

7.3        The right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by section 6(1) o f the
           Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985. There are, however, some controls:

           •         the DPP has a power under section 6(2) of the Prosecution o f Offences
                      Act 1985 to take over a private prosecution;

           •         in some cases the private prosecutor must seek the consent o f the Attorney
                      General or o f the DPP before the commencement o f proceedings.

7.4        The decision to take over proceedings should be made by the BCP.


GUIDANCE

           G eneral

7.5       The Service should take over a private prosecution only when there is a particular
          need for it to do so on behalf o f the public. A duty to take over the prosecution
          will arise only in accordance with the principles set out in this Chapter. If there
          is no need for the Service to be involved, the private prosecutor should be allowed
          to carry on with the case.

7.6       Where the Service takes over a private prosecution, the case must be reviewed in
          accordance with the principles set out in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. If the
          case does not pass the evidential and public interest tests, it will be stopped. If
          it passes both tests, the prosecution will proceed.

7.7       The private prosecutor is not under a duty to inform the Service that a private
          prosecution has been commenced. You may, therefore, find out about a private
          prosecution in one o f four ways:

           W here the private prosecutor (or a representative o f the private prosecutor)
           asks the CPS to take over the prosecution.

7.8       In these circumstances, the private prosecutor should be asked for the case papers
           which should then be examined so that you may decide whether the case is one




Prosecution Manual                                                                        14.03.97
Private Prosecutions




            that meets the evidential sufficiency and public interest tests set out in the Code
            for Crown Prosecutors.

7.9         If the case satisfies the requirements o f paragraph 7.8 above, you should take over
            and continue with the prosecution.

7.10        If it is clear from the papers that the requirements o f paragraph 7.8 are not
            satisfied, you should take over and discontinue the prosecution if one (or more)
            o f the following circumstances applies:

            •          T here is clearly no case to answ er. A private prosecution commenced
                       in these circumstances would be unfounded, and would, therefore, be an
                       abuse o f the right to bring a prosecution.

            •          The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
                       those factors tending in favour. Examples include:

                       o     malicious prosecutions (including malicious or vexatious
                             prosecutions within the meaning of Section 24 o f the 1985 Act);

                       o     a minor offence where the defendant is too ill to stand trial and
                              will not get better for a long time;

                       o     a serious offence where the defendant is terminally ill;

                       o     a minor offence committed a long time before;

                       o     an offence for which the defendant should clearly have been
                              cautioned.

            •          T he prosecution is clearly likely to dam age the interests of justice.
                       Examples include:

                       °     cases where the prosecution interferes with the investigation of
                              another criminal offence;

                       o     cases where the prosecution interferes with the prosecution of
                              another criminal charge;

                       °     cases where the prosecution involves the possible disclosure of
                              highly sensitive material;

                       °     cases where the CPS is aware o f material which should be
                              disclosed to the defendant and where the CPS cannot ensure that
                              the material is disclosed (see paragraph 7.37 below);




14.0 3.97                                                                      Prosecution Manual
                                                                               Private Prosecutions




                     o       cases where the prosecuting authorities (including the police, the
                             CPS or any other public prosecutor) had promised the defendant
                             that he would not be prosecuted at all (a promise o f an immunity
                             from prosecution): Turner -v- DPP (1979) 68 Cr App R 70. This
                             does not include cases where the prosecuting authorities had merely
                             informed the defendant that they would not be bringing or
                             continuing proceedings;

                     o       cases where the defendant has already been cautioned for the
                             offence, and the giving o f the caution was in accordance with
                             Home Office cautioning guidelines.


           Where the defendant (or a representative of the defendant) asks the CPS to
           take over the proceedings

7.11       In these circumstances, the defendant should be asked to supply copies o f the case
           papers; in practice, the defendant’s request for CPS action will be accompanied
           by the papers. There may be a need for you to make enquiries o f the court, the
           police or the private prosecutor for more information.

7.12      You should take over and continue with the prosecution if the papers clearly show
          that:

           •         the case is o f a type normally taken over by the Service following a police
                      investigation; and

           •         there is a realistic prospect o f conviction; and

           •         it would otherwise be in the public interest to do so; and

           •         there is a particular need to take over the prosecution on behalf o f the
                     public.

7.13      If the papers clearly show that the case falls within one (or more) of the
           categories in paragraph 7.10, you should take over and discontinue the
           prosecution.

           Where a justices’ clerk refers a private prosecution to the CPS under section
           7(4) of the 1985 Act, because the prosecution has been withdrawn or unduly
           delayed and there appears to be no good reason for the withdrawal or the
           delay

7.14      In these circumstances, you will always consider whether or not to reinstitute or
           take over the prosecution, as appropriate. Section 7(4) o f the 1985 Act imposes
           a duty on the justices’ clerk to refer a case to the CPS, in two situations:

           •         Where the private prosecutor withdraws the prosecution and there is some
                     ground for suspecting that there is no satisfactory reason for the



Prosecution Manual                                                                        14.03.97
Private Prosecutions




                       withdrawal. You will not start a new prosecution if:

                       o       there is no realistic prospect of conviction; or

                       o      the prosecution is clearly not in the public interest; or

                        o     the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

                       You will start a new prosecution if:

                        o     there is a realistic prospect o f conviction; and

                       o      it would otherwise be in the public interest to prosecute; and

                       o      it is right, in accordance with the Attorney General’s undertaking
                               on the re-institution of proceedings, to start the prosecution again
                               (see paragraphs 7.26 and 7.27 below).

            •          Where the private prosecutor has not proceeded with the case within a
                       reasonable time and there is some ground for suspecting that there is no
                       satisfactory reason for the delay.
                       You will take over and continue with the prosecution if:

                       o      there is a realistic prospect of conviction; and

                       o      it would otherwise be in the public interest to proceed; or

                       o      it seems likely that the private prosecutor is unable or unwilling to
                               carry on with the case (at all or within a reasonable time), and it
                               is not in the interests o f justice to allow the case to go by default.


            W here the CPS learns of the private prosecution in a n o th er way (eg, a press
            re p o rt o r a re p o rt fro m a judge).

7.15        Under these circumstances you should make a request to be provided with a copy
            o f the papers if, on the available information, there may be a need for the Service
            to take over the prosecution on behalf of the public.

7.16        You should take over and continue with the prosecution if the papers clearly show
            that:

            •          the case is o f a type normally taken over by the Service following a police
                        investigation; and

            •          there is a realistic prospect of conviction; and

            •          it would otherwise be in the public interest to do so.




14.03.97                                                                           Prosecution Manual
                                                                                    Private Prosecutions




7.17             If the papers clearly show that the case falls within one (or more) of the
                 categories in paragraph 7.10, you should take over and discontinue the
                 prosecution. Where you decide not to take over a case after a request to do so
                 by a judge or a magistrate, you should fully explain the reason for your decision.
                 Sometimes this can be done by letter; on other occasions,, you may have to
                 instruct counsel to appear.


                 A fter committal

7.18             The fact that a case has been committed for trial indicates an acceptance by the
                 court that the prosecution has established a prima facie case. Committal also
                 raises a public expectation that the case will be pursued. In such circumstances,
                 you should take over and continue with the prosecution if requested to do so by
                 the private prosecutor, unless it is clear that there is no realistic prospect of
                 conviction or public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
                 those factors tending in favour (see the second bullet point to paragraph 7.10
                 above).     You should always consider the evidence very carefully before
                 concluding that there is not a realistic prospect of conviction. A decision by
                 magistrates to commit for trial may be a significant indicator as to the prospects
                 of a conviction and due weight should, therefore, be given to the fact of
                 committal. If a case is difficult or complex, the public interest may require you
                 to take over and continue with the prosecution regardless of the wishes of the
                 private prosecutor. Where a case has been taken over after committal (with a
                  view to the case proceeding) and either the evidence or the public interest factors
                  subsequently change in such a degree as to make it clear that one or other of the
                  Code tests is no longer met, the case should be terminated.


                  Appeals against conviction

7.19               The CPS will normally take over proceedings in these circumstances since it is
                   generally in the public interest that the integrity of a conviction is maintained.

 7.20              The CPS will always take over and concede an appeal against conviction if:

                   •          There is clearly no case to answer. Since there has been a conviction,
                               there will be few - if any - cases in this category. Where, however, the
                               conviction is obviously unsafe, you should offer the appellate court
                               whatever assistance can be given without resisting the appeal.

                    •         The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.
                               This ground will often not be relevant by the time a case reaches appeal
                               stage, since the damage will already have been done at trial stage. It
                               might be appropriate on occasions, however: for example, where there is
                               an appeal against conviction on the ground that the prosecution have
                               wrongly failed to disclose sensitive unused material.




                                                                                                  18 . 0 7 .9 7
  P ro se c u tio n M a n u a l
Private Prosecutions




7.21               The CPS will not take over an appeal against conviction where it appears that the
                   prosecution fell far below the public interest test in the Code for Crown
                   Prosecutors. To do so would mean that the CPS was seeking to uphold a
                   conviction that should not have been obtained. You could not concede the appeal
                   on the ground that a prosecution had not been needed in the public interest, since
                   the question of the public interest is not one that the appellate court can consider.


                   Appeals by the prosecutor

 7.22              If there is an appeal by the prosecutor and the CPS is asked to take over the
                   appeal, you should do so if an important point of law is involved, but not
                   otherwise.


                   Police officers

 7.23               Where a private prosecution is commenced by a police officer who is the victim,
                    the principles set out in this chapter will apply.

 7.24               If a police officer, not being the victim, commences a private prosecution in order
                    to challenge a police or a CPS decision, the CPS will normally take over the
                    prosecution since this kind of action is likely to damage the interests of justice.
                    The case will be discontinued if on review it does not meet the Code tests.

 7.25               You must ensure that any decision is taken in the full knowledge of all that passed
                    between the police and the defendant at the time when the police were originally
                    investigating the alleged offence. You will want to know, for example, whether
                    the police indicated to the defendant that there would be no prosecution.

                    R e -in s titu tio n o f proceedings

  7.26               CPS policy about when to re-institute proceedings is summarised at paragraph 10
                     of the Code for Crown Prosecutors. The summary is based on an undertaking
                     given by the Attorney General to the House of Commons on 29 March 1993. The
                     undertaking does not apply to private prosecutors, who are therefore generally
                     free to start a private prosecution after a decision by the police or the CPS not to
                     prosecute or to stop a prosecution.

  7.27               The CPS will not, therefore, take over a private prosecution simply because it
                     was started after the police had decided not to prosecute, or the CPS had stopped
                     its prosecution. In three kinds of case, however, the CPS will take over a private
                     prosecution and will then apply the re-institution guidelines (as well as the Code
                     tests) to decide whether or not to continue the prosecution:

                     •       where a decision has been taken by the CPS to discontinue or not proceed
                             with a prosecution and a subsequent review of the case papers (with or
                             without fresh evidence) leads to the conclusion that the evidence does
                             afford a realistic prospect of conviction;



   18 . 0 7 .9 7
                                                                                        Prosecution Manual
                                                                          Private Prosecutions




                  cases where the defendant was cautioned for the offence, but the caution
                  was wrongly given in that the criteria for a caution had not been met or
                  in that the decision to caution was one that no reasonable person could
                  have taken;

                  cases where the defendant was cautioned for the offence and the caution
                  was given on the basis of false information about the offence or the
                  defendant provided or procured by the defendant.


          DPP consent cases

7.28       For some offences, the private prosecutor needs the consent of the DPP to the
           prosecution. If the proposed prosecution passes both the Code tests, the CPS will
           then take over the prosecution. If the proposed prosecution fails either test,
           consent to prosecute will not be given.


           Disclosure issues

7.29       This part of this Chapter explains how the rules on disclosure apply in connection
           with private prosecutions. Two different rules about disclosure are involved:

           •       rules about CPS disclosure of material to third parties; and

           •       rules about the duty of a prosecutor to disclose unused material.


           Rules about CPS disclosure of material to third parties

7.30        A private prosecutor, or an intending private prosecutor, or a defendant in a
            private prosecution, will sometimes ask you to disclose documents or information.
            The rules about CPS disclosure of material to third parties direct the way the CPS
            deals with this kind of request. This section of this Chapter summarises the
            position.

 7.31       The right to bring a private prosecution does not confer on an intending private
            prosecutor a right to obtain documents from the CPS: R -v- DPP, ex parte Hallas
            (1988) 87 Cr App 340. Nor would a defendant have a right to obtain documents
            from the CPS. Once there has been a committal, the Crown Court may grant the
            private prosecutor a witness summons to secure the production of relevant
            material from the police in order that the private prosecutor should be able to
            comply with his obligation of disclosure to the defence: R -v- Gregory Pawsey
             [1989] Crim LR 152. There is no reason in principle why such a summons
             should not be granted after committal or transfer in respect of material he    y
             the CPS; and no reason why a magistrates’ court should not grant a witness order
             to secure the production of material relevant to a summary trial.




                                                                                         18 . 0 7 .9 7
  Prosecution Manual
Private Prosecutions




7.32                The decision whether to give voluntary disclosure of documents or information
                    held by the CPS (eg, the names and addresses of witnesses) will be governed by
                    the principles set out in Policy Circular No. 25 of 1992; in addition, prosecutors
                    may need to consult Volume 1, Chapter 14 (CPS Staff as Witnesses) of this
                    Manual which contains advice about making witness statements and providing
                    information about the reasons for decisions. The general rule is that the CPS
                    should give disclosure whenever it is in the interests of justice for it to do so.

7.33                Any voluntary disclosure should be even-handed between the parties. Therefore,
                    if you give voluntary disclosure to the private prosecutor at his or her request,
                    you should copy the same documents or information to the defendant; and vice
                    versa.

 7.34               Where the CPS does not possess either originals or copies of the witness
                    statements or other documents requested, you should refer the enquirer to the
                    person or body who does or who might possess what is sought (usually, this will
                    be the police). That will be the end of CPS involvement. You must not, for
                    example, mediate with the police on behalf of an enquirer, and have no power to
                    direct the police as to what the police should do. That does not, of course,
                    prevent you from advising the police on a point of disclosure if asked to do so.


                     Rules about a prosecutor’s duty to disclose unused material

  7.35               If the CPS takes over a private prosecution, you have the usual prosecutor s duty
                     to disclose unused material to the defence. Where the CPS has not taken over a
                     private prosecution, the private prosecutor is under that duty.

  7.36               Difficulties for the CPS will arise where the CPS has not taken over a private
                     prosecution, but is aware of the private prosecution, and is aware that material
                     evidence or information exists but the private prosecutor does not possess it. The
                     CPS may not be able to disclose this information - either because the CPS is not
                     in possession of it, or because the rules of public interest immunity or the
                     guidelines in Chapter 15 of Volume 1 prevent disclosure. If the CPS is, or can
                     be, in possession of the material you must do one of two things.

                      •      notify the private prosecutor and the defendant of the existence of the
                              material, and supply it on request if it is right for you to do so (see
                              paragraphs 7.30 to 7.34 above); or

                      •      if the material is too sensitive for the first course of action to be
                               appropriate, the CPS must take over the private prosecution.

   7.37               In any case in which you are aware of unused material which has not been
                      disclosed to the defendant, and which you cannot ensure is disclosed, and which
                      would tend to exonerate the defendant or materially assist in his defence, the CPS
                      must take over the private prosecution.




                                                                                       P ro se c u tio n M a n u a l
    18 . 0 7 .9 7
                                                                            Private Prosecutions




7.38      When the CPS takes over a private prosecution because of difficulties over
          disclosure of material to the defendant, the CPS reviews the case in accordance
          with the Code tests and in the light of the disclosure problem: An application to
          the court may resolve the disclosure issue.


          Misconduct by the private prosecutor

7.39      On occasions when you examine case papers in order to decide whether or not to
          take over the prosecution, and decide to allow the private prosecution to continue,
          you may come across misconduct by the private prosecutor. An example would
          be a failure by the private prosecutor to disclose relevant evidence to the
          defendant, or a failure by the private prosecutor to disclose relevant unused
          material in his possession to the defendant. In these cases you must advise the
          private prosecutor of his or her disclosure obligation. If you cannot then satisfy
          yourself that the private prosecutor has made proper disclosure (the CPS should
          ask the prosecutor to provide details of items disclosed), you must inform the
          defendant of the failure. Since the private prosecutor has the unused material, in
          his possession, the defendant should be able to obtain disclosure through the
          court. The CPS will not therefore need to take over proceedings in accordance
          with paragraph 7.37 above.

7.40      In general, the CPS will not take over a private prosecution because of
           misconduct by or alleged misconduct by the private prosecutor. It is not the role
           of the CPS to discipline private prosecutors; it is for the courts to control private
           prosecutors. Where a court or a defendant asks the CPS to take over because of
           misconduct by the private prosecutor, you will examine the case to see whether
           it falls into one of the categories set out in paragraph 7.10 and take the case over
           only if it does.

7.41      There may be occasions when it will be appropriate for you to copy to one party
           or to the court correspondence that the CPS has had with the other party, so that
           all parties are aware of the position.

PROCEDURE


 7.42      If it appears that the case might be one that the Service should take over, ask the
            private prosecutor to pass evidence and documents to you so that you can decide
            whether to take over the prosecution; this also includes asking the police for any
            evidence or information they have. In practice it is unlikely that private
            prosecutors will refuse to hand over papers. If this does happen, it seems that
            you will not be able to compel the private prosecutor to do so unless the Service
            takes over the private prosecution. The law is summarised in paragraph 7.31
            (with the difference that in paragraph 7.31 it is the intending prosecutor who is
            seeking documents from the CPS; the courts are likely to apply the same
            principles if the CPS is seeking documents from a private prosecutor).




 Prosecution Manual                                                                      1 8 .0 7 .9 7
Private Prosecutions




7.43               Sometimes the papers will not contain enough evidence or information for you to
                   be able to decide whether or not to take over the prosecution. If this happens,
                   you will ask the police to investigate the case if it seems that further investigation
                   is necessary.




   1 8 .0 7 .9 7                                                                         Prosecution Manual
Private Prosecutions
Annex 1 - Request made by Private Prosecutor for CPS to take over the proceedings




                        Does the case satisfy        No   w Is there clearly no case          Yes         ^
  Review case papers                             -------- p.   to answer?
                        both Code tests?


                                     I Yes                                   r No

                        Take over and                          Are there clear public         Yes          w
                        C o n tin u e with the                 interest factors against
                        prosecution                            prosecution?


                                                                                 No
                                                                             T
                                                               Is it clear that the case is   Yes          .
                                                               likely to damage the
                                                               interests of justice?

                                                                             ^ No


                                                               Do not take over the
                                                               prosecution
                                                                                                               r

                                                                                                Take over and
                                                                                                D is c o n tin u e the
                                                                                                prosecution
Private Prosecutions - Annex 1




14.03.97                         Prosecution Manual
                                 Private Prosecutions
                                 Annex 2 - Request made by Defendant for CPS to take over the proceedings




                                                                                                                                                                          14.03.97
Private Prosecutions - Annex 2




                                                                 Is all information                               Obtain further
                                   Review case papers
                                                                 available?                                       information

                                                                                 Yes

                                                                 Is the case of a type
                                                                                                   No             Do not take over the
                                                                 normally prosecuted by
                                                                                                                  prosecution
                                                                 the CPS?

                                                                                 Yes


                                                                 Is there a realistic              No             Is there clearly no case       Yes
                                                                 prospect of conviction?                          to answer?

                                                                                 Yes
                                                                                                                                 No

                                                                 Is a prosecution in the   No                     Are there clear public
                                                                                                                                                 Yes
                                                                 public interest?                                 interest factors against
                                                                                                                  prosecution?
                                                                                 Yes

                                                                 Is there a particular                                           No
                                                                                             No
                                                                 need to take over the
                                                                 prosecution?                                     Is it clear that the case is   Yes
                                                                                                                  likely to damage the
                                                                                                                  interests of justice?
                                                                                 Yes




                                                                                                                                                                          Prosecution Manual
                                                                 Take over and                                                   No
                                                                 C o n tin u e with the
                                                                 prosecution
                                                                                                                                                 Take over and
                                                                                           Do not take over the
                                                                                                                                                 D is c o n tin u e the
                                                                                           prosecution                                           prosecution
Private Prosecutions - Annex 2




14.03.97                         Prosecution Manual
                                  Private Prosecutions
                                  Annex 3A - Referral to CPS by Justices' Clerk under section 7(4) POA 1985: withdrawal




                                                                                                                          14.03.97
Private Prosecutions - Annex 3A




                                                                            Is there a realistic         No
                                                     Review case papers     prospect of a
                                                                            conviction?

                                                                                            Yes



                                                                            Is a prosecution in the      No
                                                                            public interest?

                                                                                             Yes


                                                                            Is a prosecution likely to
                                                                                                         Yes
                                                                            damage the interests of
                                                                            justice?

                                                                                            No


                                                                            Does the case fall           No
                                                                            within the guidelines
                                                                            on re-institution?

                                                                                             Yes



                                                                            Start a new
                                                                            prosecution




                                                                                                                          Prosecution Manual
                                                                            Do not start a new
                                                                            prosecution
Private Prosecutions - Annex 3A




1 4.03.97                         Prosecution Manual
                                  Private Prosecutions

                                  Annex 3B - Referral to CPS by Justices' Clerk under section 7(4) POA 1985: delay
Private Prosecutions - Annex 3B




                                                                                                                                         14.03.97
                                                                                             Is there a realistic
                                                          Review case papers                 prospect of
                                                                                             conviction?


                                                                                                             Yes



                                                                                             Is a prosecution in the
                                                                                             public interest?


                                                                                                             Yes

                                    Take over and          Is it in the interests of         Is the private
                                    Continue with the                                  Yes
                                                          justice to allow the               prosecutor unlikely or
                                    prosecution           case to go by default?             unwilling to proceed?

                                                                          Yes



                                                                                             Do not take over the
                                                                                             prosecution




                                                                                                                                         Prosecution Manual
                                                                                                                       Take over and
                                                                                                                       Discontinue the
                                                                                                                       prosecution




              *
 Private Prosecutions - Annex 3B




14.03.97
                                   Prosecution Manual
                                 Private Prosecutions
                                 Annex 4 - CPS learns of a private prosecution by another way eg: press/judicial report
Private Prosecutions - Annex 4




                                                            Is the case of a type           No     Do not take over the
                                  Review case papers        normally prosecuted by
                                                                                                   prosecution
                                                            the CPS?


                                                                            Yes

                                                            Is there a realistic            No                                       Yes
                                                                                                   Is there clearly no case
                                                            prospect of
                                                                                                   to answer?
                                                            conviction?

                                                                                                                     No
                                                                            Yes

                                                            Is it in the public                    Are there clear public            Yes
                                                       No
                                                            interest to take over the              interest factors against
                                                            prosecution?                           prosecution?

                                                                                                                   No
                                                                            Yes

                                                            Take over and               8           Is it clear that the case is     Yes
                                                            Continue with the           |           likely to damage the
                                                            prosecution                 |           interests of justice?


                                                                                                                     No
                                                                                                                                   Take over and
                                                                                   Do not take over the
                                                                                                                                   Discontinue the
                                                                                   prosecution
                                                                                                           1                       prosecution
Private Prosecutions - Annex 4




14.03 .9 7                       Prosecution Manual
