RESTRICTED POLICY




1.    CCP
2.    Director



cc.   George Croston
      Lyn Salisbury



1.    ISSUE

1.1   Hillsborough.

2.    ACTION REQUIRED

2.1   Prepare handling arrangements for publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.

3.    TIMING

3.1   A public announcement will be made by the Home Secretary in late February (not
      before the week of the 16 February).

4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   The Director wrote to the Attorney General on the 9 May 1997 advising that there
      was no new evidence, and no grounds for re-opening the police enquiry.

4.2   On the 13 May 1997 the Attorney General endorsedthe Director’s view.

4.3   After consultation with the Director and the LawOfficers, the Home Secretary
      announced his independent scrutiny on the 30 June 1997.

4.4   CPS co-operated fully with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s enquiry. His enquiry has
      seen:

              •       the schedule of documents considered by the CPS in this case;

              •       the opinions of counsel;

              •       George Croston’s recent review note leading to the Director’s decision
                      on the 9 May 1997.
RESTRICTED - POLICY


5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

5.1   We have already made our decision in this matter, subject to Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith’s findings.

5.2   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith does not conclude that there is any material which should
      be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions (or the PCA) which might cause
      either us or them to reconsider decisions already taken.

5.3   Handling issues need now to be addressed. The Home Secretary will be writing in
      the next week to the Attorney General and the Director with his handling proposals.
      It remains the intention that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report should be published.
      I envisage the Home Secretary will want advice from us on:

              •     what he can properly say about the Director’s decision;

              •     whether there is any part of the report which would cause us concern
                    if it was published;

              •     the extent to which the material which the judge has considered can or
                     should be put into the public domain.

5.4   The Home Secretary has previously stated in Parliament what the Director’s
      conclusions were about this matter. Clearly he can say that the report does not change
      that view.

5.5   On a quick read of the report (which is copied for the Director’s benefit) there
      appears to be no mention of the material which he has considered from CPS,
      including George Croston’s report. He does quote from counsel’s opinion at
      paragraph 52 of his report, but this is innocuous. Paragraphs 53 to 57 of the Stuart-
      Smith report relate directly to the decision to prosecute. By implication he blesses
      the original decision of the then Director not to prosecute. Technically this could be
      seen to be outwith Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. However, subject
      to the views of the Director and the Law Officers, I am not inclined to raise any
      objection about this. It is probably best that this is clear to the families,

5.6   I have asked George Croston to go through Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report with
      a fine tooth comb to ensure that there is nothing ill il which would be sensitive from
      our point of view if it were published.

5.7   We clearly do not want George Croston’s own report to be put into the public
      domain. However, subject to the views of others, I would not have thought there was
      any difficulty in publishing the list of material which CPS considered, if we were
      pressed to do so.
RESTRICTED - POLICY


6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1   The Director will be advised finally on a response to the Home Secretary on handling
      issues once the report has been studied closely by George Croston.

6.2   Our Press Office and the Home Office Press Office will need to liaise on handling
      of press enquiries post publication. For that reason, this note is copied to Mrs
      Salisbury.




J S Ringguth
ACCP
2 February 1998
t   i   r      f     i     f   l    l    l     b   l      I T




        ~TLyi sbflJiA               (x~ CjfctrUZij &*- 6 ^ 4 .


                                   cJL /       /() ** ■         ^ t^ jy u d     fky^
                   $■
                                   UlcJL^ U k tl*-




            (i)vA-0vi\A^
                   " |U t4M ^                          ftXc u. i^cu^j,     ^ hJLiMAJ.Jfr ■
                   - (■^jdL^iuJL         -Qccj. aAw/' sfaJjr fj. crtuii

            Q a^ V tU/I .Vl^ cuf-s-^
                   8 &Ai> d W i         g-/U/Ul/v£vtv<.vi a   f^cfcu       K^fci kjZLc ^ ____

                   * sJ+Jx fy sl‘LrfkJ-v*y. t__________________________

                         ■g^^W &i-<Y j CjifjuxJl Jm /vj-i                QtA /W      dhjft   £




            7~       ML>J          uh_       u j t a ^ C l U a J ^ - ^ m ^ a X v J 1_______

                                    Ovv P*V^Jt\r4j                     »
fA^ - t w v        GvCU*




•        Ik     «uuu^<uUvu.W                   4 o Jr        Ktf.            M                                        f          ^

         ( 6J^(l                        L iU m . fiJ~e<f       fij~ti&JL (       <xA      Cfl-    ^         ^V w i^A >^     <v       ^'O'JlfU^.'Hv.v <*v




                            $*w )       /* A -    f ib .     $ -.1,      *-*vJl<(        iA -y        < lA y U « y        q J taaJ            4   t-Mt/vT

                            ^             a l     t£a        oStfj-tMXjji         ijt'&iAf       oJtvU           ck& o&*4. ■


                   V       ^ li^ L                         «&**       &*                                     ^       (^ 4 * k*
                           e iw e L u x i ^                                  4     /w -          & M ~                                   •

                            ^       ^ v J |4         U a. (LtfWvT<(jUuJ A/U>^W<L&                                 <f- a^M f

                                tjc J       U        /U -/     «£ ^2-                                 Je^A ^          ?

                                £        /&AA         -f ^          f (r(jU/H^ V i «/ft0C*O




    f\xJh><M.


     ^          k ? .C W ~ :              '>     ^           ~1       M*A * ‘*P Wfe‘i , a                                                ^
                                         dL-K-Lv^fl o« /v^fct                                           -
                                          b h n - L ~b         .
                 -^^JLCu^v                -




(Jo.U.   fvjJL                  (L 'fk        ^V U vTi^U v                            ^ y i/w
                            0
^JV/W"   (7^A/V» I tfVv/O


                    Iaa J x c ^ U a Iji ^                  ^-Iva'-^k/vvv^    flb    hPf'j.

                                                                    ($SL'<JZ>H~ M


           AaO~ |vm '( s L      W W K    (J    K ^ S U M   ju   ^
RESTRICTED - POLICY

George Croston
PTL


cc.   Dru Sharpling CCP



HILLSBOROUGH

1.    You should get the report in the DX tomorrow with a copy of my note to Dru
      Sharpling and the Director dated 2 February 1998.

2.    I have since spoken to Paul Pugh at the Home Office and the timing of the
       announcement is likely to be 16 February 1998. This means that we need to have
       briefed the Director, and agreed lines with the Home Office by the end of next week.

3.    In addition to the points which I should be grateful if you could address set out in
       yesterday’s minute at 5.3, Paul Pugh suggests we need to be clear, in case there are
       questions, about whether anything said in the report may give rise to suggestions

              •      that there ought to be further police enquiries regarding the amending
                     of police officers’ statements. I don’t see that that would get us
                     anywhere. But has this not been covered before? Your views on this
                     are required.

              •      that the state of the terracing requires further enquiry. Is there new
                     information provided in this report which has not been considered
                     before which reflects on the potential criminal liability of the club?
                     Could you consider this please as well.

4.    When we receive the Home Secretary’s letter either I or Dru will pass it to you so
      that urgent advice can be given to the Director on all these issues. I am not in the
      office on Thursday and Friday this week.

5.    It might be helpful if you kept yourself in readiness to come down on 16 February
      in case the Home Secretary requires personal briefing.

6.    When you have read this, if there is anything you don’t understand, please have a
      word.




j   /
  S Ringguth
ACCP
Central Casework
3 February 1998
Ext 1236
RESTRICTED - POLICY


Amanda Campbell




cc.   Dru Sharpling
      Lyn Salisbury
      George Croston




HILLSBOROUGH

1.    I attach a letter from Paul Pugh of the Home Office advising us that Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith’s report is due to be submitted in the week of the 19 January.

2.    It appears there is nothing to suggest that the basis on which the decisions about
      criminal proceedings were taken was inappropriate and that there are no new grounds
      for criminal investigation.

3.    There will need to be liaison with the Press Office and the Home Office and with the
      Legal Secretariat on press lines to take when we have seen the actual report. I shall
      be grateful if Mr Croston and Mrs Salisbury could liaise on this.




J S Ringguth
ACCP
Central Casework
8 January 1998
Ext: 1236
Miss D. H. Sharpling                                                                                                  m
C hief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                               CPS
                                                                                                                      CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                      United House
                                                                                                                      Piccadilly
                                                                                                                      York Y O l 1PQ

                                                                                                       Switchboard:   01904-450070
 r                                                                                                         DX No.-    65204 York 6
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                                  Facsimile:   01904 -
     Hillsborough Scrutiny
     Room 528                                                                Direct Line:    01904-
     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
     LONDON SW1H 9AT                                                       O ur Reference:


 L                                                        J                Your Reference:



                                                                                                                 1 August 1997




     Dear Sir,

     RE:     THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

     Further to the Director’s letter of 30 July 1997,1 enclose two schedules showing the material
     held by the CPS.

     As the Director indicated, the material falls into two distinct parts, the material relevant to
     the 1990 decision not to prosecute and that relevant to the recent 1997 decision not to
     prosecute.

     The schedules are comprehensive and list all the material held at the CPS or viewed by the
     CPS. All the material we hold is currently at United House in York. Rather than reproduce
     in our own schedules all the lists contained in the West Midlands Police Report, I have
     attached a copy of the master index of witnesses and documents as an appendix to the
     schedule of pre August 1990 material.

     You will no doubt wish to discuss access to the material. There is one further item which
     is not covered on the 1990 schedule, about which the Chief Crown Prosecutor will be writing
     to you separately.

     I look forward to hearing from you.
                                                                                                                           r

     Yours sincerely
                   \




 ?K l Chris Enzor
      Branch Crown Prosecutor

                          Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests o f ju stice
                                                                                       I ,iO .


                                                     MINUTE
                                                                                   CASEW ORK
                                                                                        % f.m 11 | p i
                    Dru Sharpling
                    CCP                                                               16 OCT 1997
                    Central Casework

                                                                                        YORK
                    RE: HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


              1.    On Friday 26/9 I contacted Chris Bone, secretary to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, to
                    ascertain the present position with the scrutiny.

              2.     He informed me that the Judge will be seeing the families of the deceased this week
                    and the scrutiny team would hope to see me between mid to late October. However
                    I am on leave abroad from 22/10 until 5/11 inclusive.

              3.    He says that the Judge is very impressed with the standard of our two counsels’
                    original opinion.

              4     He has now asked for a copy of my review report. A Briefing Note is attached to this
                    minute.




                    George R. Croston
                    Prosecution Team Leader
                    Central Casework York




      $L&5         fo                   c y u lry\            R£ceW ED

0 )       | # £ ) J V€Q ..                 u 5 K /       KW     i- O l A


                                 fe e



      3   t        Jfiio
                                   BRIEFING NOTE

                                   HILLSBOROUGH




1.   ISSUE

     1.1     Whether Central Casework should allow access by the Hillsborough Scrutiny
             Team, headed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to the review report prepared by
             George Croston.



2.   ACTION REQUIRED

     2.1     A decision to be made to either disclose or to refuse access to this report.



3.   TIMING

     3.1     Decision by CPS should be made by 6/10/97



4.   BACKGROUND

     4.1     The background to the Hillsborough Disaster has been well documented in
             previous reports.

     4.2     In December 1996 Granada TV aired a controversial drama-documentary
             about the tragic events which occurred in 1990. Subsequently letters were
             received from the families of some of the deceased requesting re-examination
             of the circumstances of the disaster.

     4.3     On 4/3/97 a letter was received from the Hillsborough Family Support Group
             (HFSG) Providing what was said to be fresh evidence and new witnesses. It
             was comprised of a large bundle of documents and their counsel’s opinion. As
             a result of this, discussions were generated between the Home Office, the
             Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers and the CPS. Following a meeting on
             10/3/97 it was decided that each of the three groups should conduct a separate
             review.

     4.4     On 8/5/97 George Croston of CPS Central Casework at York produced a
      review document that concluded that there were no grounds for recommending
      to the Home office that there should be further investigation of criminal
      allegations against the police or other persons.

4.5   On 30/6/9, the Home Secretary announced that it had been decided that it was
      in the Public Interest for an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there
      now existed any new evidence relating to the disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith was appointed to the position.



KEY CONSIDERATIONS

5.1   The Terms of Reference of the scrutiny are:-

      5.1.1         To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster
                    which was not available to the Taylor Inquiry, the DPP, or to
                    the police.

       5.1.2        To advise whether any new evidence justifies the establishment
                    of a further Public Inquiry.

       5.1.3        To draw the DPP’s and police attention to any relevant
                    evidence not previously considered by them.

       5.1.4        To advise whether there is any other action which should be
                    taken in the public interest.

5.2   The scrutiny was to examine all the written and other evidence which had
      been submitted as well as any further material which interested parties wished
       to submit.

5.3   The DPP’s letter of 30/7/97 to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith stated that we would
       co-operate fully in whatever way we can with the scrutiny, and that we would
       welcome the opportunity to discuss the CPS’s decision making process.

5.4   The attached copies of E mail messages at Appendix 1 shows that some
       consideration has been given to the application of PII principles to internal
       memoranda and police reports.

5.5   The provision of the review report to the scrutiny team would allow them see
       exactly what matters were considered in the initial decision making process.

5.6   The reviewing lawyer, George Croston, is agreeable to PII being waived re
       his report.



RECOMMENDATIONS
    6.1   That in the interests of co-operation with this judicial inquiry we waive PII
          and disclose the Hillsborough Review Report to the scrutiny team.



7   CONCLUSION

    7.1   It would not appear to be in our interest to hide behind PII principles for a
          document that must assist Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to come to the proper
          advice decision.
From :             Sue Ross
To:                CPSHQ Y. CSD2(enzorc)
Date:              25 July 1997 8:58am
S ubject:          Hillsborough -Reply

W e can always disclose tings that ought to be disclosed as a matter of fairness - the inquiry has come after so
many years of angst that w e ought not to make it look as though there is anything to hide. My only point was
we ought to identify what we would not normally disclose and put your recommendations as to whether it
should be disclosed in the circumstances to the Director, or at least Dru and Chris Newell (as this is a public
inquiry, and DCE are meant to be involved). Hope this helps. W hy did you have such a ridiculous deadline?
From :              Chris Enzor
To:                 cpshql.CSDI .sharplid
Subject:            Hillsboror

Redraft attached.
I spoke to Tony Chan who spoke to Sue Ross. Their view is that we should seek to apply PII principles to the
Stuart-Smith scrutiny. Looking at the terms of reference, there are clear and unequivocal references to
"evidence". I think this gives us a lead in to avoid internal memoranda and police reports. Clearly, we will need
to mark as sensitive anything we think ought not to be disclosed, but we can deal with this in correspondence
when we send the schedules.
Scheduling will be done next week.
Also, we can accommodate the scrutiny here if required.
I have not prepared a background note - 1 do not think one is necessary.

NB - I am not in tomorrow!

CC:                 cpshql.csd 1.DAWKINSL, cpshql.CSDI.chana, cpshql.CS...
                                        MINUTE

          Dru Sharpling
          CCP
          Central Casework



          RE: HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


    1.    On Friday 26/9 I contacted Chris Bone, secretary to Lord Justice Stewart-Smith, to
          ascertain the present position with the scrutiny.

    2.    He informed me that the Judge will be seeing the families of the deceased this week
          and the scrutiny team would hope to see me between mid to late October.

    3.    He says that the Judge is very impressed with the standard of our two counsels’
          original opinion.

    4     He has now asked for a copy of my review report. A Briefing Note is attached to this
          minute.




          George R. Croston
          Prosecution Team Leader
          Central Casework York




R   u e    K o ttl©      '5[io

                        9li o    tKcA




Re        m )te ©                        T io            CS                          li^ c tp y

     (frcpcHr .
C.F. Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                                                       PR3/GC/3341/89




                                                                       15 October 1997


Dear Mr Bone

Re: HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Further to our telephone conversation today, I confirm that the Crown waives Public Interest
Immunity in the CPS report prepared by myself as part of the review into allegations made
by the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

Accordingly, a copy of this report is enclosed. I have not attached the Appendices as
presumably you have access to these documents. If I am wrong in this assumption please
let me know and I shall send you a copy.

As I mentioned I am away on holiday from 22 October to 5 November inclusive.

Yours sincerely




G.R. Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Central Casework York Branch
09/02 '98       17:10           © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                                                UNITED HOUSE   IS001/004




                  CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE
                               CENTRAL CASEWORK - PROSECUTIONS,
                               INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AND APPELLATE
                                         50 LUDGATB HILL
                                        LONDON EC4M 7EX
                                         FAX: 0171 273 8450


                                           FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION


  For the attention of:                                            ............. ......................................
                                                                                           coke.                            .
  Address:.




  Fax No:.

   From:................... ..............................

  D ate:....3 ..r ..3 r , . - ' ^ . ....... Time:.................................................

  This FAX transmission consists of this page +                                        '                  others

   Message...................................................... ..................................




   OriginaMs) to follow-¥/N
   Please acknowledge receipt Y/N

   If You do not receive all pages or cannot read                                                                  __
   all the text please contact the sender of:   0171 273 + ext                                       13         (Direct Line)


 FORM/FAX
03/02 '98    15:45       © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                   UNITED HOUSE           ©002/004




    RESTRICTED POLICY




    L       CCP
    2.      Director



    cc,      George Croston
             Lyn Salisbury



    1.      ISSUE

    1.1     Hillsborough.

    2.      ACTION REQUIRED

    2.1     Prepare handling arrangements for publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.

    3.      TIMING

    3.1     A public announcement will be made by the Home Secretary in late February (not
            before the week of the 16 February).

    4.      BACKGROUND

    4.1     The Director wrote to the Attorney General on the 9 May 1997 advising that there
            was no new evidence, and no grounds for re-opening the police enquiry.

    4.2     On the 13 May 1997 the Attorney General endorsed the Director’s view.

    4.3     After consultation with the Director and the Law Officers, the HomeSecretary
            announced his independent scrutiny on the 30 June 1997.

   4.4      CPS co-operated fully with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s enquiry. His enquiiy has                !
            seen:

                     •      the schedule of documents considered by the CPS in this case;

                     •      the opinions of counsel;

                     •      George Croston's recent review note leading to the Director’s decision
                            on the 9 May 1997.
03/02     98    15:45       0 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                  UNITED HOUSE               11003/004
                                                                                             '   T-   ■|,.I.j ! .   ■.




    RESTRICTED - POLICY


    5.         KEY CONSIDERATIONS

    5.1        We have already made our decision in this matter, subject to Lord Justice Stuart-
               Smith’s findings.

    5.2        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith does not conclude that there is any material which should
                be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions (or the PCA) which might cause
                either us or them to reconsider decisions already taken.

    5.3        Handling issues need now to be addressed. The Home Secretary will be writing in
               the next week to the Attorney General and the Director with his handling proposals.
               It remains the intention that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report should be published.
               I envisage the Home Secretary will want advice from us on:

                        •       what he can properly say about the Director’s decision;

                        •       whether there is any part of the report which would cause us concern
                                if it was published;

                        •       the extent to which the material which the judge has considered can or
                                should be put into the public domain.

    5.4        The Home Secretary has previously stated in Parliament what the Director’s
               conclusions were about this matter. Clearly he can say that the report does not change
               that view.

    5.5        On a quick read of the report (which is copied for the Director’s benefit) there
               appears to be no mention of the material which he has considered from CPS,
               including George Croston’s report. He dbes quote from counsel’s opinion at
               paragraph 52 of his report, but this is innocuous. Paragraphs 53 to 57 of the Stuart-
               Smith report relate directly to the decision to prosecute. By implication he blesses
               the original decision of the then Director not to prosecute. Technically this could be
               seen to be outwith Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. However, subject
               to the views of the Director and the Law Officers, I am not inclined to raise any
               objection about this. It is probably best that this is clear to the families.

    5-6        I have asked George Croston to go through Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report with
                a fine tooth comb to ensure that there is nothing in it which would be sensitive from
                our point of view if it were published.

    5.7        We clearly do not want George Croston’s own report to be put into the public
               domain. However, subject to the views of others, I would not have thought there was
               any difficulty in publishing the list of material which CPS considered, if we were
               pressed to do so.
03/02 '98   15:45     © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                  UNITED HOUSE         ©004/004




    RESTRICTED - POLICY


    6.      RECOMMENDATIONS

     6.1    The Director will be advised finally on a response to the Home Secretary on handling
            issues once the report has been studied closely by George Croston.

     6.2    Our Press Office and the Horae Office Press Office will need to liaise on handling
            of press enquiries post publication. For that reason, this note is copied to Mis
            Salisbury.




     J S Ringguth
     ACCP
     2 February 1998
RESTRICTED POLICY

1.    CCP
2.    Director

cc.   John Ringguth
       Lyn Salisbury



1.    ISSUE

1.1   Hillsborough

2.    ACTION REQUIRED


2.1   In order to prepare handling arrangements for the publication of Lord Justice Stuart-
       Smith’s report, George Croston is to review the report and advise the Director on the
       following points:-

              •      what the Home Secretary can properly say about the Director’s
                     decision (that the material presented to her prior to the scrutiny would
                     not justify fresh proceedings):

              •      whether there is any part of the report which would cause us concern
                     if it was published;

              •      the extent to which the material which the judge has considered can or
                      should be put into the public domain;

              •      whether there is anything in the report that may give rise to
                     suggestions that there ought to be further police enquiries regarding the
                     amending of police officers’ (or other persons’) statements;

             •       whether the state of the terracing requires further enquiry;

             •       the extent to which the report discloses new information not previously
                      considered that may reflect on the potential criminal liability of the
                      football club.
The Home Secretary’s letter of the 9 February 1998 addressed to the Attorney
General (and copied to the Director) asks for his views on certain points concerning
issues involving the Director. I have been requested to advise on these points as
follows:

       •      whether advice considered by the Director in 1990 and 1997 as to the
              evidence needed to support criminal proceedings, could be placed in
              the Library at the House and therefore be in the public domain;

       •      whether or not the Director agrees that having considered the
              conclusions of the report, and on the basis of the material it contains,
              there is no basis that would justify fresh criminal proceedings;

       •      whether anything in the process by which police officers submitted
              statements to the Taylor Inquiry might amount to misconduct of a
              criminal or disciplinary nature, and thus require the instigation of a
              police investigation;

       •      whether the new information concerning the condition of the terraces
              and the overestimation of the crowd capacity would have affected the
              conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry and by inference the Director’s
              original decision not to prosecute any person;

TIMING

A public announcement will be made by the Home Secretary on the 18 February
1998.

This advice is required as soon as possible.

BACKGROUND

Following the submission of the Central Casework review note to her, the Director
wrote to the Attorney General on the 9 May 1997 advising that there was no new
evidence and no grounds for re-opening the police enquiry. That review, dated the
8 May 1997, should be read in conjunction with this briefing note as it gives more
comprehensive details of the allegations and evidence that were examined.

On the 13 May 1997 the Attorney General endorsed the Director’s view.

After consultation with the Director and the Law Officers, the Home Secretary
announced his independent scrutiny on the 30 June 1997.
CPS co-operated fully with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s enquiry. His enquiry has seen:

           •   the schedule of documents considered by the CPS in this case;

           •   the opinions of counsel;

           •   George Croston’s recent review note, leading to the Director’s decision
               on the 9 May 1997.

Chapter 1 of the report covers the background to the disaster in detail.

KEY CONSIDERATIONS

The scrutiny terms of reference appertaining to the CPS were "To ascertain whether
any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
1989 which was not available to the Director of Public Prosecutions ... for the
purpose of discharging ...(her)... statutory responsibilities ... and to draw to (her)
attention any evidence not previously considered by (her) which may be relevant to
(her) ... duties".

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was also to consider the existence of evidence in relation
to police disciplinary matters.

For the purposes of the scrutiny he received evidence both orally and in written form
from relatives of the victims, members of the public, police officers and others (for
a full list see Appendix 1 to the report). He examined the papers from Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry and most of those from the Inquests. He looked at the body files and
submissions from the counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG)
and members. He considered all the above evidence whether previously available or
not. ‘Previously available’was defined as being within the public domain or known
to the legal advisers of the parties or families. He read the joint opinion of counsel
( of the 6 August 1990) who advised the DPP that the police investigation had not
changed the findings of the Taylor Inquiry. The report does not mention that the CPS
review note of 1997 was taken into consideration or indeed read.


The report’s covering letter, which was addressed to the Home Secretary, says that
the report was written with publication in mind following the Minister’s stated
intention to publish the evidence considered during the scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith gives categories of that evidence which he does not think should be disclosed.
It includes:

       •       Reports from Drs Burns and West (relates solely to the death of one
               particular person).
       •       Report of N.Burne (copyright problem involving privileged material
               although his oral evidence is in the public domain).
       •       Details of consultations as listed at paragraph 6 of Appendix 1,
               including the Coroner.
       •       Transcripts of private discussions with relatives of the deceased.
 The report consisted of seven chapters and ten appendices. The key points from each
 chapter will be considered in order.

Chapter 1: BACKGROUND: Paragraphs 25 and 26 of the report state that counsel
for the HFSG only invited a recommendation (as to criminal prosecution) in the case
of Duckenfield and Murray, who were the two main senior officers on the day. The
Judge opined that the fresh evidence would have to be of sufficient significance that
in considering it there would be a real possibility that the DPP might change her mind
and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or any other offence, against one or both
of the officers. At paragraph 56 it was said that any prosecution of an individual
police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would not be
enough to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

Chapter 2: VIDEO EVIDENCE: The Judge found that there was considerable
confusion and misunderstanding about the video evidence of the disaster. All four
police video tapes (including the one that was supposedly missing) were made
available in their entirety to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner. There was no
evidence for the suggestion that the theft of two video tapes from the club’s Control
Room was part of a police ‘cover-up’. Submissions to him by counsel for the HFSG
were:

        •     Police evidence that their failure to see overcrowding in the pens was
               due to a defective camera was deliberately false.
        •     Evidence from video tapes was deliberately suppressed and concealed
               by the police because it would have revealed the above falsity.
        •     The Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the ‘missing
               footage’.
        •     PCs Bichard and Ryan, and PS Goddard deliberately gave false
               evidence about camera 5 not working properly.
        •     The evidence of Mr Houldsworth, the club CCTV technician, that the
              pens were overcrowded, was deliberately withheld from the jury.



He says that if the first two submissions are made out they might affect the verdict
of accidental death and the decision of the DPP not to prosecute for manslaughter. The
third submission is a grave allegation against the Coroner which could also affect the
verdict. On the fourth submission consideration would have to be given to prosecuting
the officers concerned. The fifth shows a further criticism of the police failure to
appreciate a dangerous situation. His brief findings on each point are shown below:

5.7.1         Submission 1 is quite untenable.

5.7.2         As submission 1 is misconceived, number 2 must fail also. There
              never was any disappearance or concealment of video footage from
              camera 5. The allegation is completely unfounded.

5.7.3         Submission 3 is unfounded as there was no missing footage.
        5.7.4          The evidence on submission 4 is wholly insufficient to warrant
                       consideration of criminal proceedings against any police officers.

        5.7.5          Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is rejected. His explanation as to why it
                       was only in 1996 that he realised his evidence was important is not
                       convincing. What he now says is inconsistent with what he said
                       before.The importance of his evidence has been exaggerated out of all
                       proportion.

5.8    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s final comments on the video evidence is that there is
        nothing in the submissions that calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the
       prosecuting or disciplinary authorities.

5.9    Chapter 3: MEDICAL EVIDENCE: The Judge said that the Coroner’s reasoning has
       been widely misunderstood and misinterpreted. In considering the question of how
        someone died it is not usually relevant to consider matters subsequent to the infliction
       of injuries which obviously result in death. There was no new intervening cause
       which might break the chain of causation between the crushing injuries and death.
       The Coroner did not say that all those who died did so before 3.15. The cut-off time
       was necessarily imposed to to keep the Inquiry within reasonable bounds. It is
       difficult to see the relevance of further evidence that a person was alive at 3.15pm
       but died subsequently.

5.10 The scrutiny considered the evidence of Dr Walker among others. It was suggested
     by counsel that the medical conclusions and assumptions made by the Coroner as to
     the cut-off time were false, and that on an application for judicial review it would be
     open to the Divisional Court to hold that the (inquest) verdicts had been procured by
     fraud, suppression of evidence or insufficiency of inquiry. Further that the non­
     presentation of Dr Walker’s evidence (like that of Mr Houldsworth) could amount to
     fraudulent concealment.

5.11   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found all the submissions on the medical evidence to be
       unfounded. The relevant part of his reasoning was that the evidence of Dr Walker and
       others added nothing to that given at the Inquest. The suggestion that the evidence
       now put before him was deliberately suppressed and concealed and those concerned
       acted in bad faith, was in his opinion wholly irresponsible.

5.12   Chapter 4: ALLEGED IMPROPER INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES: These
       allegations were not made to the CPS in the HFSG letter of 4 March 1997 or at any
       other time, except by way of a general remark that "one of the most striking aspects
       of this history is the way in which the evidence presented to the Inquest was evidence
       that tended to exculpate the South Yorkshire Authorities and the police from blame.
       Very serious questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the
       West Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner". The allegations were either of
       pressure being brought by police officers to bear on witnesses in order to prevent
       certain evidence being put before the jury, or of the way in which South Yorkshire
       Police obtained evidence about the disaster from their own officers (specifically the
       amendments made to their witness statements).
5.13   The Divisional Court did not find it necessary to investigate the allegation concerning
       the police putting improper pressure on civilian witnesses. The scrutiny did look into
       this matter in great detail. The first conclusion was that the suggestion that police
       officers brought pressure to bear on witnesses as part of a biased and incomplete
       investigation was clearly untenable. Secondly, that for the most part the suggestions
       made by the solicitors (acting for the police) for amendments were not open to
       criticism. In a few cases it would have been preferable if a deletion had not been
       made. At worst it was an error of judgement, it was not unprofessional conduct. Any
       amendments made by the police themselves were unexceptionable. The Judge is quite
       satisfied that the exclusion of comments (in the statements) could not possibly have
       affected the DPP. The allegation of irregularity and malpractice is not substantiated.

5.14   Chapter 5: OTHER MATTERS OF CONCERN: Families of some of the victims
       raised concerns about alleged inconsistency in police evidence, failure to disclose
       documents, and police bias. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was not able to resolve all the
       concerns about conflicts in evidence. However he would be surprised if the criticisms
       about families being unable to obtain copies of relevant documents were true. He saw
       no reason to differ from Lord Taylor’s conclusion as to the impartiality of the West
       Midlands investigation.

5.15     Chapter 6 : MISCELLANEOUS: The state of the ground: New evidence was heard
        from Mr N.Burne, a structural engineer who advised on the safety and structural
        aspects of the Hillsborough ground in 1990. It had not been available at the time of
        the Taylor Inquiry and he was not called to give evidence at the Inquest. In October
         1990 Mr Burne gave evidence before a High Court judge in the contribution
        proceedings. However the proceedings were settled before his evidence was complete
        or could be tested in cross-examination. His report criticised, among other things, the
        inadequate number of turnstiles, the lack of a control system for monitoring numbers
        in each pen, the overestimation of overall capacity on the Leppings Lane Terraces,
        inadequate emergency signing, and the inadequate standard of crush barriers. There
        were said to be many breaches of the advice and recommendations contained in the
        Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. The scrutiny found that all but two of the
       criticisms were fully considered by the Taylor Inquiry. These were the height of the
       crush barriers which were too low, and the overall capacity of the terrace which was
       overestimated. The conclusion was that these matters did not give grounds for re­
       opening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings. The Judge considered that had
       Lord Taylor known about them he might have criticised the Club, their consultant
       engineers, and those responsible for the licensing of the ground in more stringent
       terms than he did. He did not consider that the central conclusion of the Inquiry
       would have been changed, in that the primary cause of the disaster was a failure of
       police control. However, if the responsibility of the other parties was somewhat
       greater than had earlier been appreciated, that might have a bearing on any
       reconsideration of criminal proceedings against officers.
5.16   Chapter 7: SUMMARY: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith does not consider that there is any
       material that should be put before the DPP or Police Complaints Authority which
       might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken. There is no
       occasion for any further investigation into the circumstances in which alterations were
       made to some of the self written statements of South Yorkshire officers.

5.17   The conclusions from the scrutiny report mirror the relevant comments from my
       review.Indeed the Judge’s observations are often more stinging than mine.

6.     RECOMMENDATIONS

6 .1   The recommendations on the points requiring action in paragraph 2.1 above are:

       6.1.1 The Director’s decision: The Home Secretary stated to Parliament on the 30
             June 1997 that the Director of Public Prosecutions takes the view that the
             material so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings.
             My review of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report is that he comes to
             the conclusion that, having heard fresh evidence, there is nothing that should
             be put before the Director to cause a reconsideration of previous decisions.

              Therefore I recommend that the Director can quite properly say that the report
              does not change her stated view.

       6.1.2 Publication of the report: I have read the report a number of times and am
             unable to find any point of evidence or conclusion which is adverse, unfairly
             or otherwise, to the CPS. While there is a quote from counsels’ joint opinion
             of 1990, and therefore strictly speaking privileged, the way in which the quote
             and comment are used is supportive of our decision making process in the
             case.

              I recommend that no objection be taken.

       6.1.3 Material for the public domain: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s covering letter to
             the Home Secretary said that the Minister’s stated intention was to publish the
             evidence which was considered during the scrutiny. That letter makes certain
             recommendations to the Minister about specific categories of evidence and
             which do not involve the CPS. By inference it could be said that other
             material, for example, the 1990 joint opinion of two leading counsel, should
             be put into the public domain by being deposited in the House Libraries. This
             opinion was read by the Judge who commented favourably on it. He did not
             say that he considered in any way whatsoever the 1997 report to the Director
             from myself. Neither of the two reports could be classed as evidence, fresh
             or otherwise. They are legally privileged or subject to Public Interest
             Immunity and not normally subject to disclosure unless previously in the
             public domain or where that privilege or immunity is waived. Neither have
             been disclosed publicly. The basic rule is that reasons for prosecuting
             decisions are given in only the most general terms. The view is normally
             taken that the public discussion of a decision not to prosecute could amount
             a trial of a suspect, in this case certain police officers and others, without the
        safeguards which criminal proceedings are designed to provide. The Judge’s
       comments on our decision in 1990 should be sufficient for the interests of
       justice to be served. Similarly, the above reasons should also apply to the
        1997 review.

        I recommend that it is not in the interests of justice for the disclosure of the
        two advices.

6.1.4 Further police inquiries re amended statements: The report conclusions are
      that there was no improper pressure put on witnesses and that a small part of
      the amendment procedure involved at worst an error of judgement on the part
      of solicitors. As we have not seen the evidence available to the scrutiny we
      have no reason to consider going behind the conclusions made.

        I recommend that there should be no further action on this point.

6.1.5 Further inquiries re the terracing: Paragraph 5.1.4 above covers Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith’s opinion that the new and valid evidence concerning the crush
      barriers and terrace capacity would not have affected the central conclusion
      of the Inquiry. He might have made stronger comments about the Club and
      others. This new evidence was extremely relevant to civil liability claims and
      was before the High Court for those proceedings. It must be right that when
      the scrutiny report is published a more fair apportionment of blame can be
      acknowledged. My assessment of the comment that the appreciation of a
      greater responsibility of other parties might have a bearing on any
      reconsideration of criminal proceedings against officers is that if there had
      been a decision to prosecute it would have been affected by the new and
      mitigating evidence.

       I recommend that no further action is required as to any more inquiries.

6 .1.6 Potential criminal liability of the Club: I can find nothing in the report which
       can be seen as a suggestion that the new evidence goes towards criminal rather
       than merely civil liability. The Judge considers that ther are no grounds for
       reopening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.

       I recommend that no action should be taken by us on the new evidence now
       seen.

The recommendations on the points requiring action in paragraph 2.2 above are in
accordance with what I have already said:

6.2.1 Disclosure of our advices into the public domain should be resisted, not least
      on the ground of ‘candour’.

6.2.2 There is no basis for the instigation of criminal proceedings against police or
      others or for any further investigation into allegations of purported criminal
      liability.
7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   There have been        detailed and comprehensive investigations of the grave
      circumstances that lead up to the disastrous consequences in the Hillsborough
      Stadium. It should now be considered that UK judicial procedures have been fully
      explored and satisfactorily exhausted for the purposes of the CPS. I have no doubt,
      based on my dealings with the HFSG, that the matter will not end here.
03/02 '98    15:44       Q 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                   UNITED HOUSE            @




    RESTRICTED - POLICY

    George Croston
    PTL


    cc.      Dru Sharpling CCP



    HILLSBOROUGH

    1.       You should get the report in the DX tomorrow with a copy of my note to Dm
             Sharpling and the Director dated 2 February 1998.

    2.       I have since spoken to Paul Pugh at the Home Office and the timing of the
              announcement is likely to be 16 February 1998. This means that we need to have
              briefed the Director, and agreed lines with the Home Office by the end of next week.

    3.       In addition to the points which I should be grateful if you could address set out in
              yesterday’s minute at 5.3, Paul Pugh suggests we need to be clear, in case there are
              questions, about whether anything said in the report may give rise to suggestions

                     •      that there ought to be further police enquiries regarding the amending
                             of police officers' statements. I don’t see that that would get us
                             anywhere. But has this not been covered before? Your views on thi<
                             are required.

                     •      that the state of the terracing requires further enquiry. Is there new
                             information provided in this report which has not been considered
                             before which reflects on the potential criminal liability of the club?
                             Could you consider this please as well.

   4.       When we receive the Home Secretary’s letter either I or Dm will pass it to you so
            that urgent advice can be given to the Director on all these issues. I am not in the
            office on Thursday and Friday this week.

   5.       It might be helpful if you kept yourself in readiness to come down on 16 February
             in case the Home Secretary requires personal briefing.

   6.       When you have read this, if there is anything you don’t understand, please have a
            word.




 —4 S Ringguth
  ACCP
  Central Casework
  3 February 1998
  Ext 1236
RESTRICTED POLICY




1.    CCP
2.    Director



cc.   George Croston
      Lyn Salisbury
                                                                    YO R K
1.    ISSUE

1.1   Hillsborough.

2.    ACTION REQUIRED

2.1    Prepare handling arrangements for publication of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.

3.    TIMING

3.1    A public announcement will be made by the Home Secretary in late February (not
       before the week of the 16 February).

4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   The Director wrote to the Attorney General on the 9 May 1997 advising that there
      was no new evidence, and no grounds for re-opening the police enquiry.

4.2   On the 13 May 1997 the Attorney General endorsed the Director’s view.

4.3   After consultation with the Director and the Law Officers, the Home Secretary
      announced his independent scrutiny on the 30 June 1997.

4.4    CPS co-operated fully with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s enquiry. His enquiry has
       seen:

                      the schedule of documents considered by the CPS in this case;

                 •    the opinions of counsel;

                 •    George Croston’s recent review note leading to the Director’s decision
                      on the 9 May 1997.
RESTRICTED - POLICY


5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

5.1   We have already made our decision in this matter, subject to Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith’s findings.

5.2   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith does not conclude that there is any material which should
      be put before the Director of Public Prosecutions (or the PCA) which might cause
       either us or them to reconsider decisions already taken.

5.3   Handling issues need now to be addressed. The Home Secretary will be writing in
      the next week to the Attorney General and the Director with his handling proposals.
      It remains the intention that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report should be published.
      I envisage the Home Secretary will want advice from us on:

              •      what he can properly say about the Director’s decision;

              •      whether there is any part of the report which would cause us concern
                     if it was published;

              •      the extent to which the material which the judge has considered can or
                      should be put into the public domain.

5.4   The Home Secretary has previously stated in Parliament what the Director’s
      conclusions were about this matter. Clearly he can say that the report does not change
      that view.

5.5   On a quick read of the report (which is copied for the Director’s benefit) there
       appears to be no mention of the material which he has considered from CPS,
       including George Croston’s report. He does quote from counsel’s opinion at
      paragraph 52 of his report, but this is innocuous. Paragraphs 53 to 57 of the Stuart-
       Smith report relate directly to the decision to prosecute. By implication he blesses
      the original decision of the then Director not to prosecute. Technically this could be
       seen to be outwith Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. However, subject
       to the views of the Director and the Law Officers, I am not inclined to raise any
       objection about this. It is probably best that this is clear to the families.

5.6   I have asked George Croston to go through Lon) Justice Stuart-Smith’s report with
      a fine tooth comb to ensure that there is nothing in it which would be sensitive from
      our point of view if it were published.

5.7   We clearly do not want George Croston’s own report to be put into the public
      domain. However, subject to the views of others, I would not have thought there was
      any difficulty in publishing the list of material which CPS considered, if we were
      pressed to do so.
 RESTRICTED - POLICY


 6.     RECOMMENDATIONS

 6 .1   The Director will be advised finally on a response to the Home Secretaryon handling
        issues once the report has been studied closely by George Croston.

 6.2    Our Press Office and the Home Office Press Office will need to liaise on handling
        of press enquiries post publication. For that reason, this note is copied to Mrs
        Salisbury.




J i S Ringguth
  ACCP
  2 February 1998
                                  Police Policy Directorate
                                                                                           Home Office
                                  Paul P u g h
                                                                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
                                                                                           London S W lH 9AT
                                  Head of Operational Policing      (QppuJ
                                                                                           Telephone: 0 1 7 1 -2 7 3 3141
                                                                                           Fax:       0 1 7 1 -2 7 3 2703




             RESTRICTED: POLICY

           Stephen Wooler Esq
           Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
           Attorney General’s Chambers
           9 Buckingham Gate
           London SW1E 6JP
                                                                             29 January 1998


      ly
         HILLSBOROUGH




                                                                                    = s «
       he dW a t ^ e rep0rt, by layin9 n before P a r l i a n S ^ ™ ^ nfi""edthat he wi» *teh


      kH                                  S S S S                                              s
     Headquarters^ *hiS letter' With a « W °f the report to John R im u t h at c p s


                                                                    $-C




                                                        PAUL PUGH




f:'oppu\hou\IettertppOJ46pd.doc
09/02 '98    17:10          © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                                                     UNITED HOUSE            0002/004
 '09 FEB      *9B    17:00 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                                                               P. 2^3




                                                                                           Q U E E N A J i N B - S O A T E L O N D O N S W i K 9AT


                                                                           yt ;cw < i
                                                                               &r i *!/>
                                                                                                                      0 9   TEB WM
       The Rx Hon John Morris QC MP
       Attorney General.-
       Attorney General’s Chambers
       9 Buckingham Gate
       London S ^ l                                                      ...




                                                                                                                 5 2 .^
                                                                         ^ ' ■ ' pd ^ w -
                                                                          jo / M 1cJ®
                                                                           ^     g.
                                                                           >  1   £e^Mv<OlS>~
                                                                                   /




                                                        HILLSBOROUGH

            Lord Justice Snian-Smithh^ n                    o        w         ^

                                                 ««» » «                               ^ ■W< “ Kd ^                  “ aSr" °“ r rSPOnSe “
            his conclusions.
            A copy of the judge’s terms of reference, which we agreed, is attached. Essentially he had
            Xyto tasks.
                     m         t o advise m e w h e th e r a n y evidence n o t p rev io u sly l i a b l e                           is o f such
                               sign ifican ce as to ju stify a fu rth e r p u b lic m q rn ry ; a n d

                     (ii)      to id e n tify fo r y o u , th e D ire c to r o f P u b lic P ro s e c u tio n s
                               c o n sta b le, as disciplinary a u th o rity , a n y evidence * l t m lS ^ b                               ,
                               your statutory responsibilities that has not previously been considered.

             u      J«i«                          - w               - » j - »•                                       *;             ~ S £
                                                        S       S    S    S            S      S       ^ -    &

             „                           -*                                                       1    5 7       a t?       z s u



             When I established the scrutiny on 30 June last year, I gave a commitment that th ji J
             report would be published, together with as much of the evidence which he cons1          ^
             oo -sible Much of the key evidence is contained within Appendices to his rep .
             "he e - a i n ^ - te r ia l -hich he ha, considered is already in the public^domain such
              transcripts^r f public proceeding, There is some material,
              S c u a r t - S m i t h refers to but which has not so far been made pub ic.
09/02 '98         17:11     © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                  ->->-> UNITED HOUSE         Ig]003/004

 *       09 FEB     '98   17 =01 HO FZ DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                           P .3 '3




               particularly advice considered by the DPP in 1990 and 1997 about whether the evidence
     j        available would support criminal proceedings. 1 would be grateful for your views on
     (        whether that advice can be placed in the Library at the House.

              When the rep o rt> published, I intend to confirm that I accept the conclusions and the
              reasoning behind those conclusions and that there will be no further public inquiry. It is
              important that, as far as possible, publication of this report should draw a line under
              speculation about further investigations or proceedings. I realise that both your and the
              Director’s responsibilities require you to keep open the possibility that, should anything
              new emerge, you would consider it. But it is essential that I should give as firm an
              indication as possible about your views at this stage. If you agree, I consider that I should
              say on publication of the report that you and the Director have considered its conclusions,
              and on the basis of the material which it contains, the Director consider that there is no
 /            basis which would justify fresh criminal investigations, and that you consider that any
              application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of
               succeeding. I would be grateful for your views.

               There are two particular issues in the report on which I would be grateful for your views.
               The first concerns the process by which statements of police officers submitted to the
               inquiry were amended. The report considers this process in detail, setting out exactly how
               and why it occurred and confirming that it had no material effect on the outcome of the
 O             proceedings. There are bound to be questions, however, about whether anything in this
               process might amount to misconduct of a criminal or disciplinary nature. Lord Justice
               Stuart-Smith considers chat it would not. It would in theory be possible to instigate a
               further police investigation to confirm this conclusively, but I think the outcome would be
                a foregone conclusion, and I do not consider that such an investigation should be
               instigated. I would be grateful for your confirmation view on this point.

               The second issue concerns the technical evidence put forward by South Yorkshire police
          *    about the state of the ground. He suggests that the condition of the terraces and the over-
               estimation of erod'd capacity was worse than Taylor suggested. If that information had
               been available at the time, it is possible that Taylor would have attributed a greater
               proportion of the blame on the club and the local authority. However, it is clear that Lord
               Justice Stuart-Smith does not think the issue would have had any material effect on the
               balance of conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry.

               One of the observations made by Lord Justice Stuajt Smith is that it is unsatisfactory to have
               an inquest where there has already been an.inquiry, chaired by a judge, into a major disaster.
               This issue was in fact considered by a Home Office Working Group on disasters and
               inquests, whose reporc was published last March. This recommended that, where a major
               disaster has occurred, and the Lord Chancellor is able to certify that a judicial enquiry into
               the disaster will also constitute sufficient investigation into the deaths, the role of the coroner
               should be limited by securing the adjournment of the inquest and not requiring its
               resumption except in the most exceptional circumstances.

               Although further comments on the report are awaited, in responding to Lord Justice Stuart
               Smith's report I propose, subject to the views of Derry Irvine, to endorse the
               recommendations in principle. In the absence of a suitable legislative opportunity, there are
09/02 '98   17:11     © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                  UNITED HOUSE          @004/004
                                                                                            P. 4/3
 * 09 FEB    '98    17:01 HO FZ DIVISION 0171 273 270J




       no early prospects of implementing the recommendations (which require primary
       legislation), but I chink it will be important to flag up a willingness to remove one of the
       causes of delay and difficulties for the families of disaster victims.

        Publication of the-report will come as a severe disappointment to the Family Support
        Group, but, however painful for them it will be, I thinkw   must try to
                                                                    e           d    a line here. 1
                                                                                    r a w


        will want to emphasise that that does not mean that those responsible have escaped blame -
        the Taylor inquiry was clear about that. I will want to emphasise also that we are putting
        right the shortcomings in the police disciplinary system which in part enabled the officers
        in charge to avoid disciplinary action. I will want nearer the time to clear with you the
        text of my statement, but I would be grateful for your urgent agreement in principle to
        whac I propose.

        My aim is to lay the report before Parliament and to make an oral statement in the week
        beginning 16 February. Ann Taylor’s office have suggested IS February. The report is
        very long (over 120,000 words) and detailed, and it will be impossible for MPs to read in a
        short time. But it will inevitably provoke strong feelings and requests for further debate.
        If Ann agrees, I would like to head off those protests by indicating that we would be
        prepared to make time available for the House to debate the repon.

        I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Lord Chancellor, the President of the
        Council, the Director of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




                                              JACK STRAW
                                                                                                                           3 .1/ 7 ( 9 7

                                                                                                               m
                                                      C A SE W O R K                                           CPS
D am e Barbara M ills D B E QC
                                                           *mt \ i f
Director of Public Prosecutions
                                                           3 1 JUL 1837                                        Headquarters
                                                                                                               5 0 Ludgate H ill
                                                                                                               London E C 4M 7EX

                                                               Y O R K
r                                                          1                                    Direct Line:
                                                                                                Switchboard:
                                                                                                               0171-273 8098
                                                                                                               0171-273 8000
    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                                                     Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
    Hillsborough Scrutiny                                                                            d x No:   300850 Ludgate E C 4

    Home Office
    Rm 528
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
    London SW1H 9AT
                                                           J                                                                     On
L
                                                                                                           30 July 1997        L .7




           C -fv O                             ,




    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

    Thank you for your letter of 18 July 1997. We will obviously co-operate fully in whatever
    way we can with your scrutiny.

    The CPS material in this case is held at CPS Central Casework, United House, Piccadilly,
    York. Mr George Croston is the lawyer involved.

     From the CPS perspective, there have been two distinct phases in this case. First, the CPS
     considered the report of the West Midlands Police and the report of Lord Justice Taylor in
     1989/90. Advice was taken from leading counsel, culminating in an announcement on 30
     August 1990 that there was insufficient evidence to justify criminal proceedings against
     anyone. Staff at Central Casework, York are in the process of compiling a schedule of
     material. We will let you have a copy of the schedule by 4 August 1997.

     Second, we considered further material sent by the Hillsborough Family Support Group in
     March 1997 and in addition, Mr Croston saw some material when he visited South Yorkshire
     Police earlier this year. The CPS view is that the material presented in March 1997 would
     not justify fresh criminal proceedings, a point which was made public by the Home Secretary
     in his announcement on 26 June 1997. A schedule of this material is also being prepared and
     we will let you have a copy by 4 August 1997.

     I hope that these schedules will assist you in your task.

      You mention access to the documents held by CPS. There is a substantial quantity of
      material held by York in relation to both the 1990 and 1997 decisions. You and/or your staff
      would be very welcome to inspect the material at York. Alternatively, if you prefer to
      inspect the material at CPS Headquarters in Ludgate Hill, I will ensure that the necessary
      arrangements are made.




                                  Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
-2-


I note that you maybe interviewing some witnesses. We would welcome the opportunity to
discuss the CPS decision making process and to assist you in identifying with precision the
material which we have inspected. Mr Croston would be the relevant member of staff to
help, and he can be contacted on

I hope that this reply is helpful to you.




DAME BARBARA MILLS QC
                                      HILLSBOROUGH

 FILE NOTE of telephone conversation with Mr. Ward of the Home Office
 0171-273-3612

 I asked Mr. Ward for clarification of Lord Justice Stewart-Smith’s letter asking for an
 indication of the nature of the material held by us. I asked specifically whether he wanted
 a reply in relation to the material considered in 1990 or the material considered in 1997 or
 both. He said both.




 CE
 24/7/97


         K O TC    jf     K liC ih                   C kM      SO ^£       < f S C iu J U < ^ f f t f r .
 O q i     273      U JU -7

           <#<&: fewN S l9                               W , CvxK.
 lit     tc c ju A ta t     m o ih H t          - c iu v id i        c ^ A tb v     ia   .

         YuXuO O** late. S&Dititft adtyjdicst tt
 tie a&itctA couxheJ&oi. Oct. &           Hoi&L
                  fe            i2/9 m                        I<o+k c U- LH
                  fc' piclc u f     CB.

»»/sl<n                                              Ahw.Ctvt              Ole iq./r

fu £ koi£ of VetatH                     u^fU CUaa
 T7C.& OUceRiuX                                 LJ   & Sex. ftoUU*-*
 A0«t wJCfek- UkcLj t                   S4C £ £    to U k Ckioi*.
u »    U 'i H f t o t a / u i t t ,   c a w s tX )                .
CB                 fe -   cm /   h c tia o    /© I c .

                                                                   I s i)S     K    u k a j- J ,
 K c j/u u H d -
   £ £ P \    u o   7   t v jl m   4^P

                                         DRAFT




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


Thank you for your letter of 18 July 1997. I would like to make it clear at the outset that
we will co-operate fully and in whatever way we can with your scrutiny.


The CPS material in this case is held at CPS Central Casework, United House, Piccadilly,
York. As you know, Mr. George Croston is the lawyer in the case.


There have been two distinct phases in this case so far as the CPS is concerned. First, the
CPS considered the report of the West Midlands Police and the report of Lord Justice Taylor
in 1989/90. Advice was taken from leading counsel, culminating in an announcement on 30
August 1990 that there was insufficient evidence to justify criminal proceedings against
anyone. Staff at Central Casework, York are in the process of compiling a schedule of
material. We will let you have a copy of the schedule by 4 August 1997.


Secondly, we have considered some more material sent by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group in March 1997 and in addition, Mr. Croston saw some material when he visited South
Yorkshire Police earlier this year. The CPS view is that the material presented in March
1997 would not justify fresh criminal proceedings, a point which was made public by the
Home Secretary in his announcement on 26 June 1997. A schedule of this material is also
being prepared and we will let you have a copy by 4 August 1997.


I hope that the schedules we are providing will assist you in your task.


You mention access to the documents held by CPS. There is a substantial quantity of
material held at York in relation to both the 1990 and 1997 decisions. As this materials
forms part of our records of the decisions I would prefer not to physically part with the
material. You and/or your staff would be very welcome to inspect the material at York. I
          At our recent meeting we also discusse^ future courses. We discussed running a
          Senior Lawyers Fraud course in February 1997 to be delivered by yourself and Ian
          Stamp. I would be grateful if you coul/get together with Ian and decide on proposed
          dates for this. I will then be in a position to arrange a venue and advertise the course.
          I look forward to hearing from you on this matter in the near future. We also
          discussed the delivery of a Serious Fraud and Corruption course in March 1997 to
          follow the Senior Lawyers Fraudxourse. As soon as I have your dates for the Senior
          Lawyers Fraud course I will ga ahead and arrange this as well.

          I will be writing to all Centred Casework Lawyers in the near future requesting them
          to express an interest in the/aesign and delivery of vocational training. This with the
          aim of increasing and improving the delivery of training to Central Casework staff.
          At present I have very lime knowledge of our ability to deliver internal courses and
          I wish to rectify that. / would be interested on your thoughts on the vocational
          courses I aught to be offering in the short to medium term to meet the operational
          needs of Central Casework.

          Thank you as always for your continued help support and guidance. I look forward
          to hearing from yc

Kind Regards




Steve Poole
Area Training fficer for Central Casework and HQ Directorates
Training Br;
6 December 1996
Tel:
Fax:
DX Number: 65204 York 6




ccw/sfc/pp.1.96
will be very pleased to make secure office facilities available to you. Alternatively, if you
would prefer to inspect the material at CPS Headquarters in Ludgate Hill, I will ensure the
necessary arrangements are made. Before you inspect the material we would appreciate the
opportunity to discuss with you whether it would be appropriate for you to have access to
documents which are not "evidence" and which would attract public interest immunity in
other situations. Confidential police reports and internal memoranda are the obvious
examples, but there may be others.


I note that you maybe interviewing some witnesses. We would welcome the opportunity to
discuss the CPS decision making process and to assist you in identifying with precision the
material which we have inspected. Mr. Croston would be the relevant member of staff to
help.


I hope that this reply is helpful to you.
 6        At our recent meeting we also discussed future courses. We discussed running a
          Senior Lawyers Fraud course in February 199*7 to be delivered by yourself and Ian
          Stamp. I would be grateful if you could get together with Ian and decide on proposed
          dates for this. I will then be in a position terarrange a venue and advertise the course.
          I look forward to hearing from you an this matter in the near future. We also
          discussed the delivery of a Serious Fraud and Corruption course in March 1997 to
          follow the Senior Lawyers Fraud coarse. As soon as I have your dates for the Senior
          Lawyers Fraud course I will go ajfead and arrange this as well.

7        I will be writing to all CentraLCasework Lawyers in the near future requesting them
          to express an interest in the design and delivery of vocational training. This with the
          aim of increasing and improving the delivery of training to Central Casework staff.
          At present I have very lime knowledge of our ability to deliver internal courses and
          I wish to rectify that. I would be interested on your thoughts on the vocational
          courses I aught to be Offering in the short to medium term to meet the operational
          needs of Central Casework.
                             /
8        Thank you as always for your continued help support and guidance. I look forward
         to hearing from .you.
                         /




Steve Poole
Area Training Officer for Central Casework and HQ Directorates
Training Branch
6 December 1996
Tel:
Fax:
DX Number: 65204 York 6




ccw/sfc/pp.1.96
                                 Hillsborough Interested Parties
    i~jj\             Mrs.J.McBrien           '2'?^I (JT? )
      i5li            L, D and M Jones              1 3 / 1 (& )
    (A4>*jTG2         Mr and Mrs O'Neill        2fL{ < t P f ) . n h fS'M.)        2o/,(^/iMt)
       •7 1 I         Mr S.Edwards     Oa h          (*>

           S>h        Mr and Mrs Clark         17/1 (SwuOUR) ,2-t/i       tP?) .
      7/(             Mrs. R.Robinson           (
                      Mr and Mrs J P Joynes

       2(5^21^' Mr and Mrs. s Roberts and Miss S Roberts                           tj/l    .
                      J W Saunders     '.111 /<*>)
     5/1              Mr G.W. Wright

                 \f   Mr Hicks

                 n X CHilsborough Family Action Support Group
h$y\P M A^MMCiUafeolicitor representing HFASG
                      Claire Curtis-Thomas MP                (NEW MP   fo r   CORBY NEVER        BEEN
                      WRITTEN TO BEFORE)


 IQ / jT                    Torw aoujE                   ib/s (Pp )
    U tte .                    to

     c        . r .        fio o t                                                                   Q y

    th €                  tfu -o a v b o ;*                  s c / u n * '?                           p s &      k c h ’i u     t f e       r


     Jbsh                  u o b

     3 0 Ok/uSJ ^ e > C.Atf£                                                                               IS c t r        °>~1
     LOjJbD*3   SWI H 94T*

    D e a r                        vScV u.


0 { ; ) ilL U & b u $ b |                          S    ttfP       iu h        l\ S       fa T   &     t




    furtUt^ to cur Meptyou ccAodteU*<K                                                                                                          t
    I C a JL ff-j                  t t a J t           r k          C n iU A               u J tu a c *          ftc fa U c

     U * € ie ,h                Ih h u ^ t ,                    C .        rt<              C PS           f t a iW   o     f e /d lr

     p q x * » *                   h ?    H y s ^ ;                                   p a T \         ^       tf<         r a ^ o * i

     U a to                                                                    ^ 7                          W i iX y % ^ O C t U A ^ L \
     gmmm         * *              c                                                  "
      W        h A ^ y        S it |3 J lc f V          W       U iji      -


     ^cctscX ^^f ,                                                  c/                           > epcT V                  e ^ & y o t.
         I     K cw e          40** c L t f t c k G x                      H z               A w t+ c U a -x C X ^

         {^u H aJd U , ^ > k                            1< |u *           O tJ ^ v >                 f c                   rfo c u S < A            •

     IP           I A h        h    J K ^      k         K     m    U      a ^ o u )ftv < ^                     p l® k f        M       :

             N £ Im c >0                                            V ^ U c U X £ * v e i y < * -i ^ £ 4 * 7 •
         A>           I                                       I £V \        C U O O -,               c \      ta U o G u ,

         QcM3b& Iso 3 Kout^iW r u ^ U u !((K .
                                                                                                                                    fr o
A <UJ>                     .


^   -JL-   C lip 5 n > o
                                  MINUTE
        Dru Sharpling
        CCP
        Central Casework



        RE: HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


1.      On Friday 26/9 I contacted Chris Bone, secretary to Lord Justice
        Stewart-Smith, to ascertain the present position with the scrutiny.
2   .   He informed me that the Judge will be seeing the families of the
        deceased this week and the scrutiny team would hope to see me between
        mid to late October.

3.      He says that the Judge is very impressed with the standard of our two
        counsels' original opinion.

4       He has now asked for a copy of my review report. A Briefing Note is
        attached to this minute.




        George R. Croston
        Prosecution Team Leader
        Central Casework York
                          BRIEFING NOTE

                          RE: HILLSBOROUGH




ISSUE

1.1     Whether Central Casework should allow access by the Hillsborough
        Scrutiny Team, headed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to the review
        report prepared by George Croston.



ACTION REQUIRED

2.1     A decision to be made to either disclose or to refuse access to
        this report.



TIMING

3.1     Decision by CPS should be made by 6/10/97



BACKGROUND

4.1     The background to the Hillsborough      Disaster   has   been   well
         documented in previous reports.

4.2     In December 1996 Granada TV aired a controversial drama-
         documentary about the tragic events which occurred in 1990.
         Subsequently letters were received from the families of some of
         the deceased requesting re-examination of the circumstances of
         the disaster.

4.3     On 4/3/97 a letter was received from the Hillsborough Family
         Support Group (HFSG) Providing what was said to be fresh evidence
         and new witnesses. It was comprised of a large bundle of
         documents and their counsel's opinion. As a result of this,
         discussions were generated between the Home Office, the Legal
         Secretariat to the Law Officers and the CPS. Following a meeting
         on 10/3/97 it was decided that each of the three groups should
         conduct a separate review.

4.4     On 8/5/97 George Croston of CPS Central Casework at York produced
         a review document that concluded that there were no grounds for
         recommending to the Home office that there should be further
         investigation of criminal allegations against the police or other
         persons.

4.5     On 30/6/9, the Home Secretary announced that it had been decided
         that it was in the Public Interest for an independent scrutiny to
         ascertain whether there now existed any new evidence relating to
         the disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed to the
         position.



KEY CONSIDERATIONS

5.1      The Terms of Reference of the scrutiny are:-
If


                5.1.1       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to
                            the disaster which was not available to the Taylor
                            Inquiry, the DPP, or to the police.

                5.1.2       To advise whether any new evidence justifies     the
                            establishment of a further Public Inquiry.

                5.1.3       To draw the DPP's and police       attention to any
                            relevant evidence not previously considered by them.

                5.1.4       To advise whether there is any other action which
                            should be taken in the public interest.

          5.2   The scrutiny was to examine all the written and other evidence
                which had been submitted as well as any further material which
                 interested parties wished to submit.

          5.3   The DPP's letter of 3 0/7/97 to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith stated
                 that we would co-operate fully in whatever way we can with the
                 scrutiny, and that we would welcome the opportunity to discuss
                 the CPS's decision making process.

          5.4   The attached copies of E mail messages at Appendix 1 shows that
                 some consideration has been given to the    application of PI I
                principles to internal memoranda and police reports.

          5.5   The provision of the review report to the scrutiny team would
                 allow them see exactly what matters were   considered in the
                 initial decision making process.

          5.6   The reviewing lawyer, George Croston, is agreeable to PII being
                 waived re his report.



     6.   RECOMMENDATIONS

          6.1   That in the interests of co-operation with this judicial inquiry
                we waive PII and disclose the Hillsborough Review Report to the
                scrutiny team.



     7    CONCLUSION

          7.1   It would not appear to be in our interest to hide behind PII
                principles for a document that must assist Lord Justice Stuart-
                Smith to come to the proper advice decision.
>
            C u j^   &   C c     i/io                                     GdP7
                                        MINUTE
              Dru Sharpling
              CCP
              Central Casework



              RE: HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


    1.        On Friday 26/9 I contacted Chris Bone, secretary to Lord Justice
              Stewart-Smith, to ascertain the present position with the scrutiny.

    2   .     He informed me that the Judge will be seeing the families of the
              deceased this week and the scrutiny team would hope to see me between
              mid to late October.

    3.        He says that the Judge is very impressed with the standard of our two
              counsels' original opinion.

    4         He has now asked for a copy of my review report. A Briefing Note is
              attached to this minute.




              George R. Croston
              Prosecution Team Leader
              Central Casework York
                                 BRIEFING NOTE

                                 HILLSBOROUGH




1.   ISSUE

     1.1     Whether Central Casework should allow access by the Hillsborough
             Scrutiny Team, headed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to the review
             report prepared by George Croston.



2.   ACTION REQUIRED

     2.1     A decision to be made to either disclose or to refuse access to
             this report.



3.   TIMING

     3.1     Decision by CPS should be made by 6/10/97



4.   BACKGROUND

     4.1     The background to    the Hillsborough   Disaster   has   been   well
              documented in previous reports.

     4.2     In December 1996     Granada TV aired a controversial drama-
              documentary about the tragic events which occurred in 1990.
              Subsequently letters were received from the families of some of
              the deceased requesting re-examination of the circumstances of
              the disaster.

     4.3     On 4/3/97 a letter was received from the Hillsborough Family
              Support Group (HFSG) Providing what was said to be fresh evidence
              and new witnesses. It was comprised of a large bundle of
              documents and their counsel's opinion. As a result of this,
              discussions were generated between the Home Office, the Legal
              Secretariat to the Law Officers and the CPS. Following a meeting
              on 10/3/97 it was decided that each of the three groups should
              conduct a separate review.

     4.4     On 8/5/97 George Croston of CPS Central Casework at York produced
              a review document that concluded that there were no grounds for
              recommending to the Home office that there should be further
              investigation of criminal allegations against the police or other
              persons.

     4.5     On 3 0/6/9, the Home Secretary announced that it had been decided
              that it was in the Public Interest for an independent scrutiny to
              ascertain whether there now existed any new evidence relating to
              the disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was appointed to the
              position.



5.   KEY CONSIDERATIONS
     5.1   The Terms of Reference of the scrutiny a r e :-

           5.1.1       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to
                       the disaster which was not available to the Taylor
                       Inquiry, the DPP, or to the police.

           5.1.2       To advise whether any new evidence justifies     the
                       establishment of a further Public Inquiry.

           5.1.3       To draw the DPP's and police attention to any
                       relevant evidence not previously considered by them.

           5.1.4       To advise whether there is any other action which
                       should be taken in the public interest.

     5.2   The scrutiny was to examine all the written and other evidence
            which had been submitted as well as any further material which
            interested parties wished to submit.

     5.3   The DPP's letter of 30/7/97 to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith stated
            that we would co-operate fully in whatever way we can with the
            scrutiny, and that we would welcome the opportunity to discuss
            the CPS's decision making process.

     5.4   The attached copies of E mail messages at Appendix 1 shows that
            some consideration has   been given to the application of PII
            principles to internal memoranda and police reports.

     5.5   The provision of the review report to the scrutiny team would
            allow them see exactly    what matters were considered in the
            initial decision making process.

     5.6   The reviewing lawyer, George Croston, is agreeable to PII being
            waived re his report.



6.   RECOMMENDATIONS

     6.1   That in the interests of co-operation with this judicial inquiry
           we waive PII and disclose the Hillsborough Review Report to the
            scrutiny team.



7    CONCLUSION

     7.1   It would not appear to be in our interest to hide behind PII
           principles for a document that must assist Lord Justice Stuart-
            Smith to come to the proper advice decision.
From :              Chris Enzor
To:                 cpshql.CSDI .sharplid
Subject:            Hillsboror

Redraft attached.
I spoke to Tony Chan who spoke to Sue Ross. Their view is that we should seek to apply PII principles to the
Stuart-Smith scrutiny. Looking at the terms of reference, there are clear and unequivocal references to
"evidence". I think this gives us a lead in to avoid internal memoranda and police reports. Clearly, we will need
to mark as sensitive anything we think ought not to be disclosed, but we can deal with this in correspondence
when we send the schedules.
Scheduling will be done next week.
Also, we can accommodate the scrutiny here if required.
I have not prepared a background note - I do not think one is necessary.

NB - I am not in tomorrow!

CC:                 cpshql.csdl.DAW KINSL, cpshql.CSDI.chana, cpshql.CS...
From :             Sue Ross
To:                CPSHQY.CSD2(enzorc)
Date:              25 July 1997 8:58am
Subject:           Hillsborough -Reply

W e can always disclose tings that ought to be disclosed as a matter of fairness - the inquiry has come after so
many years of angst that we ought not to make it look as though there is anything to hide. My only point was
we ought to identify what we would not normally disclose and put your recommendations as to whether it
should be disclosed in the circumstances to the Director, or at least Dru and Chris Newell (as this is a public
inquiry, and DCE are meant to be involved). Hope this helps. W hy did you have such a ridiculous deadline?
From :             Sue Ross
To:                CPSHQY.CSD2(enzorc)
Date:              25 July 1997 8:58am
S ubject:          Hillsborough -Reply

W e can always disclose tings that ought to be disclosed as a matter of fairness - the inquiry has come after so
many years of angst that we ought not to make it look as though there is anything to hide. My only point was
we ought to identify what we would not normally disclose and put your recommendations as to whether it
should be disclosed in the circumstances to the Director, or at least Dru and Chris Newell (as this is a public
inquiry, and DCE are meant to be involved). Hope this helps. W hy did you have such a ridiculous deadline?
4/06 '97       15:35          © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                                            UNITED HOUSE             0001/011




                     CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE
    0**^              1 f^ C E N T R A L CASEWORK - -

                                                       50 LUDGATE HILL
                                                      LONDON EC4M 7EX
    S      i    g     .                             .................
                                                       FAX: 0171 273 8450
    W* ^                  ■




                                                FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION


    For the attention of:

    Address:...................




     Fax No:._________________

     From:............

     Date:...........^             .rr. . .(a . - 5 D. ■ . Time:........7S>~ ■                   ...............................

     This FAX transmission consists of this page +                                                        others

     Message........................... •(........................................................................................
           ................................................   :         .... . i S c u J b                    --••

                    Q j £              i d t v ^ ......

                              J d u ,                £ 2 b.(a                :...




        Original(s) to follow Y/N
        Please acknowledge receipt Y/N

        If You do not receive all pages or-cannot read                                                     o .        _. ,
        all the text please contact the sender of:   0171 273 + ext                                           (Direct Line)


    PORM/FaJC
From :              Chris Enzor
To:                 cpshql.CSDlsharplid
Subject:            Hillsboror

Redraft attached.
I spoke to Tony Chan who spoke to Sue Ross. Their view is that we should seek to apply PII principles to the
Stuart-Smith scrutiny. Looking at the terms of reference, there are clear and unequivocal references to
"evidence". I think this gives us a lead in to avoid internal memoranda and police reports. Clearly, we will need
to mark as sensitive anything we think ought not to be disclosed, but we can deal with this in correspondence
when we send the schedules.
Scheduling will be done next week.
Also, we can accommodate the scrutiny here if required.
I have not prepared a background note - 1 do not think one is necessary.

NB - 1 am not in tomorrow!

CC:                 cpshql.csdl.DAW KINSL, cpshql.CSDtchana, cpshql.CS...
                                                                     C A S E W       O   R r .

                                                                        A JEJULIE?
           T H E H IL L S B O R O U G H S C R U T IN Y
           Room 1106                                                     2 9 AUG 1997
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT                        V h a l         TTS
m          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007
                                                                              YORK


MrCEnzor                                                     Your reference:
Crown Prosecution Service
Central Casework                                             Qur reference:
United House
Piccadilly                                                   Date;               21 August 1997
YORK YOl 1PQ




                 A os



 You may wish to note that the address and telephone numbers for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
 scrutiny o f the evidence relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster have changed.
 The new address and numbers are shown above.




                                                                     P ao O      k

                                                                              •p a   ■




                                                                           O l I /<?

C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny
                                                                     KikA                    \/<?
               T H E H IL L S B O R O U G H S C R U T IN Y
               Room 1106
               50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
               Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007




     Miss D Sharpling
                                                                 Your reference:
     Crown Prosecution Service
     Central Casework
                                                                 Our reference:
     50 Ludgate Hill
     LONDON EC4M 7EX
                                                                 Date:             27 August 1997


                                                       bpi          ho


                                                                                         2 . < r t S '* '
                                                                         T
     You may wish to note that the address and telephone numbers for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
     scrutiny of the evidence relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster have changed.
     The new address and numbers are shown above.




                                              ✓

        l/L L 'tv
                          1/
     C F BONE
ff   Secretary to the Scrutiny
    T h e Guardian S atu rd ay O ctober 11/1997
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             v-v'.:; M o n e y !11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    "    . -       . ,




                                                                                   ■■   .. »       . . ... ■.■%P.         ■ . ' <%0   ■   ;             . ,. ■■■■ Jiff ■        ..                                                                                                              Richard CoISaey



             S THE inq u iry into the H ills­ p a re n ts of o lder children and / •'•<- - -s ta n d in g legal principles*. it'}g.'iaiSi/                                                              ..aliie-lo                                                                        iC
             borough clisasteropeiieci this brothers an d s is te r s ;of victims.-.' *'•; -.- '-to-argae tiia ftb e experien ce o f the-/.;'.'
            .w eek am id controversy '                received nothing anJ.ess.tli.ey could .: police officers, g hastly thoug h i t - '.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ::-inore/spic.ifieal!y'tliait'anyonHas''-                card,'.though., is that 'the .amount
                                                                                                                                                                                                      dofifi-'so 'far, th i s can n o t lead l « h e        -would be-'paid-to everyone eligib le, '
            laboitl; th e ju d g e’s rem ark s,       shovs'that they lo st fin an ciai support w as, was' in the sam e.leag u eas that-.-.                                                          ;-fajii!I;tes iS c e rra ig c o m p e n s a iiilit.; . ■rattier tim n jiist b ginga sin g le pay-'
   m in isters w ere co n sid erin g a Law '""•• as.a re su lt of th e'd eath s. B ecause' -.            of, fo r instance, M ranclM rs'H icte."''-.
   C om m ission proposal to in crease' ■                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /mei5i.-The'.C.ommission-has'pr;o-.: '■
                                                      m an y of th ose whri died w ere too 1-                                                                                                                                                               ;p)sed^lia{:'tlioseeligible.sbotdiliiir.
  dam ages payable to th e fam ilies o f "/•; young to h av e s ta rte d .fe iiillie s o rv \h
  people k illed in accidents.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              '-iifiide'pft^                           ./•..
                                                     c areers, on lyfu n eral expen ses m r e 'v .joke on Monday ■.abput Liyerpdoi''1'.'!.
     H illsborough h as highlighted i n - ' paid, Trevor and Jennifer,Hteli'" " feiis.turahig;np late cllstiacted:f|*pia:i
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .■itifteEtlteeSeiif                                    /cliillrliw fa^ ^                            ■■

  adequacies in the p re se n t law for '• 'w ho lost: da. ligh­
                                                                                                                                                                                                     PbfcwoBlffiffS                                                      'possibly, '-unjnarried part- ■
  com pensating'the bereaved. These - te rs S a ra ly l9 ,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           /iieri;:93»^                                                                  -


  shortcom ings are in dram atic con-.... an d V ictoria,-IS,
  trast to 'the American sy stem w here                   w«Monfyhie; Itls'/hai*#!® ; p p i a t t i a t f                                                                                                                                               11a v ’                          i, >        :/'/'Tliereais:feibrtH:natfay.;^afM''. ■
  th e p a re n ts of a. six-year-old boy who
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               '/^gnitledto'dagi;//:- /en0U ib'& t^M ccideB ts.lbri.nci-eas-
  died a fte r falling out o f a badly de- .              lccciyedthe. ■ ■ th e :p o lic e
                                                     sta n d a rd be­
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ;';/.ages:ta reflect./';/'                            /iiigpaym eots|il£e--thteselbJjayea--:'
  signed van. w ere th is w eek aw arded                                                                                                                                                                                                       / ■ -the tie g |ii|ii.e e S f'                        '■significant im p act m iiisiiraiiee .pre- -
                                                     reavem ent pay­                                                                                                                                                                           /vcplj'eagries,:at-; -■’//,                           tnitans-, 'w biclfisalw ayis aecffisider-
  $282 m illion (£182 m illio n ) ag ain st          m ent for the                 if a s in 'tlie smme.leafuc> -as.'that                                                                                                                       ;xlfidttgli.|»artly;to:/                             .atiQn..wt!eiii3isiii,g:d.amages;.Iiow- ■
  th e C h ry sle r C o rp o ra tio n .. •           yo u n g er g irl’s".'
 . A lthough the South Yor.kshi.re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        t i i>t ' , ' u                              fv e ty .tlie iijn ip a r is o n tie tw e e n tlie '. :
                                                     death . T he bit--"-:                                                                                                                                                                     :/.aelyeai/Itli.iiof:a/';'':                            U    i>    ",H 1,1 n ,ui ,'i ij                           I,
  P olice A u th o rity ad m itte d liab.ii.ity      te rn e s s fe ltb y
: fo r the ev en ts that led to 96 d e a th s a t '. the victim s’fam* -.                                                                                                                                       ..                             . :iSitiiItfctf--;};ike:/:'/y■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   “                     m >/ i n id ,, i <                        ■S aferiiii'O f a llb feltidfla-^o nipared.
  the FA C up sem i-final betw een L iv­             llles w as intensified, whenatp t o .               the purpose o f h is in vestig atioiis, V
  erp o o l and N ottingham F o rest in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ..*ifli:w h#,iS'payabM 6r^t!ie4ea'lili.of
                                                     £200,000 w as paid to. iiiclividti.il/"' V/" w hich is.to p ro v id es '‘Ib e tis e d s e fu --                                                                                                                                                °chIia,eyeSilf.tjiolaw ;cttangB s.iB A/' -'
  A p ril 1989, it h as had to pay rela- *           police officers to com pensate them -'' .tiny”-into th e d isa ste r. T he victim s’;,
. tiv ely little com pensation.. -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .rMii                              j>ropos-
                                                     fo r the p o st-trau m atic slioc.lt/they."/'"-/". ■families, rem ain deeply d issatisfied ///                                                 ■     /     .     /      .     v      .     f        l     i         e   j       j     a     " :als,;:»ll¥epali;fa;:i a a t;f e            -
     A su m o f £3,500 w as autom atically .suffered d ealin g w ith the aftermath-.;' ■with th e::w ay the.inquest'was con-                                                                        'l»sed/|iMa*«3asifig.
  p aid to th o se who lo st spouses or a ‘ of the trag edy . W hile the dam ag es/':» ■ducted, ;and w ith the'verdiqt o f d e e p
  child u n d e r 1,8. 'U nm arried p a rtn e rs,' w ere determ ined,according to-Iong* ■ , dentaldeath, E ven if.th ein gttiry i s •;
                                                                                                                                                                                                     i^sMMop0iromSfli0i^§he%- pt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^        R iM a m C (d b e y \is p p a rn s te r




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MsWMm.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     mhb                                                                   WMMmm

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 wmmm
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WMmtZ                                                                             S ffli

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WMM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      mm
           clolier’s 'issue of                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mm
              fmmj. Observer                    Wl (H i^meI Pensions:
         Iqoksatram jpanies                     Theprps.and.cphsof.';'
  whose records for ' - -                       making lump-sum
  dividend growth h a v e ' ■ :                 ratlier titan rc^gtilar ■' / :'
  given them enviable -'- '                     contributions to a personal                                -'■
  stock in affat ratings, ' •                   ■ A leading M accept;                                          li
 - Many companies                               portfolios to suit boli low-risk and .aclwitiirop: ^ -' -
  increase'the^-payoutsto. . .                  tiwestors. -.          - ■ . . . . ;"/'/:/ ;,/./.:":.::/^/
  shareholders on a regular                     if *»,*look at how home income pJaiisfife-pensioiefs
  basis. However, we.provi.de'                  an extra ineome from their propeitym fiottf losing '-                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .■■■■■   ■ ...
 an in-depth profleof 1.8                       security of tenure.
 which have consistently.                                                                                                                                              own finances.
                                                ■ Building Societies Survey; Coiiiprelieiisiye-giilite to
 sewed op. ffli.nti.al/                         the best rates on oiler to savers.
 dividend payouts of 10 per '                   ■ Fra: fop Coit»p«’ir,               »rrvice.
 cent or more over the past
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 m       ur h   to                im m y t W(s               m   itv*
 decade.
                                                                                                                                                                            *m^&my                            m«mey-h-tSg^
                                               pagespacked with andysisandadvice - helpingyw
                                               t&makeJaliMseqfyour hard-earned income. ■:                                                                                  • if your Income"


                                                H Siibserilie now and .receive your- iialf-pri.ee ' ■
                                                3-nMMit.li M ai sutecription fo r only £3.79. . ' ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  G et nim h m ore-with.'0 ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ,/                            WOOLWICH
      WSl Himt Wj fhnv wmih »(,<!                                                                                                                                                                                                               E B M                            M
  H i h M r . p i m t U ,r y.) a i            h m „ i ill    I,                                                                                                                                                                  ' "';®'# "'                             ■Wk■#$!'■ ■
 |ilil|iS |l||||l;l|a
  ■ , , ' S » v.’H l,‘        - i' l ’. < j        ■ if


                                                                  Mllllllll                                                                                                         ■ ' ■ ■ ■ in          Xo^m am uiin m w
                                                                                                                                                                           B.SOmn■QXfG^mJWO'HFF(l;'3J30am-\^J)Op^SAT}0}:iX^a!i\^2,&QpmSUtllttte/meiisiklsfress;^S|K//w*w,woo^wffihxoj,ik
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            m ay £se r&cortfeii a n d /o r
                                                                  f ??- j| :^-
                                                                  1 ...I  . if ,   1    fj
                                                                                        *-
                                                                                               h     H if
                                                                                                          ^
                                                                                                              IS
                                                                                                              S     1*
                                                                                                                    j-i    !|
                                                                                                                           i;
                                                                                                                                ij
                                                                                                                                Is
                                                                                                                                     ^'   l! 'if
                                                                                                                                     '* -I ' *j
                                                                                                                                                   ’■
                                                                                                                                                   ;
                                                                                                                                                                'pQBwty-/’id)                   securityf e t a f f l a l g a g e . F w iffi-wei.. sn :^ ia a ? < k Musi’s wivw&p. t o a>'!;3bga b               Mfasyrosvxv e f i i '{o.i                3
                                                                                   iiliiilliiSIIl
                                                                                                                                                        ypu r                              as                                                                                                                                                    capita? . ? t t e e/;rf o H t e
                                                                                                                                                        '                       ?                       oirmiMetsrdt e ^ ' i e s a , a ^ l i | « f / f i f e o f ;45-^-. ^                        ^                     ^ ^ -^
                                                                                                                                                               m w vi'l pBfyZibift £152,550,00. fe 'a iiie                                                                        ?8n5»?|sps.'-lf?viiaKi?» up ia-lh‘i'd?       'Mx>WiCU'?> wiy-atsn
                                                                  §|tpill!S                                                                             ’■AVi'S. pyopm?y. A!t trwftgsggs m i %-ii'wvt tt> tsWius arid 'Wfoak® s'ft#.-a.
                                                                                                                                                         Sktetf}), Hgj'it'DAI.4 6!;E. ^HmhAc'n Ditftct'is a se-ma?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A wft&ri tfjola'api.ris avaiiab-e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5)v V/oo!wgih pic! RegiSteiMj e'fKfr...Wy«!irig $J?ee(,              Kent 0A6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            fesRvWooiaict). 0iract,.p 0 8>m S<X>,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ftegiilsffitl so: .32S5SS3.. Vkmiv-iK-h


                                                                                                                                                        y o o r .
                                                                                                                                                                i                                                                                                                                                                                         OMiT, FBM2
12lffipney-                                                                                                                                                                                                            T V OtM('S>„n , ,,                      ,'t '<„/ I               /V,7




       Stew art Daltoy
       on the rage for
       golf souvenirs




                                                                                                                                                                       V«- --Ji|y                                                  "■          ■achieved was £ffi»4W),’paidfor
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             : ari.eigM eeath century .'iron ■ ':
                                                                                                                                                                       - ''ft. iw     W. ot  rv/'vV'-^  'T/^  /i“
                                                                                                                                                                           ||- ' ' :. Jiff- v.wAfi WWll, SOIulr .%  1  1     -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             i/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              v-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                / .            Wli'JI'VI'vsr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;uuu.uy;'m6.i30iiyian.uii                   iII ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       mu-
                                                                                                                                                                         <'3 * - : S : ;i-oiieiii,--lt w asa ■ > I :lisriaire-.IaliaeQtiilz.Patin.o,-a'
                                                                                                                                                                         V ^ t e .m a te h t te ^ d e in ilae.-;::--: ihoted-golf.ehthusiast-.with a
                                                                                                                                                                                    v r tth ^ id fttr ^ ^ a golfer ■■ ■iprivategolf course in south- ■
                                                                                                                                                                      VoB;lt;:B ie;golilr»aa-t!ie. ' -'.-:-v' "eraSpain.:,-;.;-:                                              y.-- ■' \- - -
                                                                                                                                                                                                  V;---; ; i v ”■                           v;: ■;-OM-'goifbatts-.are know aas'
                                                                                                                                                                      yx,yiSij|Jt^                                                            ■feaUierfes, They-were hand- -.
                                                                                                                                                                       ’:k-% ^ 1v:>                ':-/-jW :*'"/.'*■"/,-r"i?      O'f'/’t - . !xi.3£«^ iiij.iM.-10'iii.t i,.Didi/ii ana
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  allu.
                                                                                                                                                                      --fplf!t$:tn^oi^E b^-$ale; in/. ■ ■■ feel -sinewy . The casting is /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ■fWss:/'*ch'if1-o Thatf a w chiffisH ■ '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -■-with feathers and sew n                        .--/
                                                                                                                                                                       ..about say. m einbrabiiia a b o u t.' together .with.waxed thread.
                                                                                                                                                                      :;the:e^e'fet<jh''^emitigiy-                                            ■The .ball' dictated the shape o f
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               the-club.'-' -■ "■-■-■■                    ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ■:':^ M tfli» ;ia7 te,cfe& s« ei» y :.
                                                                                                                                                                      ;aj#fitS;ii* b e lm iliiiio a fain-?- i ■-usuaUy. long'hbsed, wooden- :'--.-
                                                                                                                                                                         ' * ;>M», ) ) ( ’>’ i !',« n                                       -■ andcustb^wade/Qccasion-:,-.'-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            :.:aifyf;fb!tspeciaiiarcaiB^y'''. ■ '.'■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /sides';-jton.clvibs; would ;be,:
                                                                                                                                                                         1' i|r !</ / : /I ’ f /i / 1;                                     y^d@:by'-|^s|'biacksTniths.'yyy y
                                                                                                                                                                            U-n’tfl !';)>'•/Vdi, /it Wulliff'                                  %i ”■ ' n ‘t ' . ' .
                                                                                                                                                                      '■:aI{||J|si||p tfS ill!Q a ^ ^                                             j’Ucl;.O'f            '.C3-X'1,1.^. .PslIfiO'. •
                                                                                                                                                                                .OI» •m ' iU'ii'I’/ h'/v/il!                               y|)aiilirMs%h;it)y-■■■■■'y.''X :
                                                                                                                                                                       :'l£B0W trsp o r|iif siea eiia iiifc ‘V :'-. ■y.B.bth:ba.lls-'a.a£l:c!iibs w ere y
                                                                                                                                                                        f*l f' It * 1*j ail i'll tt'h’ 11h                                  ---BiMai)yiraftsi.nea-aM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ^ing g 0'l£c!Ii-ti©t':c0Bj.e ciieap'ia:
                                                                                                                                                                      .Twr^aigapii^esioQ/,;:;:                                              ■vi.BB0igoie€5iitii                              ■-.■■■■
                                                                                                                                                                     '5i'^ :M ie iM 8t:biiiliii|)-by the-:--:- ■;W ^rdM oht^e;golf-expertat :y
                                                                                                                                                                     .;.S.oiitli 'AMciah:giilfer Bobby'^.r::; fclin stie s in Glasgow,-says:
                                                                                                                                                                      liocke,- w lie won. the B ritish - ‘‘Peatheries cost two shiliiB gs
                                                                                                                                                                     '"fipea c 'te iip io n sh ip 'tH tr ;;-■. .- and sixpeace-ln the1830s, so
                                                                                                                                                                     ‘rllines, pas.S 8M.'at iactian: i i j S ": g g |! f l? f t ''f f y y v o j ,ld:ec»t,:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ;7':-':'!fbday>a.f#'ifierie iB 'gooi y
                                                                                                                                                                      bl,«’ it'll' ihil1*. /fir) t’-iiit,             ycoaditioiiedialiM ciithoii-- ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -s a iy s,:p a rtic a la riy :iflllia sy -.-.
                                                                                                                                                                       h p r i c c . - . . Snmduyvium,                  ttie na®e-of.a--weU-tociwn ■- ....■--
                                                                                                                                                                     'A ia e iic a i buyer p a if e ■:’.. .;fc:-'.'.- . iaafer'OB.:if, la th e ca riy i9SM)s»/.
                                                                                                                                                                     ':-repate#$l;25m Illien:'-:. y ./y :: S.pblte<rtbr.-paid:£i2iiK)0.fbray
                                                                                                                                                                     :.{£86p,CX)6).fci*'att''aM' Icbn'ciuh-.':- featli.er-41I.lfic! ball made.by ■'. ':
                                                                                                                                                                     .;w itliM l/s :faH!|}M.sii.:flie y\-' -■ W&j.Gourlay Ib 1840r still in.- -
                                                                                                                                                                      'li^d,.'rfe^rtediy\bel6ai^'g-id-:-,' ■ ■ M i n t c o n d i t i o n . ' . ■■ ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ■-,.-. yH:y'a y -. -:'Because o fth e expense,            .-'
                                                                                                                                                                     y. -fMpmxliks<a:mis 'llgtKfpi'i-:. .'fewer jand'fewer people could,-'-'
                                                                                                                                                                     :yale!y:a|M3.- ts:Slirotitleffiii.se--“-'-v ;A M t e play golf; Then, in the
                                                                                                                                                                     '.cre^vB ^ i |s - a t :. th ea u ^ b n sy !'
                                                                                                                                                                     ;lie IJ t^ J ! ia t.it;ra iti^ h e r;-b e :: .'
                                                                                                                                                                     rproved'or; iis ir o v e il li a tt li e ; yy :-0 jfta-percha rubber im portM
                                                                                                         6 . 5 0 %
                                                                                                                                                                     :clalJ:#eIong(aiioi the -IsJngyif I t "• ■.IhjmMalaysia'yGdlfbalM: ".
                                                                                                                                                                     ..aid,:itwoaM                                     stoppecl'pingtag and-.startedv. ■..
                                                                                                                                                                     ■earliest' loig w n g o if elalisv           y'
                                                                                                                                                                         ;lh e'.h igh ^ f auc^ohpricie ■ ■ 1 : '.The r & o r t prfce'ftir a galf


                        Our new 30 day savings.account gives you-a-better, rate than most,90 day account
               Plus one penalty-free withdrawal of up to .£2,500 each.-year and-, the-ability .to take.-your interest -monthly
                       W h ats more, it’s backed by the internationally renow ned Flemings:Group,-All you. have
                  to do is maintain a minimum ,balance of £1,000. For more:Information orr Sovereign'30, c a lfto w                                                  TES€G.'stdl^a;march baits.. -..:
                                                                                                                                                                     liTMgSMiishaiy's-antl'                                      'y-;   -launched jjy.tiie.encl of'N'o-: .
                                                                                                                                                                     :Saffewa^1!iis;»eek;Wtietttt''     member, w ill.also be a v a ila b le '
                                                                                                                                                                     launched tts fli’sl'iastD re per* i M s the' hi-tech screen s.:'
                                                                                                                                                                     :senal tliian.caiceii.tre':.£;m   '■.'f.-But-despite-Tesco’s'foray : ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    in to the financial services see-
                                                                                                                                                                     ..'-''-\-'llie cenbTe;::sii^ted'tii,'ites--- ;:t€xr,.;it'S5tiil lags"behind -its-' • ■ •
                                                                                                                                                                      ■co's Baidgek Store ..fii-Bertfk2 - rtral.-Sainsbitry’s,'.which- a t - .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  •'-readypffers-'fersohal loans            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  :'and;ihc#tgages and h a s ' ---
                                                                                                                                                                            >»* ' f '    '   I '< > )• ' ' t l u l ,   i'S 'i./ilf f

                                                                                                                                                                     —mia-wiflPtiie Soyal'Baiit-of:': M m M sm m s'lm estism ts --
                                                                                                                                                                     Seetlaaci-'^^wllljha'ilile' to'tie-'' - -:'sinc€t Sains'b'ary.'sBaiilt was'. - ■'
                                                                        1 g%                                                                                         ..posIt'CheiBfifrOE'cash-a&well               p u n c h e d ■in .February-.- .-
                                                                                                                                                                     -as .pbtain-;rairi-i'Stateaiejita;.             : .Bbth®e«JQ..aBd'Sa|nsbm^’s .
                                                                                                                                                                           : yM ibrm M m on p iq u e ts,y ~ y ■imve chosen to'rtia M io a r - :
                                                                                                                                                                           'and: s ® ^ e s :fe d u d la i Ciolfc' 'telephonerbaiikingojieration-
       Ail interest tales ate gross compounded: annual rates and are paid net 'of lower-rate income tax: Non-taxpayers, may be eligible to .receive gross'interest 'seUect :cartI;BHs,/Tas?<j;:® sa and W         -foi* custoiner.convenienee a:i
       o the required registration; Interest rates are correct at the time of printing-and sire Subject'to variation-. Robert:' Fleming & .Co, Ltd -{Registered'office-?5 .Tesco                                  'tp-cut.'oveirheads,--According-
   ■                                 1 L ? p® ¥i,rf es         services as principal', Save & Prospw-Group-Ltdacts as'its/agerit/Teiephone-caSls-may be.mcciftlstl   'bf.-'tc8ieM^                        iB iaw tm m xhreleaseM lr
       o ^ s c u iity putposes. #Pius 1 -A oonus tf miramu
                                                                                                                                                                     vlhfi-'sat!Bnaai4et'i3':fi.aaneM'"’"         -.management cons-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ;tancf-Bossaird 'Cornsultar*''
