                     Director o f Public Prosecutions                   Deputy Director and Chief Executive
                                     Allan Green Q.C.                   D. S. Gandy CB OBE




                                             Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                        C. W. P. Newell




      J M Jones                                                               Crown Prosecution Service
      Assistant Chief Constable
      West Midlands Police Headquarters                                       Headquarters
      PO Box 500
                                                                             4/12 Queen Annes Gate
      Lloyd House
                                                                             London
      Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                             SW1H9AZ
      Birmingham
                                                                             Telephone 01 -222-7944
                                                                                       Ext.




Your Ref                                   Our Ref                                      Date:


                                            PGK/3 341/89                               12 March 1990



      Dear Mr Jones

      Re:    Hillsborough

      I write by way of information to confirm that I have recently
      received a file of papers from the South Yorkshire Police.
      The papers are the sequel to a complaint made by Messrs Wayne
      Justin Roper, Paul Graham Hutchinson and Stephen Parker
      against officers of the South Yorkshire Police alleging that
      they were offered entry to the ground upon payment of cash.

      These allegations have been thoroughly investigated by the
      Greater Manchester Police and I have recently written to
      advise that there is insufficient evidence for any criminal
      proceedings to be instituted.  I write to you in these terms
      so that you are aware of this decision in case your own
      enquiry touches upon any of these complainants.

      Should you wish to discuss the matter with me please do net
      hesitate to telephone.

      Yours sincerely




      M G Kennedy
      Police Co mp l a i n t s      Division
