             HOME OFFICE


   THE HILLSBOROUGH
    STADIUM DISASTER
              15 APRIL 1989


          INQUIRY BY
THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


         INTERIM REPORT

                   Presented to Parliament
      by the Secretary ofState for the Home Department
                 by Command o f Her Majesty
                         August 1989




                        LONDON
        HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
6       ^   -       w      -    .

!.0 .             (s® b                          I   / -*
C&^.            * ^ — 7*       C L^-fh   K ^ iu ^ .'tU
NEWS RELEASE                          50 Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                      (Night line 01 -2 7 3 4595)
                                      Contact N u m b e r:


                          HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                     STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY


Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
report, the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP said:-
II
  I am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing
the first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim report
before the start of the football season.

Mlt is an excellent report which pulls no punches about the causes
of the disaster.

"The Government welcomes the thoroughness of the report and its
recommendations. They include a number of matters which should be
dealt with without delay pending the longer-term findings of the
inquiry which will be published in the final report.

"A Home Office circular* is to be sent out immediately to local
authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
the organisation of football matches, urging them to take action
on the report's recommendations so as to put as many of them into
effect as possible before the beginning of the season. Similar
steps are being taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland.

"I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though
clearly the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at
sports grounds ( The Green Guide) in the light of the inquiry.

"Most of the problems which contributed to the disaster at
Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. The report reveals
serious shortcomings in applying those lessons on the part of the
police, of the club and of the local authority responsible for
the safety certificate.

"The report reveals clearly that there are major deficiencies in
the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough ground which
should have been recognised and corrected."



*   A   copy of the circular is attached.
The South Yorkshire Police

"it will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider the conduct of individual officers and the South
Yorkshire Police collectively in the light of the inquiry and the
investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police. I shall
look to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially for a
report on the action he proposes to take."

Supervision of Safety Certificates

"Powers recently proposed by the Government in the Football
Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in
due course this is considered necessary in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report.
"The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the
past had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned to
ensure they are applied in the future."
Note to Editors
Following the disaster at Hillsborough stadium on April 15, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary
"To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
ground on April 15 1989 and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."
Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University
of Newcastle upon Tyne. The secretary of the Inquiry was Mr Robert
Whalley from the Home Office. The investigation of the disaster
and the gathering of evidence was carried out by the West Midlands
Police under their Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey Dear, who appointed
Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full time charge of
the investigation. Counsel for the Inquiry were led by Mr Andrew
Collins QC. Technical tests and studies were carried out at the
Health and Safety Executive's Research and Laboratory Services
Division in Sheffield.
The hearing began on May 15 in Sheffield Town Hall, and continued
for 31 days concluding on June 29. 174 witnesses gave oral
evidence. Transcripts of the evidence came to over 3,800 pages,
and some one and a half million words in all. Lord Justice Taylor
also received some 1550 letters.
                                                  HOME OFFICE
                                           Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                   Direct line: 01-273
                                                 Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Ourtference:      F SP/89 3 5 / 4 8 /8 8
Your reference:


       The Chief Executive
       County Councils
       Metropolitan District Councils
       London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London
       Fire and Civil Defence Authorities

       Chief Officers of Police

       Chief Fire Officers
       Chief Ambulance Officers

                                                          4 August 1989




       Dear Sir/Madam
       HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989
       INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
       Introduction
       The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
       into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
       on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the Report is
       attached. Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.
        2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
        contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
        without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
        recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

        Government response
        3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the thoroughness of the
        Report and its recommendations which he believes should be dealt
        with without delay pending the longer term findings of the
        Inquiry which will be published in its Final Report.
E.R.



       Scope of the recommendations

       4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
       primarily at football league grounds and the international
       stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
       large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
       nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
       grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
       attendance.
       5.   The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316. They are in
       two categories: the 28 asterisked are those requiring
       implementation before the start of the new football season or
       immediately thereafter; the remaining 15 are those which,
       although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer to
       put into effect. The Home Secretary nevertheless urges
       recipients to take urgent action on both categories so as to put
       into effect as many of the recommendations as possible before the
       start of the season.

       The guide to safety at sports grounds
       6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
       the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
       appropriate bodies. Any changes will take account of the Final
       Report's recommendations. If there is any doubt as to the
       nature of crush barrier testing described in Annex C of the Guide
       advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.

       The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

       7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
       enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
       Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
       Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
       include mandatory terms and conditions. Consultation as required
       under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
       any such Order is made.

       Football clubs

       8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
       sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
       stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
       Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
       reminded of their powers under s.10 of the 1975 Act for use if
       there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
       the ground.
       Resource implications
       9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
       examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
E.R.



       recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
       significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
       of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
       services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
       or ground operators themselves.
       Other
       10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
       (see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
       (01-273 2765).
       11.     Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.
                                   Yours faithfully




                                   A H TURNEY
                                   Fire and Emergency Planning Department
E.R.



       Association of County Councils
       Association of Metropolitan Authorities
       London Boroughs Association
       Association of London Authorities
       Association of District Councils
       Welsh Counties Association
       Association of Chief Police Officers
       Clerks to Police Authorities
       Regional Managers, Health Authorities
       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

       National Association of Fire Officers

       Fire Brigades Union
       Police Federation
       Police Superintendents' Association

       Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
       Football Association
       Football Association of Wales

       Football League

       Football Trust
       Football Grounds Improvement Trust
       Rugby Football Union

       Welsh Rugby Football Union

       Rugby Football League
       Speedway Control Board

       Cricket Council
       Jockey Club
       National Greyhound Racing Club
  6




E.R.



       Lawn Tennis Association

       All England Tennis and Croquet Club

       Royal and Ancient Golf Club

       RAC Motor Sports Association
       British Board of Amateur Athletics
       Hockey Association
       British Show Jumping Association
       National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs
       Football Supporters Association
       St Johns Ambulance
       Sports Councils for England and Wales
       Central Council for Physical Recreation
      h-~<-                                                          ^
   CL,                9_ * ^
                           1(4^



      ivc6,r    ^                                       ?       f


         c            h   *~      bcJL^t;
                                   <
                                   r
                                                                                                  V-S'S
  flu* Uv«-U)       ^e- ^(a          1    3-^(t-*~jJi—                     Cf^C               ^


u ■«. w v     fc.'.L *   ,;«.«(•>
                           r
                         r-»
 5 ■y. cw<-* i*-* \t\jv*—~~)

jne      .^r^ty                4 -       Ul^      ^             h         c^


                                                                                                  <A S e'*~ p '
 la*, 9 jafU^s (fL Sj^ —4                                   ^       C ^ ffi-7      J*‘a' 1''

            v—^/{ w'>«/              a.w^ V           — t--_7 1>-C''^A-it'^'

                                         L^V    c(o c-j^— 1„'


   S7                                    ------
                                                                                                  Grtf-^2-C
  ^-^i,               -    c_^>           ^    ^r/c*-                                  fr~*


  ?M           ir u        7*,.


                          /cs-e^?         /C      s



   3 u ~ — ft^ ^C <
                  y ^                             c>>^

                i^VirC—                                     ^         /   a /u v   .
                                                                                     I11                  -              /          >        ,/L «                  F\ ; r        ,

                                                                                                     STA1 ’EM ENT OF WITNESS
                                                                                 (C. J. A C T 1967 Se c . 9, M .C . A C T 198 0. See. 102, M .C . R U L E S 198 1, r. 7 0!




                                                             reuor Hicks                                                                            Age (if un de r 21, date o f birth,
                                      Name                                                                                                                                                         A3
                                                                                                                                                    if over 21, age or estimated age)

                                      Address
                                        (and tel. no if any )
BL OC K OUT OA TES
W IT N E SS NOT AVAILABLE
                                      r.                          Managing Director
                                      O ccu p a tio n                        r         ..............................................................


        1      8 15       22   29
        2      9 16       23   30
                                       Ihis         statement                    is     made           f ol.Lowing                   the          Iaylor            Judicial          Review   into     the
        3     10 17       24   31
        4     11 1 3      25          Hillsborough Disaster earlier this year,
        5     12 19       26
        6     13 2 0      27
        7     14 21       28


                                      I am making the following complaints as an individual but I should also
        1        8   13   22   29
        2        9   16   23   30
        3     10     17   24   31     clarify that I am the Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support G r o u p .
        4     11 18       25
        5     12 19       26
        6     13 2 0      27
                                     Within              this          capacity                 I      have           taken             a      deep        interest          in       the    review     Lind
        /     14 21       23
                                     all aspects of the event,

        1        8   16   22   29
        2     9      16   23   30
        3    10      17   24   31
        d    11      18   26          1 was            a      spectator                  with           my        wife           and          two        daughters           at       the   Liverpool     v
        5    12      19   23
        6     13     20   27
        1     14     21   28         Nottingham                    Forest               football                 match              on        the        15th        April     1989         held   at   the

                                     Hillsborough                      Football                 ground.                   As a            result           of the       disaster            I lost both
        -\       3   V3 22.    29
        2     9 16        23   30
        3    10 17        24   31    my daughters Sarah Louise and Victoria Jane Hicks.
        4    1 i 18       25
        3    12 19        26
        6    13 20        27
        7    14 2.1       28
                                     I       gave           evioence                  to       the          Hillsborough                          Stadium            Disaster          enquiry     before

        1        8   15   22   29
        2        9   16   23   30
                                     His Hon Lord justrce                                      Taylor.                  Subsequently                      1 have taken a deep interest
        3    10      17   24   31
        4    11      18   25         in the matters arising and I have collated evidence both as an in d ividual’
        5    12      19   26
        6    13      20   27
        7    14      21   28         and as Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.


        1  8         15  22    29
        2  9         16  23    30
        3 10         1 7 24    31    f'1y presence                    on         the       day         and         my        consideration                      of     the    evidence         leads     me
        4 11         18 2 5
        5 12         19 2 6
        6 13         20 27
                                     to       conclude                that            several               Police              Officers                 neolected           to       discharoe     their
        7 14         21 2 8


:.' i "!ER   S   IF N O   OATES              T h is s t a t e m e n t (c o n s i s t i n g o f    3     pages e a ch s i g n e d by m e ) is t r u e to t h e b e s t o f m y k n o w l e d g e
'O BE A V O I D E D
                                    a n d b e l i e f a nd I m a k e it k n o w i n g th a t , if it is t e n d e r e d in e v id e n c e , I sh all be lia b le t o p r o s e c u t i o n if I h ave
                                    w i l f u l l y s ta t e d in it a n y t h i n g w h i c h I k n o w to be fal se o r d o n o t b e l i e v e to be tru e.


                                    D a te d th e             hAirn                     day of                 August 1 389                             (Signed)
                                                                                                                                                                             Trevor Hicks
                                    t a k e n / w i t n e s s e d b y ...........................................................................................
             F O R M 67
                                                                                      D Jarratt, Det Superintendent                                                                                      3 0 3 I 70
                                                                                                      iWO
          CONTINUATION                                                                    Page Mo.
          STATEMENT OF          Trevor Hicks



          duties relating to the staging of this football match.




          I am able to identify the following officers and I wish to make a formal

          complaint against them.




          1   fir Walter Jackson

              Assistant Chief Constable

              South Yorkshire Police




              fly complaint     against     him    is   that    he     failed   to take   control    of    the

              disaster.




          2   Chi ef Superintendent        David Duckenfield




          3   Super.Lntendent Roger       Marshall




          A   Superintendent Bernard Murray




          5   Superintendent Roger         Greenwood




               It Is my complaint that these officers




               (a)   Failed    to    prevent      a dangerous build up of           supporters       outside

                     of the gates.




               (b)   Failed     to   control      the       movement    of   supporters    subsequent       to

                     th e o p e n 1 n g o f g a te ’C ' .




                                                                                   Signed: Trevor Hicks




FORM 69                                                                                                   303290
                                                                                         ihrt;i.
                                                                         rag e N o ...............
CONTINUATION
STATEMENT OF       Trevor Hicks




     (c)       Failed   to   respond   to   the   developing   tragedy     and       were        slow

               to effect a rescue operation.




 I have previously contacted South Yorkshire Police and they have recorded

 two matters of complaint.




     (a)       Incivility towards me by a Police Inspector.




     (b)   . My treatment by a different Police           Inspector at the            temporary

               mortuary.




                                                                 Signed: Trevor Hicks




                                                                                                 303290
C/I                                 is.




 P<ru^'
 CJJL,
        tnX'vl      W ««rH '


             — <»



                        i r c   c




                                (C, *-■»                               U-Ci            ^       o-x^y1



      Su^3                           £r u—                     ocC^v            CX ^ *»^-o

                                                        j)frJ-a                cfyfl       ‘
       U/ j?                ^~r7                <A/v^

       (^®                       cv*          -0—C*—       S    / c * - | —p                      —     *           £




iL c
               (Ujc                       U                          0 4 ------- H

                    \           /<"<                                                                            ^       >
                                                ' »w . n                   /u                               y
             V <U^-                                                        /G Z ^ '
                                Ic U p \ ty             L                           ^--e'          >
  INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
  STADIUM DISASTER



    NEWS RELEASE
August 4, 1989.                                       01-273 4610
              HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

                  INTERIM REPORT PUBLISHED

The Interim Report of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
under Lord Justice Taylor is published today. The Judge makes
extensive findings as to the cause of the disaster and in his
recommendations proposes 43 instant measures capable of being
implemented forthwith and, where possible, before the start of the
next football season.
Brief Summary of Causes

Lord Justice Taylor finds that:-

"The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the
disaster was the failure, when gate C was opened, to cut off
access to the central pens which were already overfull.
They were already overfull because no safe maximum capacities had
been laid down, no attempt was made to control entry to
individual pens numerically and there was no effective visual
monitoring of crowd density.

When the influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the
barriers there afforded less protection than it should and a
barrier collapsed. Again, the lack of vigilant monitoring caused a
sluggish reaction and response when the crush occurred. The small
size and number of gates to the track retarded rescue efforts. So,
in the initial stages, did lack of leadership.

The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the
turnstiles. That occurred because, as both Club and police should
have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cppe with the
large numbers demanded of it unless they arrived steadily over a
lengthy period. The Operational Order and police tactics on the
day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival of
large numbers should that occur in a short period. That it might
so occur was forseeable and it did. The presence of an unruly
minority who had drunk too much aggravated the problem. So did the
Club's confused and inadequate signs and ticketing."
Interim Recommendations

The interim recommendations are designed to prevent overcrowding
and crushing on terraces in the short term and to improve safety
procedures. But Lord Justice Taylor says that they do not and
cannot meet all the problems or address all the issues of post-
Hillsborough football.
The Judge says:-
"Wider issues such as membership schemes, identity cards, all-
seater stadia, super stadia and long term recommendations fall to
be considered in my Final Report. So do a number of other specific
matters such as a comprehensive review of the Green Guide*, the
problem of excessive pre-match drinking, fans without tickets and
ticket touts."
* Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.
Lord Justice Taylor    says that further evidence and study will be
required before he     can make recommendations on these matters.
Accordingly,    he    says,   the main    thrust  of  the   interim
recommendations, as   a holding exercise,

"is to reduce numbers on the terraces, to increase vigilance and
to achieve a proper balance in crowd control between prevention
of disorder and maintenance of safety."
The Judge has made no recommendations about taking down perimeter
fences. But he says that gates in them to the pitch should be kept
open whilst the terraces are occupied. He does, however, stress
that "it will, of course, be necessary to have a police presence
sufficient to prevent pitch invasion for improper reasons through
the open gates."

The Judge finds that in the assessment of figures for capacity,
the criteria in the Green Guide were not applied with sufficient
rigour at Hillsborough. Since this may also have been the case
elsewhere, he recommends that they should be reassessed with
proper and realistic allowance for all the factors concerned. On
top of that, he proposes a further reduction of 15 per cent on
terraces as an interim measure to improve the safety margin.

The scope of the interim recommendations covers the maximum
capacities for terraces, filling and monitoring terraces, fences
and gates, crush barriers, Safety Certificates, the duties of
football clubs, police planning, communications, the co-ordination
of emergency services, and first aid, medical facilities and
ambulances.

The interim recommendations are set out in full in Chapter 24 of
the report.

Part Two of the Inquiry

Lord Justice Taylor and his Assessors will now be starting work on
Part Two of the Inquiry. This will be directed to making final and
long term recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports
grounds. The Judge will be considering the large body of written
evidence submitted to him which he may want to supplement in some
instances with further oral evidence or discussion in conjunction
with his Assessors. He will also need to make a number of visits
and inspections. He has indicated that he expects to prepare his
final report and recommendations at about the turn of the year.
Note to Editors
Following the disaster at Hillsborough stadium on April 15, when
95 people were killed, Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the
Home Secretary
"To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football
ground on April 15 1989 and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events."
Lord Justice Taylor was assisted by two Assessors: Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University
of Newcastle upon Tyne. The secretary of the Inquiry was Mr Robert
Whalley from the Home Office. The investigation of the disaster
and the gathering of evidence was carried out by the West Midlands
Police under their Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey Dear, who appointed
Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full time charge of
the investigation. Counsel for the Inquiry were led by Mr Andrew
Collins QC. Technical tests and studies werecarried out at the
Health and Safety Executive's     Research and Laboratory Services
Division in Sheffield.
The hearing began on May 15 in Sheffield Town Hall, and continued
for 31 days concluding on June 29. 174 witnesses gave oral
evidence. Transcripts of the evidence came to over 3,800 pages,
and some one and a half million words in all. Lord Justice Taylor
also received some 1550 letters.
                     CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOMMENDATIONS


315. The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary
to ensure that existing football grounds can for the present be
safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at
Sheffield and other information I have received. They complement
the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out after his
inquiry at Bradford.

316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the
1989/90 season starts. The rest should be started forthwith and
completed as soon as possible.

Maximum Capacities for Terraces

1.   Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which
are self-contained, the Safety Certificate should specify the
maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or
area.

A pen or area is to be deemed "self-contained" notwithstanding
that it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen or
area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

2.   Each   figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in
accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide
figure") subject to the following qualifications:-

        (a)   in arriving at "the Green Guide figure",            proper and
              realistic allowance must be made for all factors which
              should reduce the permissible density in accordance
              with   the   range   of       maximum   figures   specified   in
              paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

        (b)   after assessing "the Green Guide figure", a deduction
              of 15% should be made to improve the safety margin.
                                        1
3.    Arrangements should be made:-

      (a)   to limit the number of spectators entering each self-
            contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure
            assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above
            either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing
            arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

      (b)   to close off further access to such pen or area when
            its maximum capacity is about to be reached.



Filling and Monitoring Terraces


4.   There should be a written agreement between the club and the
police setting out their respective responsibilities for crowd
safety and control and in particular for the filling of each
self-contained pen or other terraced area and the monitoring of
spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding.  Any
variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match
should be agreed in writing in advance.


5.    At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for
each self-contained pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the
club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police
are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions
in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators.        Whoever is so
appointed should be in addition to any other steward or police
presence.   He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the
control room.


Fences and Gates


6.    All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to
the   terraced   areas   and   especially   those   with   duties   under
                                    2
Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with
regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition
of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics.       Training should
include demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to
enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd
densities.

7.   All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other
self-contained areas should be painted in a different colour from
the rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit".

8.   Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch
should be kept fully open during the period when spectators are
on the terrace.

9.   There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence
(or group of gates if they are close together) a police officer
authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a
gate to relieve overcrowding.     The officer so authorised in
respect of each gate should be identified for each match and
known to be so by all stewards and police officers in that
vicinity.   He should be able to make radio contact with the
control room either himself or via an officer close at hand.

10.   Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided
by the club at each ground where there are perimeter fences to
permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers
of spectators if necessary.    Agreement should be reached as to
whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade
or stewards.   Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so.
Whether to use it should be a decision of a nominated senior
police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers

11.   All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately
for signs of corrosion.   Any barrier found to be affected by a
significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.
                                 3
12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should
be reviewed immediately to ensure that it complies with the
criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.  If it does
not, the assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen
or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above,
should reflect the fact.

Safety Certificates

13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety
Certificate by the responsible local authority, which should
consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued,
the police, the fire service, the ambulance service and the
building authority.   Such a review should include an inspection
of the stadium.     Its object should be to ensure that the
operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to
add or substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter
of urgency following the findings and recommendations in this
report.

14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports
stadium designated under the 1975 Act for which no Safety
Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to
remedy the situation.

15.   Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local
authority   at   least   once   annually and each Certificate   should
require to be renewed annually.

16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for
issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing
Safety Certificates.    Such review should require that there
exists or is provided an accountable administrative structure
whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and
decisions are properly taken in accordance with the local
authority's rules.
                                     4
17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions,
it should set up an Advisory Group consisting of appropriate
members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the
fire and ambulance services, of the building authority, of the
club and of a recognised supporters' club. The Advisory Group's
terms of reference should encompass all matters concerned with
crowd safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman
from the local authority, and an effective procedure.        Its
resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to
produce regular written reports for consideration by the local
authority.

Duties of each Football Club

18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of
flow measured. Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to
ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting
spectators at the rate anticipated.

19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and
the turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure that all
the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can
pass through the turnstiles within one hour.   If that cannot be
done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
accordingly.


20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of
the area served by them is about to be reached and arrangements
should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with
turnstile operators for this purpose.

21.   Closed   circuit   television       should   be   so   installed   as   to
enable crowd densities outside the ground, within concourse areas
and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and
throughout a match.


                                      5
22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the
ground should be comprehensively reviewed.        It should, in
relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye­
catching, simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the
rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing area.

23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous,       simple and
clear and should correlate absolutely with the          information
provided in respect of each match both outside and       inside the
ground.    Retained   ticket stubsshould contain        information
necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

24. Information on tickets requesting spectators       to be in
position by a particular time should be reviewed by clubs in
conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with
the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.

25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters club
as to the provision of pre-match entertainment aimed at
attracting spectators to the ground in good time.

Police Planning

26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there
is one designated stadium or more should nominate a chief officer
to liaise with the management of each football club and local
authority concerned in respect of the safety and control of
crowds.

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium
and the pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should
alert such officers to the importance of preventing any
overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking appropriate steps
to remedy it.

28.   The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium
should enable the police to cope with any foreseeable pattern in
the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure.     It
                                6
should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment
of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion
of the officer in command at the ground. Crowd safety should be
the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

30. There should be available in the police control room the
results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical
counting of numbers at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any
area of the ground.     Officers in the control room should be
skilled in the interpretation and use of these data.


Communications

31. There should be sufficient operators in the police control
room to enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated
and answered.    The radio system should be such as to give
operators in the control room priority over, and the capacity to
override, others using the same channel.     Additional channels
should be used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the
airwaves.   Consideration should be given to sound-proofing the
control room against excessive crowd noise.

32.   To   complement   radio   communications,   there   should   be   a
completely separate system of land lines with telephone links
between the control room and key points at the ground.


33. Within the control room, there should be a public address
system to communicate with individual areas outside and inside
the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground.
Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to
catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in
the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on
every programme sold for every match.

34.   Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising
                                    7
boards to address the crowd. Consideration should also be given
to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to
indicate to the control room the existence of certain emergencies
or requirements.

Co-ordination of Emergency Services

35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain
through senior nominated officers regular liaison concerning
crowd safety at each stadium.

36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should
ensure that the fire service and ambulance service are given full
details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the
number of spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and
exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning
the control or movement of the crowd.     Such details should be
readily available in the control rooms of each of the emergency
services.

37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium
of emergency vehicles from all three services should be reviewed.
They   should   include   routes    of access,   rendezvous points,   and
accessibility within the ground itself.

38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should
be briefed as to the contingency plans for the arrival of
emergency services and should be informed when such services are
called as to where and why they are required.


First Aid. Medical Facilities and Ambulances


39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one
trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.    The club should have
the responsibility for securing such attendance.

40.    There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms.
The    number   of   such rooms    and   the equipment   to be maintained
                                         8
    within them should be specified by the local authority after
    taking professional medical advice and should be made a
    requirement of any Safety Certificate.

*   41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present
    at each match and available to deal with any medical exigency at
    the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first
    aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before
    kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of
    the match.    His whereabouts should be known to those in the
    police control room and he should be immediately contactable.

*   42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate
    ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with
    an expected crowd of 5f000 or more.

    43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches
    where larger crowds are expected should be specified by the local
    authority after consultation with the ambulance service and
    should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                    9
                        f(IC. C S ' & 0 * i-D

f   a           - -




s       /)     ffh*-   ttfc&     /€=-=*     tf'    ^   ~ £   ■


    /   ■>■)                                    'f/tF S % -




                                                                 7 /4 /? ?
F       R       »




    R       t       A   S   S
' s-




                                                         p
                        /t'iedU z ^ e £ * ~ &




       S<^Cr             ».»<w« o        ^             fifSQ—%
                     l^es^ < ^ 4 i r ^
                 ’           ^ ^L^ -m'-^ r /»1<. »^_ ^                  *«---».




       1trcjk.        /H>


                                     ^       >V - •»


                             <V




f o « C U f i & - *~- S L C s -                        yi*&^   es-3 ?
           £*^7 ^      ^V»K
     SENDER'S R E h tR E N C                                                                                                                                                  CONSIGNMENT NOTE NO
                                                                                                     Head Office
                                                                                   C2 • Gardners Row Business Centre • Gardners Row
            mm: a d lin g to n                                                                     Liverpool *L3 6JE                                                                              .jKt        ,$A,
                                                  s w i f t    d e s p a t c h        Telephone: 0 1 5 1 2 0 1 1 4 1 0 • F ax: 0 1 5 1 2 0 7 1 4 1 0

                                                                                    SENDERS A C CO U NT NO                                                                                  mmm

        NUN ACCOUNT ( t, IV I: ftp Out)                                                                                               cr-li CENTfcAl                  CARf WOfiK
                                                                                                                                                                                                        wmmmm
                                                                                     NO. OF ITEMS          GR OSS W EIG HT
                                                                                                                                                                                            “
                                                                   OFFICE USE                                                         ■                -\T£ H X t t
         LIVERPOOL                                               SENDING DEPOT


                                                                                     01 HER S tR V IC b PLEASE SPECIFY
                                                                                                                                      ORFA'It-.i'.

                                                                                                                                  FOR THE ATTEN T ON OF




     IS EXTRA INSURANCE REQUIRED?                             DECLARED VALUE
                                                              FOR CUSTOMS                                NTER- I SAME
                 YES    □                                                                 S A ; UR DAY NATIONAL   DAY  i                     | PARCEL | MX x " lK                  09 .00       10.00    > 12.00     i   la.Ql
     IF YES, STATE VALUE HERE                                                                           XPRESS EXPRESS


                                                  S ENDER'S VAI NO



                                                                                                                                              MmmM

                                                                                                                                                                      CEIVED IN




                                                                    DESPATCH DAT



                                                                                                                                                               r o •
         351*38991 1V
i   TOP WHITE: SENDING DEPOT 2ND YELLOW: SENDING DEPOT POD 3RD GREEN: DELIVERY DEPOT POD 4TH BLUE: RECEIVERS COPY 5TH PINK: SENDING CUSTOMER
                                                                                                                                                                          The Alternative Parcel Company
                                                                                                                                                                CONDITIONS OF CARRIAGE 1997
                                                                         EFFECTIVE FROM 1 NOVEMBER 1997 — Based on Road Haulage Association Limited Conditions of Carriage 1991
        Thi
        UnetA
            2l
             0t
              1e
               ,rn
                 Aax
                   tc
                    iv
                     eePa1
                      ss rc
                          0el
                            E;
                             stCoem
                               at ,pB
                                    aen
                                      ny
                                       tleyRoadSouth,DarlastonWS108LQ
                                                                                                                                                       •n for any                      Si a Cnn
                                                                                                                                                                                       a lor' or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n a consignment i

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     it sha,; be deeme.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          givsn
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         (bj To £1300.00 per tonne on either he grosi weight of rhe Consignment or
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             accordance with Condition 8(2)'a) or (ai hereof; or

                                                                                                                                            7. Undelivered or Unclaimed Goods                                                                                                               the Consignment bears to tne actual van-c of the ■■.■.+,oie of the Consrgno
  (hereinafter referred to as "(he Carrier’) is not a common carrier and accepts goods for carriage on‘y upon that conditio                 Wt>ere the Gamer is unace for any reason to deliver a Consignment :t he Consignee or as ne may ordar, or .Yherf by virtue o'                    sushmiid. is in respect of that pat o?Hie Consignment.
  Condii,oris sei out oelow. No servant o<agent of trie Carrier is permittee to alter or vary ttese Conoitions m any way .m                 the provso to Cond't'cn 6,'i.i ns'eef trans-t is deemed to ce at enc, t:'« Cainer may sell the goods a'-o payment or fence' c* the
  expressly authorised in writing to do so.                                                                                                 proceeds after ceajcl,o:i o' a,, propei charges and expenses m re.aiicr: fncreio ar;a of all outstanding charges in relation to Hit
                                                                                                                                            carriage and storage of the goods shall iwithout o'e>oice to any claim c> right which the Customer may have against the Carrier
  1. Definitions
                                                                                                                                            otherwise arising under tnese Conditions) discha'ge the Carrier irom alt liability mrespect of such goods, their carriage ana
  In these Conditions:
■ 'Customer' means the person or company who contracts for the services of the Carrier including any otner carrier who
  Consignment to tne Carrier for carriage.                                                                                                  Provided thaf                                                                                                                                                                                                                         w.th 'l;i'a, of this Condition.
                                                                                                                                            (1) the Carrier shai1do what :s reasonable to oota.n the va-^e c' ne Ccnvjnment a "                                                                                                                                                   >r consequential ioss or damage, however
  'Contract ’ means tne contract of carriage between the Customer and the Carrier.
  'Consignee' means tne person or company to whom the Carrier contracts to deliver the goods.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     la'ge; m respect of the Consignment or the
                                                                                                                                               Cane' snan have done what -s reasonas.e r me circumstances to g.'.e notice :o re sender or, if the r.ame and address c! the
  'Consignment 'means goods in bulk or contained m one parcel, package or container, as the case may be, or any nun                            sender is not oown, to he Consignee that the goods will Oe sold unless withm the time specified in such notice, bang a
  separate parcels, packages or containers sen! at one time in one load or for the Customer from one address to one adi                        reasonaoie time lr tne crcumsiances from tne giving of sjch notice, the goods are taken away or instructions are giver, tor
   ''Dangerous Goods‘ means dangerous substances listed by the Health and Safety Commission in Part 1 of the Autho.'is
■ Approved List of Dangerous Subs;ances, explo:' es, radioactive substances and. any. other          . substance presealing a s:                                                                                                                                                             amount of that interest, anc
                                                                                                                                            8. Carriers Charges
  2. Parties and Sub-Contracting                                                                                                            ill The Carriers charges shaii be payable fcj the Costume- without - O'Uttice '.o tie Carriers rights against the Consignee or any           ib) prior to the commencement o‘ t'arrsit the Customer has dei:.erea to
  (1) The Customer warrants that he is either the              sr of tne gooas in an/ Consignment or is authorised by such (                    otner person Frov'deo that when gccds are consigned 'carnage biwaid' the Customer shall not be recused to pay sjch                           agreed tme hmir and amount of tne mte-est.
       tnese Conaitions on such owners behalf.                                                                                                  charges unless he Consignee raiis to pay a'er a 'easonable dehanci has oeer mace by the Ca'rier for payment ths'ftof.                12. insurance
  (2) The Carrier and 2ny ether came                                                                                                        (2, Except where a quotation states otherwise a:i u-jctat ons based o-' a tonnage rate shall aooiv to the gross weight unless.
       fulfilling the Contract in whoie oi                                                                                                      ;aj the >,eods excaod 2 2i- OJbic metres in measure'nerit perforate, rfl which case the tonnage rateshail be ccmpv-.ed jpcn          13. Indemnity to the Carrier
       request.                                                                                                                                     and apply ’.c each measurement of 2.25 cubic metres or any part thereof, or                                                      The Customer sha.i indemnify, tr-e Carrier aua^sr:
  (3) The Carrier contracts for itself and as agent of and trustee for its servants and agents and al> other cairiers referred to m i,2;        jbj the size cr snaoe of a Consignment necess'tates the use of a vehicle of greater carrying capacity than the weight cf the         (1) ali consequences suffered by he Came' ij,-eluding cut -cr I :t ted to u<
       aoove and sjcn other carriers servants and agents and every reference in Conditions 3-19 inclusive hereof "the Car-ier shall                 Consume"! would cthe'w;se reom-e. s- v.fcion case the torn^e 'ate shat be computed upon and app'y to tne canyrig                     cos:, expenses anc less of or damage to the carry,rg .-er ce a-c m oh
       be deemed to include every other such carrier, servant and agent with the intention that they shall have the benefit of me                   capacity ot such vef>ie!e as >s rtasenfoly 'eq^'re;                                                                                  or mis-representation by tne Cu^torsr cr cthe- Oi’.'.e' i ‘ t ie g :‘ Cs or t
       Contract and collectively and together with the Carrier be under no greater liao-lity to the Customer or any other part;' than is    (3j Charges sha.. be oayacis 0" he e'oiry c* any im t nil: orei'.cusl, si.ojlatec anc tne earner sha" be ent'tiea tc interest at 5           ire'oper packing, tabeiimg o- aacressmg of tr ; gvoos c f-ajo as,', C
       tne Carrier hereuncer                                                                                                                    oer cent above the Clearing Bank base Rate current at tnis t'me calculated c a daA casis on all amounts overdue to '.he                  ah claims anc demands whatever by whomsoever mace ir excess ot t-
  (4) Notwithstanding Condition 213) the carriage of goods in any Consignment by rail. sea. inland waterway or air is arranged by               Carrier.                                                                                                                             (3) an losses suffered by and claims made aganst the Ca-nsr resulting fror
       tne Carrier as agent of the Customer and shall be subject to the Conditions of the raii, shipping, inland waterway or z# carrier     9. Liability for Loss and Damage                                                                                                             cut of the carriage by the Ca'rier of Dangerous Gooes /vrotner or riot e
       contracted to carry tne goods. The Carrier shall be under no liability whatever to whomsoever and however arising m respect                                                                                                                                                   (4) a;l caims mace uoor. the CaTjr by ri.M. Cu;:o"ni arid Excise -n respei
       of such carriage. Provideo that where goods are carried partly by road and partly by such other means of transport any loss,             commences.           Cus'omcr has agreed in wiling hnt the earner s1ail not tre lab't for any less or mis-delivery cr 0' damage to       transit has ended o: oeen juspenoeo
       damage or delay shall be deemed to have occurred while the goods were being carried by road unless the contrary is proved                goods however oi whenever caused and whether o- not caused o- ccrtncurec to directly or indirectly oy any act. omission,             14. Time Limits for Claims
       by the Carrier.                                                                                                                          neglect, default or other wrongdoing on the part of the Came’.                                                                       The Carrier shat: net oe habit for
  3. DangerousGoods                                                                                                                         (2) Subject to these conditions the Carrier shall be liable for'                                                                         (ii loss from parcel, package or conta.ne- cr fror any ur.oacp.ed Co-s,gnn
  Dangerous Goods must be disclosed by the Customer and if the Carrier agrees to accept their, for carnage tney must be                         (a) loss or mis-delivery ol or damage to livestock, bullion, money, securties stamps precious melais or precious stones only it'         Consignment unless he- is aav see trerao* ;n ,’,-;:ir:g ct-erwse fiat upor
  classified, packed and labelled in accoraance with the statutory regulations for the carriage by road of the substance declared.                   (i) the Carrier has specifically agreed in writing to carry any such items and
  Transport Emergency Cards (Tremcaros) or information in writing in the manner required by the relevant statutory provisions must                   (ii/ {he Customer has agreed m nrwng to reimburse tr-e Carrier ir respect of all additional cosis wnic1, result iron- the                                        '"■ery f me whc.c of a C;                          ■ separate pareei. package or container forming part
  be provided by the Customer in respect of each substance and must accompany the Consignment.                                                             carrying of the said items and                                                                                                                                                                                '.ve'y in wring otherwise than upon a consignment
  4. Loading and Unloading                                                                                                                           (iii) the loss, mis-celivery or damage is occasioned during transit and results from negligent act or ormsson Dy the Career;                                             i-envsign- cays, a                         ; in wilting within forty-two days, after tne
  (1) Unless the Came' has agreed m writing to the contrary witn the Customer:                                                                  flii any .oss or ^is-deliveiy ot or damage tc any other goods occr.-rc-rsd during tiansi; uifess tne same hac ar'Ser. 'roT anc
       ia) The Carrier shall no! be under any obligation to provide                                        r than that earned by tn
             required fc; loading or unloading the Consignment.
       (b! The Customer warrants that any special appliances requ              for loading or unloading the Consignemn: which ai
             earned by the vehicle will be provided by tne Customer ■ i the Customers behalf                                                                                                                                                           e to pnoperk by or uncer
                                                                                                   whatever, however caused. 'I tr i Cam.                      e-' of any &ovemmc-'i: or pub '0
       (Cl The Carrier shaii be under no liability whatever to the Customer for any
                                                                                                                                                                o> 'orte’tore under legs, proc.es
             instructed to load or unload gooas requiring special appliances which, in            - of the warranty in lb! above h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ie goods or by servants       The Carrier shall have a general lien against the Customer where he Customer is the owner of the goods, tor any monies
                 :n provided by tne Customer or on the Customers behalf
        (di The Carrie: shaii not be required to provide service beyond the usual place ol collection or delivery OJt if any such se-vice                                                                             Mhe'en; defect, vice                                           whatever due from the Customer to the Camer. If such a lien is not satisfied within a reasonable lima the Carrier may, at his
             is g.veri by tne Carrier it shall be at the sole risk oi the Customer.                                                                                           it pacing;                                                                                             aosoiute discretion seli tre goods or part thsreo’, as agent for the Customer and apply the proceeds towards the monies due and
  ',2; The Customer shaH indemnify the Carrier against all claims and demands whatever which coaid not have oeen made it sjch                                                                                                                                                        ‘he expenses of the retention, insurance ana sale of the goods and snail, upon accounting io the Customer for any ba,ance
       instructions as are referred lo in (1)(c) of this Condition and such service as is referred to in (i)(d) of this Conanlon hao no:                                                                                                                                             remaining be discharged from a!11ability whatevc- n respect of the gooas rtnere the Customer is not the owner of the goods
                                                                                                                                                                              or acceptinp c:i                                                                                       the Carrier srail rave a pa’tlcuiar lien against sa!d owner, avowing him to rera.r, possession out not dispose o1. the goods against
  5. Consignment Notes                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               monies due from the Cwtcme1-•" resoect :> (ne Consignmertt.
  The Carrie' shall if so required, sign a document prepared by the sender acknowledging the receipt of the Consignment but no                                                                                                                                                       16. Unreasonable Detention
  such document shall be evidence of the condition or o' tne correctness of tne declared nature quantity, or wegnt of the
  Consignment ar the time it is received by the Carrier.                                                                                    10. Fraud
                                                                                                                                            The Carrier shal- net r.     circumsta--ces be -:2                                                                                       17. Computation of Time
  ;1) Transit shaii commence wnen the Carrier takes possession of tne Consignment whether at the point o^ collection or at tne              Customer or the o-.vner Of (he goods or the servt
      Carriers prenrses                                                                                                                     conhibuteu by ’he conphcrty of the C-ar-ier o' c;                                                                                        statutory public holidays shai. be e»c!uoor.
  (2: Transit shall (umess otherwise previously deteimmed) end when the Consignment is tendered at the usual place of Delivery at           11. Limitations of Liability                                                                                                             18. Loss Adjustment
                   ees address within the customary cartage hours of the d'Stnct.                                                                                                                                                                   is-delivery of or damage to

                      id adequate access or no adequate unloading facilities there exist then transit shaii be deemed to end a the                                                                                                                                                   19. Impossibility of Performance
          expiry of one eeai day ate' notice in writing (or by telephone if so previously agreed in writing; of the arrival of the                 days' written notice to 'he Carrie; reauinn
          Consignment at the Carriers premises has been sent to the Consignee; and                                                                 wt'ere tMf value exceeds £t300.00 per to
                  ddddddddEEEEEEEEEEEd3333J33333LtEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE
                  33333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE                                                                  !jl
                                                                                                                                                  %
                  33333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE
           ii
            >
            :     33333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE
                  33333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE

                                      3333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
                  33333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE

                  33333333EEEEEEEEEEE                   EEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE
                  33333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE
                  33333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEE


                                                                                                                                          oo
                                                                                                                                       III! ^
                                                                                                                                       lllll1,1
                                                            " " M il                                                                      w
                                                                                                                                          o       r
                                                                                                                                                  n
                                                                                                                                                  J:
                                                                                                                                                  C
                                EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEE
                                EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEE
                                EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEE
                                EEEEEEEEE
                 it: (r,xc j EEEEEEEEE
               I: i             EEEEEEEEE
3 3! u         ,B     fpzsu     EEEEEEEEE                                               L|||e   3   !   u              I e fp z s j
               u u u B o y EEEEEEEEE                                                    la^uuujuu                      L| u u B o y
                                                                                                                                                  rt
U U UJU U                                                                                                                                         c
                                EEEEEEEEE                                                                                                         c.
2   3! u                                                                                M||B 3! u                      I e fp z s j               rr
U U UJU U      u    u u B o h   EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333               IS^UJUJUU                      q uuBoy
               M            1=1 EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333                 EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333            7    EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333                 EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333                 EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333                 EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333_                EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333*                EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333             i EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333                 EEEEEEEE33333333
;33EEEEEEEEEEE     33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333              ■5 EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE      33333333EEEEEEEEEEE3333
                   33JJJJ33EEEEEEEEEEE3333                 EEEEEEEE33333333
33EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
133EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
I33EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
jgm h          m F n m f el FFFFFFFFFFF33333333333FFFFFFFFFFF^nm333
                                EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333               Rogm h                         m F n m f el
zdj a I        n    iE  allh    EEEEEEEEEEE33333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333               rszdj a I                      n iE allh
                                                           --- — EE33333333
igm h          mFnmf e                                                                  Rogm h                         m F n m f el
zdj a I        n iE allh                                         EE33333333
                                                                                        rszdj a I                      n iE allh
                                                                 EE33333333
)g m h         m F n m f el                                                             Rogm h                         m F n m f e.i
                                                                 EE33333333
zdj a I        n iE ai l h                                                              rszdj a I                      n iE al l h
                                                                 EE33333333
                                                                 EE33333333
                                 I
                                            3333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
                                            3333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333
                                            3333333333EEEEEEEEEEE33333333


                                                                                                                                         00

                                                                                                                                         ro
                                                                                                                                         In
                                                                        ’!
                                                   l
                                                   i,dill
                                                                        MODE.     1       2       3           4       5
                 I                                                      MAG %
                                                                        REG.
                                                                                101.2    85.0
                                                                                        0.425
                                                                                                 75.0        70.7    61.5
                                                                                                                                          i
                 o       FIELD USE
                                                                                0.506           0.375       0.354   0.308
                                                                                                                                          o
                 JO
                 M          ONLY                                       TOLS ±0.030 INS. MEASURED FROM                                     30
                 o                                                     LEAD EDGE TO HORIZONTAL REF.
                                                                                                                                          M
       -         z                                                                                                                        o
                 H                                                                                                                        z
     /*^*V     o^ * ^


                        ^     ^        s ^ z z ^ r     Jz^?~


Jf/fa-/6            tf££z-


     *■/tf^*s£tts                 f- /^/uu:



                                              y/i^
                            s~i+-&er          /t^G~.
Peter Pearson
Branch Crown Prosecutor
Prosecutions Branch 3
United House
York                                                            CASEW ORK

c.c. Paul Jennings




RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.    I acknowledge receipt of the papers which Paul sent last week received from the
      Home Office on Hillsborough.

2.    Prior to the meeting to be arranged between ourselves, Law Officers and Home
      Office, I should be grateful if a note could be prepared as to the present position and
      outstanding actions which the Director may need to consider in her own right. This
      should be prepared in sufficient time for us to consult the Director in advance if
      necessary.

3.    I assume that all necessary holding replies have now been sent to the various
       correspondents.

      Thanks.




J S Ringguth
ACCP
CPS Central Casework
19 February 1997
X 1236
                           QUESTION                 ONE

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and -as such had experience of the ground.
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre, Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 - 6, Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should also brief himself.


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander.
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has, if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off, to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such functions should be the subject
of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction
                          QUESTION                 TWO

Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous experience. Intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket, holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions in the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would arise where we
would have to change our operational plan.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control,
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 7 - 1 5 , Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 46

46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
                                    QUESTION                 THREE

           Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
           thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
           not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
           before the 3 pm kick-off?


           Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
           the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
           However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
           reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
           the ;faylt. with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
                                             i more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
h , ,/U^   purpose for delaying the kick-off.
•
M *•               / "?
4-...
           OBSERVATIONS

           Please see pages 1 6 - 4 1 , Volume 2.


           Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

           226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
           thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
           come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
           wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out. Finally, he did not know why
           he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
           2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
           for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not, however,
           have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
           like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the
           control room.

           227. The truth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
           with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
           cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
           behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
           proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
           kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a commander must deal with the
           problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
           safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
           delayed.


           Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report Recommendation 29

           29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
           command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
           deciding whether to exercise it.
Why didn't police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?


No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4.                Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson in
the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield’s
attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings
Lane.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 42 - 52. Volume 2.

Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excessive air traffic on channel 25, attempts could have been made to alert officers
on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations.
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the
control room.

245. The 20 officers detailed to the perimeter track were distributed round the pitch so
that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)". At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure
and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm went unheeded or certainly
Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
Final?


The tunnel was not closed as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did not perceive
overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield took no steps to block off or stop people going
down central tunnel.

The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or brought to his attention by any other person,
consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans going down central tunnel.
On giving instructions for the gates to be opened, radio on talk through,
hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to close tunnel.
In 1988 the central tunnel was closed at 2.35 pm, possibly because central pens full.
All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 53 - 79, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

9.   Arrangements should be made:-

(a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
otherwise, and

(b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is
about to be reached.
                           QUESTION                  SI X

Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of
the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
he believed correct in a crisis moment.

Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier.
However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
ground.


OBSERVATIONS

This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 80 - 103, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
control room for information. Mr Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities
and the game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That’s the gate
that’s been forced: there's been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans’
account that the police had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had forced
their way in.

99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club’s boardroom.
Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
emergency operations.
            ,fb
                                           QUESTION                  SEVEN

                  Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
                  down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
                  the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
                  emergency evacuation?


                  Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
                  Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
  \tii-           Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
                  of the perimeter gates.
  ffAT- 1
    I
e--/(0            Mr Seaman, Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
                  discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of the
                  gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch.
                  The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
                  include the perimeter gates.

                  Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
                  used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
                  area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
                  was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
                  experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
                  could have helped, they would have used it.

                  Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the perimeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
                  but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
                  - may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
                  localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
                  perimeter gate when considering escape He agreed that it was within his knowledge
                  that the width of the perimeter gates, nghtly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
                  deliberate decision of the certifying authority and they decided that the gates should
                  be less than the recommended guide The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
                  decision to leave the gates.

                  Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
                  first request was made to Claywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
                  would have to travel some distance. If it had been at Claywheels Lane it could have
                  been at ground very very quickly.

                  Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson’s statement "that anyone who had
                  considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
                  realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, “I follow .that
                  point. As I think I have said earlier in this inquiry I don't think I am going to require a
                  lot of persuasion about that''.

                  When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
                  Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
                  equipment.
Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
the number he had wanted to bring out.

Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
’Breakin-Kit’ on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement'. The certifying authority issued
a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
should have been.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 104 - 137, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report


Gates

258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
example, the collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the
alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than *six
minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
                        QUESTION                  EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made - either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pm?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in ihe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to clear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.

The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes clear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 138 - 148, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John’s ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
minutes ticked past, some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

Fans                                                                                *


97. Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical
assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority of
                          QUESTION                 NINE

Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on
to the pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent
need of trained medical help?


The SYMAS ambulance located at the ground was for use in the event of a major
incident as a base for communication and not for use in the rescue operation

Mr Hopkins SYMAS was aware of damage caused to ambulances who had in fact
been onto the pitch and of the problems encountered by the drivers of the
ambulances as they attempted to negotiate the ramp giving the only access and
egress to the playing area.

Mr Higgins SYMAS took the view that it was impracticable to take ambulances onto
the playing area due to the crowd and melee that was going on there. A bottleneck
would have been formed by there being only one route into and out of the playing
area. The evacuation of the injured and dead to the Gymnasium was carried out very
quickly and because of the involvement of the police and fans it helped the operation
of dealing with them more smoothly than if they had been dealt with in isolation out on
the pitch.

Mr Eason SYMAS describes actions taken oy Mr Higgins in radioing for assistance
and preparing Gymnasium area to receive casualties.

The problems experienced with the only ramp giving access and egress to the playing
area, the crowd, the melee, in contrast with the speed in which the casualties were
evacuated from the playing area by the rescuers would indicate that the decision not
to allow the ambulances onto the playing area was correct.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 149 - 156, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15
April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances did not
arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was
proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on
television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
                           QUESTION                  TEN

Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.


OBSERVATIONS

This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 157 - 159, Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
on television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
