                                  OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                   WATERY STREET
                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                   SHEFFIELD
                                               (West District)
                                                                   S3 7ET
     STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                   CORONER


                              Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721       .8 August      19 89..



CONFIDENTIAL
Mr A Green QC                    lor the attention of Me. C. Newell.
Director of* Public Prosecutions
Crown Prosecutions Service
h /12 Queen Atme>*s Gate
LONDON
SW1 9AZ

Dear Mr Green

Ret HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

1 • You will of* course be aware that on the 15 th of* April an
     incident occurred at the Hillsborough Football Ground which
     resulted in the loss of* 95 lives as well as injury to other
     spectators.

2. Lord Justice Taylor was charged with holding a Public Inquiry
    and that the first part of* it has been completed. I understand
    that Lord Justice Taylorn*s Interim report is being published
    on k August 1989.

3.     As Coroner for South Yorkshire West District, it falls to me
       to deal with the deaths by way of Inquest.

k.    It is my present intention to resume the Inquests on the 15
       January 1990.

5.     Mr Hytner QC in his oral submission to Lord Justice Taylor
       at the close of the oral evidence stated:-
       "It is no secret, and I say this at once, that many of the
     " bereaved have specifically instructed us that they wish
       consideration to be given to criminal prosecution or criminal
       prosecutions in due course, but this they understand is not
       the time nor the place for that to be said."

6.     This point is also reported rather more specifically in the
       Daily Telegraph, Saturday 15 July where it is stated:-
       "Solicitors representing the bereaved and injured believe that
       the Inquest is likely, to return verdicts- of *Unlawful Killing*.
       They say that if the Crown Prosecutor fails to act they will
       seek leave to begin private criminal action against the people
       they hold responsible. Miss Elizabeth Steele, Chairman of a
       group of Liverpool Solicitors said yesterday that her clients
       were more interested in seeking prosecutions than gaining
       compensation payments.    A substantial number were determined
       to ensure those they felt were responsible for the deaths were
       "Brought to book" she said. A summons alleging corporate
       manslaughter by P & 0 European Ferries following the Zebrugge
                                  OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                           WATERY STREET
                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                           SHEFFIELD
                                               (West District)
                                                                           S3 7ET
     STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                   CORONER


                              Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                 ,.8...Augus.t....i989.

                                                               -   2   -




Mr A Green QC



       Perry Disaster which claimed 193 lives was issued at Bow Street
       last month. Mr Michael Humphries of* the Liverpool Solicitors
       Group said ?*My clients want the people responsible for this
       disaster made to pay the proper price for what has happened*."

7.     You will of course be fully a*ware of the provisions of
       Section l6(l)(a) of the Coroners Act 1988 which in effect
       provides that where the Clerk of the Magistrate* s Court
       informs the Coroner that certain serious offences have been
       charged, the Coroner shall in the absence of reason to the
       contrary adjourn the Inquest. Sub section l6(l)(b) is even
       wider in scope and enables the Director of Public Prosecutions
       to request the Coroner to adjourn an Inquest in certain
       circumstances.
       Section 16(2) provides savings which enable the Coroner not
       to adjourn Inquests which fall within Section 16(1) or where
       having adjourned an Inquest, he? may be permitted to proceed.
       I believe in fact that where Inquests are adjourned by
       Coroners under Section l6(l) it is in fact very rare for the
       Coroner to resume these, and the matter is usually completed
       under the provisions of Section 16(4) and (5).

8.     Rule 27 of the Coroners Rules 1984 substantially covers the
       point covered in Clause16(1)(a) of the Coroners Act 1988.

9.     Rule 28 of the Coroners Rules provide that if during the
       course of an Inquest evidence is given from which it appears
       to the Coroner that the death of the deceased is likely to
       be due to an offence within Rule 26.3 and that a person
       might be charged with such an offence, then the Coroner,
       unless he has previously been notified by the Director of
       Public Prosecutions that adjournment is unnecessary, shall
       adjourn the Inquest for 1k days or such longer period as he
       may think: necessary and send to the Director particulars of
       that evidence.
       At any time before the date fixed for the holding of the
       adjourned Inquest the Director of Public Prosecutions may ask
       the Coroner for further adjournment and the Coroner may
       comply with his request*
                               OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR           MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                    WATERY STREET
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                    SHEFFIELD
                                            (West District)
                                                                    S3 7ET
  STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                CORONER


                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721              ..8...Augus &.1989-•


                                                                3

Mr A Green QC


10. I appreciate that you have not yet had an opportunity to
    assess the evidence in the Hillsborough Disaster, and therefore
    are not presumably in a position to say whether any charges
    may be brought which fall withinthe provisions of Section
    l6(l)(a) or Section l6(l)(b).

11• I also fully appreciate that it would not be right for you
    to take any decision purely upon what legal representatives
    of bereaved families might say or what is stated in newspaper
    articles.
12. However, these comments are very relevant to me because they
    indicate the line of thinking which at least a portion of
    the interested parties are likely to pursue.
13« You will of course be aware of Regina v St. Pancras Coroner*s
    Court ex party Higgins, Divisional Court QBD, 23 May 1988,
    where their Lordships appeared to indicate that a Coroner can
    withdraw the verdict of Unlawful Killing from the Jury where
    there was no evidence which could conceivably have amounted
    in law as sufficient to justify such a verdict.
14. You will appreciate that it is impossible for me to take a
    view until in fact the evidence has been given at the Inquests,
    and it will be at that stage no doubt that I will have to
    decide whether there is evidence which can be left to the
    Jury to consider a verdict of Unlawful Killing or whether the
    evidence is of such a nature that I can properly withdraw
    that verdict from their consideration.
15. This position precisely encapsulates the problem which I
    am now faced withl-
    a. I anticipate that it will be necessary to call a considerable
       number of witnesses and that consequently the Inquests will
       take some considerable time. This apart from being
       expensive will of course generate a great deal of stress
       both for the bereaved but also for the witnesses, some of
       whom may well wish to shield under the provisions of Rule 22
       (Rule against Self Incrimination).
                               OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                        WATERY STREET
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                        SHEFFIELD
                                            (West District)
                                                                        S3 7ET
  STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                CORONER


                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                 .8..Augu§t....i9 83..


                                                            -   h   -




Mr A Green QC



16. I am particularly anxious not to get into a situation where
    having started the resumed Inquests 1 am forced to stop
    because 1 am requested to do so , or because 1 have to under
    the provisions of Rule 28. This would create considerable
    distress I am sure to relatives and witnesses and would
    leave us open to the criticism that we have not covered a
    situation which is foreseeable in view of the comments referred
    to in paragraphs 5 and 6 above.

17« You will of course know that if we were dealing with a serious
    Road Traffic Incident where Section 1 proceedings were
    contemplated, SmasammmmjfrR under the Road Traffic Act 1972,
    it would be the normal practice to adjourn the Inquest until
    such time as the CPS have indicated whether or not they intend
    to proceed under that Section.1 If they indicated that they
    do not wish to proceed, then we would deal with the Inquest
    in the normal way. If they do decide to charge someone,
    then the provisions of Section 16 of the Coroners Act 1988
    would apply.

18. It seems to me in tis case that there are two possible
    courses open as far as my Inquests and your involvement
    are concemedt-

    a. You can notify me that you have no objection to me proceeding
       with the Inquests and that you do not require me to
       adjourn the Inquests notwithstanding that evidence may be
       given which might require me to leave the possible verdict
       of Unlawful Killing with the Jury. You will of course
       appreciate that it is their decision not mine as to what
       verdict they bring in.
       I imagine that this situation must have arisen in the
       Zebrugge Inquest undertaken by Mr Sturt at Dover.
    b. The alternative would of course be for you to request me
       to adjourn the Inquests before I resume until such time as
       you have completed your investigations, and then in the
       light of your decision, one would have to decide whether
       or not the Inquests should be resumed or dealt with under
       Section 16 Coroners Act 1988.
                               OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR           MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                    WATERY STREET
                                       SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                    SHEFFIELD
                                            (West District)
                                                                    S3 7ET
  STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                CORONER


                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721             8..Augu.s.t....i9.89...


                                                                5


Mr A Green QC



19.   Tou will appreciate that there is a considerable amount of*
      public interest in this disaster as well as a great deal of
      anxiety and personal grief*. I am very anxious that whatever
      is done by me should be done correctly, but with a view to
      minimising the upset and pain which the Hillsborough Disaster
      has, is and will cause.
20. I would be grateful if* I could hear from you as soon as
    Possible. Irrespective of what the decision might be,
    several urgent matters have to be dealt with and I would like
    an indication of your thinking. If it would help to discuss
    this a mutually convenient time could I am sure be arranged.




o.o. Mr. S.J. Bear.
             M. Jodob .
