                7?!09:34P        CPS   C E N T R A L    CASEWO R K C C P       0171        27 3   S O S O                          P.04

'/              -3H 15:46      TREUOR HICXS ENGLAND WORTHSIDE                      0                                              P01
/




                                                                                                          ^        —          *
             stl ppOT*                                                                                          Su ppO*
                                    Hillsborough Family Support Group
        FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION OF                                                 PAGE/S (inclusive)


A Tm :                                                                     FAX NO:     ■ .ffH
TO:                                               ......................   DATE:                   ...
                         SUB.JECT:......... ......................................................




                   jtf         c>&/4&>            &       Y w          m a a      a   &>      ife             /Tmtom

/tjr&t                 sfrfp                  /       S7#r&*frtr                  far             &/A*2>cf                    yg>?

WCC              *€'&&/£'          f tff          /tf            ya        4041                                          A20M&&


                   jM            tjUfirn*K;                                       YAC/tzfr-Ae?           /V             of

1fe                                                                                         f&vf              /7S             2)40T

<T»TVS.
    iimt         ytf        /m      /pMc/Atfto/ .




O IA IH M a N                                           KKCKCTAltV                                       TKICA-SURItll
T. I lick*                                              K I lummuful                                     Mot. ). ’I rujrnor
WF3£
L0T&J t?
                                                                                                                             P .0 5
                                                                                 0 1 7 3.   273   8 0 5 0
                   0 9 : 43P   CPS     C E N T R A L   C A S E W O R K C C P
0 7 -Mar*-9 7      09:
            04-MOR-Sn i5:41          TREUOfl HICKS ENGLAND I.ORTRSIPE                                                  pea
  1




                                                                                                      v •- . • *


                                                                                                            iuppo’®'
                                        Hillsborough Family Support Group

                    Da&o Barbara Mills
                    Director of Public Prosecutions
                    SO Ludgate Hill
                    London
                    SC4M 7SX.
                    4th March 1597                                             WUVAT* AND CONFIDENTIAL


                    Dear Dame Barbara,
                   rsi- HllXoborouqh Pi.gaeter
                   The HFSG representa the interests of the fajnili*# bereaved by the
                   football diaaotcr at Hillsborough, Sheriield on the 15th April
                   1989. I write to you both an a bereaved father and in my capacity
                   as Chairman ©£ the HFSG.
                   Following my fc«1ephone conversation with Jana Gill on the
                   telephone yesterday we ara arranging £or a tull bundle of
                   doauzaantc and supporting video tapes to be hand delivered to you
                   today by Phil Hammond. (Vice-Chairman) and Azin Adlington
                   (solicitor). Further copies will be passed to the .Police Policy
                   Directorate (acting on bohalf of the Home Secretary) on Thursday
                   Of this week.
                   We £elt that you would appreciate an opportunity to examine this
                   material properly and privately. We have therefor* at-.t-.AmptAd to
                   avoid nedia attention at Lhi« Ulwie - heuce the "private and
                   confidential1* nature of our submission.
                   The bundle is large and the background scune-whaL complex,
                   therefore I felt it useful to summarise the key issues for yout-
                         Pre-production research/ and the screening of the Jinuny
                         KcGovATn/Oranada TV programme brought to light fresh
                         evidence and/or new wituses's. some ot this has reached the
                         publio domain and io probably olroady known to you.
                         Follow up o f these matters has led to the discovery o f even
                         aoro cvidcnoc which not only corroborates the fresh
                         evidence, it proves that suppression of «wMdervce, perjury
                         and coiJ»yixacy to pervert the course o r justice all
                         f e a t u r e d in the legal proceas that followed the dioaotcr.




          CHAIRMAN                                        VTCE-CUMRMAN/$tt;KKTAHT                     TKKaSVKKR
          T. llwfc.-.                                     T.                                          Mo..V
                                                                                P .0 3
                                                          m   71   273   8050
                      CPS   CENTRAL     CASEWORKCCP
0 4 , ^ - g n is;40   TREUOfl HICKS ENGLftNO UOftTHSIDE                         P04




      We have instructed Alun Jones QC and he has seen/ reviewed our
      material and hia Opinion appear® to support our view.

      Naturally these are matters for your office and we would formally
      request you to examine the evidence and to initiate a full and
      urgent criminal investigation into these matters.

      We will gladly make ourselves available should you/your staff
      require a meeting to discuss the evidence/ issues or we will
      provide any further detail/cmterial you request.

      This clearly is a matter of public interest and not just victims
      families seeking retribution and/or vengeance. All we have ever
      sought is a proper and even handed investigation into the events
      that cost the lives of our loved ones.

      Justice can only be done when those charged with investigating
      the circumstances and presenting the results to an inquiry or a
      jury do so in an honest and even handed way. Clearly that cannot
      be the case in the light of the evidence we now place before you.

      yours sincerely




      Trevor Hicks
      Chairman.
07-Mar-97   09:34P    CPS   CENTRAL    CASEWORKCCP    0171    273   8050     P .0 6

            15:48    TREUOR HICKS ENGLAND UORTHSIDE    03 f                PBS
■




       Stataatsot by Trevor Hicks

       Video Evidence - Hillsborough Disaster


       I Trevor Hicks of I
      j                                            would make tie
      following statement in connection with video material I have
      viewed in recent weeks.


      Earlier in my career I was Divisional Director of Chubb Alarms
      Ltd, a company which Mold, installed and serviced security
      systems and hence have a reasonable working knowledge of
      closed-circuit television systems (CCTV)

      Summary


      a)    It is my firm belief that the material I viewed is
            genuine footage recorded by the South Yorkshire Police
            video system and that the time and date codes on that
            footage are correct.


      b)    I am content that the video material proves three key
            points ;-
            1)      The crucial camera (scoreboard/Camera S) was working
                    from llOOhrs through till 1700hrs at least.
            2)      It could pan, tilt, and zoom and produced pictures
                    of sufficient quality and detail to "identify facial
                    features *
            3}      The footage contain excellent views of people
                    standing at the front of Pens 3/4 of the Leppings
                    Lane terraces and can be seen Co zoom during such
                    sequences .

      c)    All of the above corroborate Roger Houldsworth's
            statement and in my opinion shows that Police Officers
            Ryan and Bichard gave f a l s a witness.
                                                                                            1
0 7 -Mar-97   0 9 : 34P   CPS   CENTRAL     CASEWORKCCP    0171   273   80 5 0     P -0 7
    04-MAfl-gi 15:49      TREUOR HICKS ENGLAND UORTHSIOE     0                   PBS




         d)     Because of the large number of "sequences" contained
                within the videos it is incomprehensible that the person
                or persons who edited the "Compilation Video" did not
                know of the existence of the extensive footage from the
                scoreboard camera.


         e)     It was not produced despite several requests from the
                inquest jury and this indicates suppression of critical
                evidence.


         f)     It is my belief that had this footage been produced and
                shown to the jury it would have totally changed their
                view of "what the police could see".



        Background
                                               of Granada Television
        I contacted Mr Chris Bryer, Head of Factual Programmes at
        Yorkshire Television in an attempt to establish what material
        was still in their archives following their production "First
        Tuesday ".


        After our telephone discussion he agreed to see what was
        available and contact me further. The following day he
        returned my call and advised that he and Roger Finnigan
        (Senior Producer and co-producer of the First Tuesday
        programme) had discussed my telephone call /various aspects of
        Houldsworth's evidence. He made the following comments:m


        1.     They had conducted an interview with Roger Houldaworth a
               few weeks after the Disaster and were looking to see if
               any video footage of that remained.


        2.     They have a written transcript of the aforesaid Roger
               Houldsworth's interview.

        3.     They had found some footage of police video tapes which
               had been supplied to them by South Yorkshire police when
               they wore researching/making the First Tuesday programme.
0 7 -Mar^-97   09:34P    CPS   CENTRAL     CASEWORKCCP    0171     273   8 0 5 0     P. 0 8
    04-f1AR-9H 15:49    TREUOfl HICKS ENGLAND WORTHSIDE     ES (                   P0T




          4.    The circumstance* of the supply of video tap** were as
                follows:-
                     An approach was made to South Yorkshire police.
                     The request required ratification by Peter Wright,
                     the then Chief Constable.
                      At a subsequent meeting with Peter Wright, a box of
                      VHS video tapes were handed to Messrs Brier and
                      Finnigan.
                      Working copies (broadcast video tape format)of the
                      VHS video tapes were made by Yorkshire Television
                 (Note; these were the tapes viewed by me. )


         Mr Brier confirmed that both he and Roger Finnigan remembered
         carrying out the interview with Houl doworth and that it was
         interrupted by a police officer. He later confirmed that this
         was Superindent Burton (?) who at the time was in charge of PR
         *t West Midlands police.


         It was agreed that we should meet so that I could examine
         whatever video footage they had and that meeting took place on
         Friday 24 January 1997.


         Meeting At Yorkshire 7 - Friday 24th January 1997
         Following a preliminary discussion mainly surrounding
         Houldsworth's evidence and the relevance thereof, we crossed
          to another building and entered an editing suite.

         We viewed at length several video tapes including references
         PI-Part 1,2 & 3 and P4-Part 1 & 2, which clearly showed that
          the score board camera (camera 5 on map attached as appendix
         A) was working.

         The pictures from this camera were clear enough to enable
         identification of individuals and in only one case was there
         any evidence of the flaring (whitening of screen) appmaring.
                                                            0171     273   80 5 0          P. 0 9
07-   Mar-97    09:35P    CPS    CENTRAL   CASEWORKCCP
      04-ttflR-gq IS:S0   TREUOR HICKS ENGLAND UORTHSIDE         m                        P00




           T!h« clarity of the images was store than satisfactory and
           therefore raised a serious doubt in my mind regarding the
           truthfulness of evidence by the police officers responsible
           for operating eha CCTV.


          Tapes PI-Part 1,2 & 3 shows several different sequences taken
          from the scoreboard camera ( camera 5) from the earliest time
          of 1200hra through to 1423 and then 1S02 through to 1523hrs.


          Although there is no footage recorded from this camera between
          1423 and 1502 it is more than probable that the camera was
          working perfectly well throughout this period. The screen in
          the police control box would of course show the output from
          this camera even when it was not recording.

          Tape P4- Part 1 6         2 include similar footage timed at1S57          and
           through until 1722 when the          tape runs out.


          These sequences include some very clear shots of the front of
          of the West Stand and Pen 3/4 on the terraces. Camera 5 can be
          seen to pan, tilt          and xoom, especially when lookingat agroup
          of four people at          the front of the terrace.


          Both sequences of video tape show the arrival of a Limousine
          Registration NTV2 and comparing the video time bases we were
          able to establish that the footage had come from two video
          machines -which fits the configuration of the Sheffield
           system.

           I contacted Roger Houldsworth by telephone and he confirmed
           that the two video machines in the police control box operated
           in parallel.         This would appear sensible as it would enable
           recording via either VCR of any of the two "sequencingm
           devices output enabling the police to either v I b w or record a
           specific incident while the other machine was still on auto-
           oequence.
0 7 -Mar— 9 7   09:35P   CPS   CENTRAL    CASEWORklCCP    0171   273 8050    P . lO
     Z4-rm-21 itari,!    TRFunn hicks England uotthside     m               PBS




         It is my opinion that this footage has never been seen be form
         by myself and I believe has not i>««a included in any police
         compilation* and/or other tapes that X have seen.

         Prom my knowledge of close circuit television and of this
         particular CCTV syatem, thin evidence is uncontrovarsial proof
         that camera 5 - the black end white scoreboard cainara wee
         working between the hours of eay 1100am and 1700pm. Xn ell
         oases her one, thm iuagea are clear and cannot be deacrlbed as
         interior.

         Xn addition to the proof of quality, the sequences contain
         pan. tilt and xoem actions which not only prove that these
         facilities verm functioning, they prove that the operators
         (i.e. the policemen) were using the camera and da facto must
         have known it to be working and been able to see the terraces.

         Hessra Bryer and Finnigan operate in the television world and
         have produced many documentaries (including First Tuesday)
         which have relied upon video evidence. They gav* zac the
         impression that in their opinion this footage was more than
         adequate.

         Subject to rechecking research and/or other footage, Hessra
         Bryer and Finnigan appear to agree with aiynelf that thit>
         supports Houldsworth'p evidence th*t the CCTV equipment
         viewing Pens 3 and 4 was functioning satisfactorily, both
         prior and subsequent Co tie opening of Gate C.

         Furthermore, they advised that the transcript or their
         intervimw with Houldsworth tends to support Houldcworkh'a
         statement end in effect corroborates his position has not
         changed between the disaster and new regarding the performance
         of the equipment.

         Xfc ia my belief that the footage I -viewed totally supports
         Mouldsworth's position.
0 7 -Mar'— 9 7 0 9 : 4 3 P C P S C E N T R A L C A S E W O R K C C P   0171    273   8 0 5 0     P .0 4
      04-flRR-gn 15:51     TREUOR HICKS ENGLAND UIORTHSIDE
                                                                           ©                   P10




            I was loaned a working copy of the tapes bo that 1 could look
            at all the relevant sections in detail and J would confirm
            that the compilation attached is a true copy of that worJcijng
            copy. YTV can confirm that the original tapas, including those
            vith footage from camera. 5 were supplied to them by South
            Yorkshire Police.

            It has been agreed that Granada Television, Yorkshire
            Television and the Hillsborough Family Support Group will
            continue to work together on further research of this and/or
            other evidence to establish to vhat degree it is contradictory
            to the caae presented to the inquest jury/ others.




            Trevor Hicks                                         Date :-
07-Mar-97    03:35P        CPS    CENTRAL        CASEWORKCCP               0171     273    8050                   P   . 11

MAR-83-37 17:02 P R O M < BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                         ID.                                    PHUa   *




                                   The Hillsborough nisaster : Anril 1989.


                                                   Opinion



       Introduction

       1     ! am asked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
              appropriate legal course to follow in the light of three areas o f fresh evidence that
              have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters ofI,iverpr>ol
              Football Club, died in tho Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
             cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, held in April and May 1990,
             and later between November 1990 and 28AMarch 1991, verdicts of accidental death
             were recorded on the victims .

       2     A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six o f the
             bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a ftcsh inquest. The main
             complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
             presented in the Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as Annex A . In
             summary form, those main complaints were.

             2.1      The Coroner imposed an arbitrary cut-off point in time of 3.15, which had the
                      cficct of excluding relevant evidence as to the failure to implement the “Mqjor
                      Disaster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                      emergency services promptly.

             2.2      The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances o f the deaths
                      o f the 95: he failed therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                      of the victims were alive after 3. IS, and might have been saved by prompt
                      medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to S.12. and 7)

             2.3      The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages of his
                      summing-up on the subject, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many o f the
                      Liverpool supporters were under the influence of drink. The report by Lord
                      Taylor, which was severely critical of the police, had ruled out the
                      consumption o f alcohol as a cause of the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

             2.4      The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                      scicction of evidence and treatment of witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

             2.5      The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial task to perform, in
                      directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                      and unlawful killing.




                                                      1
07-Mar''-97   0 9 : 35P   CPS     CENTRAL        CASEWORKCCP                0171     273    8050      -------
 .MAB-«3-a7 17.02 F R O M « SRUCE CAMPBELL CO                        I D*                                    PAGE   3




         3     The inquest verdicts were not quashed. *0k judgment of tha Court is at Annex R.
               The Court was strongly influenced by the &ct that the lawyers originally instructed
               for the families had acquiesccd in many of the Coroner’s decisions (eg page 7). that
               the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have made a difference, or had
               been property excluded (pages 14* 36); that the directions o f the Coroner to the jury
               wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
               40).

         4     Since 1993, as 1 am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
               that the legal system failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
               circumstance* o f death. After tho 1993 judicial review it seemed to me that the
               disaster would probably recede, from the legal point of view, quietly into history. It
               has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
               professional opinion, provide strong evidence of perjury by individuals police officers
               at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
               coursc ol‘justice at the inquest. None of the following matters were made known at
               the inquest.

         5     rhc evidence of Roger Houidswonh. Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth,
                dated 25,h November 1996, attaching a statement of May 1989 and supporting
                documents, and commenting on evidcncc given at the inquest (Auncx Q - Contrary to
                the evidcncc presented, no camcras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures of the
                I.eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
                tapes and Mr I louldsworth’s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
                officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at largo in
                December 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
                disaster. (The evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldsworth is at Annex D)

         6     Tho now videotape evidence. Vory recently, a member of the Family Support group
                has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies of
               those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
                lokl that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the
                South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
                inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks o f the Family Support
                Group in the presence o f Mr Mouldsworth, Mr Philip Hammond of the Family
                Support Group, and Ann Adlington of my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
                that policc officers were lying, and that the pictures of all relevant areas of the ground
                were clcar, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
                Mr Houldsworth in his evidence of November 1996. Hvents in the relevant area may
                not, for various reasons, liave been recorded on tape between 2.-10 pm and 3 pm, but
                they were clcarly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

         7     1 have also been shown a copy of what was, I sun told, presented to the jury. U is a
                very haidly duplicated and blurred picture o f individuals escaping from the stricken
                pens shortly after 3 pm. in which it is indeed not possible to identity individuals. The

                                                        2




 W
0 7 _M a r ._97 0 9 : 3 6 P C P S C E N T R A L C A S E W O R K C C P         0171     273    8050                   L i i
 HAR-e-3-a? 17 •03 FROM. BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                            ID.                                       PACE  «




                    lapc has bad interference in the picture. It appears that this tape is a copy at several
                    generations removed from either tho copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
                    the videotape o f which the new evidence is a much better copy, but it presents only
                    events after 3 pm.

             8     The importance of the new evidence. The question whether the police could and did
                    notice (he pressure on the pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest. On Day 77,
                    pugc 125, the Coroner directed (he jury fAnnex fc):

                    “The assessment o f the terraces” is a “very important factor" and ‘'maybe the single
                    most important factor in the whole Inquest”. “The totaJ sum of evidence from tlie
                    Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfcld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
                    that none o f them noticed any problems with the pens until 3 o-cloclc”.

             9     None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue in the
                   ewe in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner as the critical time. I
                   believe that the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
                   the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

             10     The evidence nf Dr Ed Walker In February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came to
                    light; see Annex F. . The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
                    appears at Annex G. The new cvidcnce discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
                    “sinus rhythm and cardiac output” after arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
                    Sheffield. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
                    criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
                    points out in his letter o f ? hFebruary 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that of Dr
                    Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3rf May 1989 by Dr Wardrape, who was
                    closely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15* June 1989 to
                    stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
                    at the inquest.

             11    It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr Walker’s
                    evidence. At page 10 of the Divisional Court's judgment of November 1993 the
                    Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
                    tho evidcncc disclosed the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousncss leading to rapid
                    death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
                    rcvouliny remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his tetter of 3rt May 1989 “Almost
                    immediately the department was flooded with large numbers of acutely ill patients
                    requiring urgent resuscitation”. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
                    structured by the Coroner on an utterly difTeient factual assumption.

             12    The previous investigation. One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
                    in which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
                   exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
                   questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
                   Midland* Police who assisted the Coroner.

                                                            3
                                                                          0171     273    8050                      • . 14
tyj -Mar'-97 0 9 : 3 7 P C P S C E N T R A L C A S E W O R K C C P
  MAR-03-8? 17.04 TROM = BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                         tO <                                      PACE     s




             12    Conclusion. In my view these new pieces of evidence call for a full police enquiry or
                   public inquiry. Exhibits such as the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
                   analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
                   production of evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
                   this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director of
                   Public Prosecutions for her consideration., with a full copy to the Home Secretary,
                   who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few months.

             13    I hope that the Director might feel abio to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
                    two nr three of the Family Support Group, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this
                    ad vice.




             3 Raymond Buildings
             Gray's Inn
             London WCI


             3rd March 1997.                                                   Alun Jones QC




                                                          4
0 7 -Mar*97   09:37P     CPS    CENTRAL       CASEWORKCCP              0171     273   8050      P - 15




                               E 8S S a- Bffi£S S S S L ^ _ M a lJ n f lB S M

         C0UH8ET. 'a -OPINION
                                                                    ^gg-JSUW PER IK B w n r r
         Paragraph 3!          Page 7
                               Pages 14 -     35                          Page 30
                               Page 9                                     Pages 37 -    59
                               Page 40                                    Page 32
                                                                          Page 63
         Paragraph   8   -
                         ‘     Page 125
                                                                          Page 578
             7 ^109: 3 4 P    CPS    C E N T R A L   C A S E W O R K C C P        0171      273     8 0 5 0                       p.04

             -SH 15; 46       TREUOR HICKS ENGLAND UORTHSIDE                          0                                         P01
>'y


        **»< »«*                     T7-TJ- T ^ k                                                             , ^ 00" % .
      * •    .                         I J §  Cir \ \ V f r                                **



           5 / / ppQT*                                                                                            sap p o ^
                                    Hillsborough Family Support Group
      FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION OF                                                       PAGE/S (inclusive)


ATTN:                                                                     FA X N O :                                    7 . f ^

TO:                                                                                    DATE:                 ?/fy

                         SUBJECT: /              ?             ...........................................
                                       .




                                                                   t& z & w w     ?       <&*V€zrS'r7?*'v'                  JT

 w c p            j f         0&/4tb          /A       Ym          Mac*                                         /9rrmvs>

/.trr&t                  5>     'TXAff'          S7* r & * & r               %        far                                       >o*

WCC           &'#£/£'            ftff          /rf             w                                                           4$C/*efr&


      X'          4**         fjkrir/ws          Aff&wt                               YM/zfr-Ae?             7V          a/'

1fe          #€*&£&*C &                        Ztfpr}                                                            /7S            Z&tfT

<r#7VS.



                y&r       /a'




           fe&jc*




 C11AIKMAN                                           SK CKtTAkY                                       ^      r^JCASURFU
 T.Hick*                                             1’.Ilummuml                                             Mf*. i.'irajrnur
                                                                                                             P .0 5
                                                                    0171   273   8050
             0g ;4 3 P   CPS   CENTRAL     CASEWORKCCP
07-Mar*-97   09:
         04-PWR-9O \S--4n   TREMOR HICKS ENGLAND 1.I0RTHSI0E                                           P23




                                                                                        • . a


                                                                                        su rpo^
                               Hillsborough Family Support Group

              Dcano Barbara Mil In
              Dir«flfcor of Public Prosecutions
              50 fcudgate Hill
              London
              BC4M 7EX.

              4th March 1997                                     tKXVAXJS AND COHFIDENTXAl.


              Dear Dam* Barbara,
                   - HI1Xoborcrugh. Digueter
              The HFSG represents Che interests of the famil.i beraavad by the
              football dioaoter at Hillsborough,              on the 15th April
              1989. I write to you both a* a beraavad father and in my capacity
              as Chairman of the HFSG.
             Following ray l-.nlephona conversation with Jana Gill on the
             telephone yesterday we are arranging for a full bundle of
             doouaantc and oupporting video tapes to be hand dalivwted to you
             today by Phil Hsuiunnnd (Vie#-Chairman) and Ann Arlington
             (solicitor). Further copies will be passed to the Police Policy
             Directorate (acting on bohalf of tha Koine Secretary) on Thursday
             of this week.
             We felt that you would appreciate an opportunity to examine this
             material properly and privately. We have therefor* atf.etnpf.Ad to
             avoid media attention at Lliia tiuie - hence the "private and
             confidential* nature of our submission.
              The bundle is large and the background somewhat, complex,
              therefore X felt it useful to summarise the key issues for youi-
                    P r e -production research/ and the screening of the Jimmy
                    McCovArn/rtraneda TV programme brought to light fresh
                    evidence and/or new witness's, some of this has reached the
                    publio domain and io probably alroady Known to you.
                    Follow up of these matters has led to the discovery of even
                    aoro evidence which not only corroborates the fresh
                    evidence, it proves that suppression of evidence, perjury
                    and con          to pex’vwrt the course of justice all
                    featured in tha loyal process that followed tha dioaotor.


                                               vice-
                                                   ciiaJHMan/SK«;KirrAR>           TKKa^VKKH
        CHAIRMAN
                                               P.IkunnmK*___                       M<v }. *rt »yiinr
        T.irwio
                                                                                P. 0 3
                                                         m   71   27 3   SOSO
                            CENTRAL     CASEWORKCCP
    ar,_97 0 9 : « P CPS CENTRAL.
07-Mar-
     34-nAR-91 15:40   TREUOfl HICKS ENGLAND WORTHSIDE        m




          We have instructed Alun Jones qc and he ha® seen/ reviewed our
          material and his Opinion appears to support our view.
          Naturally these are matters for your office and we would formally
          request you to examine the evidence and to Initiate a full and
          urgent criminal investigation into these natters.
          We will gladly stake ourselves available should you/your staff
          require a meeting to discuss the evidence/ issues or ve will
          provide any further detail/material you request.
          This clearly is a matter of public Interest and not just victims
          families seeking retribution and/or vengeance. All we have ever
          sought is a proper and even handed investigation into the events
          that cost the lives of our loved ones.
          Justice oan only be done when those charged with investigating
          the circumstances and presenting the results to an inquiry or a
          jury do so in an honest and even handed way. Clearly that cannot
          be tha case in the light of the evidence we now place before you.
          Yours sincerely




          Trevor Hicks
          Chairman.
-Mar-97    09:34P      CPS   CENTRAL   CASEWORKCCP    0171   273   8050           P -06
 04-nflfl-gn 15:48   TREUOR HICKS ENGLAND WORTHSIDE    E3                       P0S

"1




      Statement by Trevor Sicks                                           ___
                                                                     °*A ,
      Vidao gvidmca - Hillsborough Disaster

      I Trevor Sicks of
                                                   would make the
      following statement in connection with video material I have
      viewed in recent weeks.

      Earlier in my career I was Divisional Director of Chubb Alarms
      Ltd, a company which sold, installed and serviced security
      systems and hence have a reasonable working knowledge of
      closed-circuit television Bystems {CCTV)


      Bvumary


      a)     It is my firm belief that the material I viewed is
             genuine footage recorded by the South Yorkshire Police
             video system and that the time and date codes on that
             footage are correct.


     b)     I am content that the video material proves three key
            points ; -
             1)      The crucial camera (scoreboard/Camera S) was working        \/
                     from H O O h r s through till 1700hrs at least .             i
            2)       It could pan, tilt, and zoom and produced pictures               PT£2
                     of sufficient quality and detail to "identify facial        £ £ GjjMltily
                     features"
             3)      The footage contain excellent views of people
                     standing at     front of Pena 3/4 of the Leppings
                     Lane terraces and can be seen to zoom during such
                     sequences.

      c)     All of the above corroborate Roger Houldsworth's
             statement end in my opinion showa that Police Officers
             Ryan and JBichard gave false witness.
0 7 -Mar-97   09:34P   CPS   CENTRAL     CASEWORKCCP      0171   273   8 0 5 0      P .0 7
    04-MRR-S1 15:43    TflEUQR HICKS ENGLAND UORTHSIDE      m                     P0S




         d)    Because of the large number of "sequences" contained
               within the videos it is incomprehensible that the person
               or persons who edited the "Compilation Video* did not              / y ^ 1
               know of the existence of the extensive footage from the
               scoreboard camera.


         e)    it was not produced despite several requests front the
               inquest Jury and thin indlcmfa suppression of critical                   P^   r<
               evidence.


         f)    It is my belief that had this footage been produced and ^
               shown to the jury it would have totally changed their
               view of "what the police could see".




        Following discussions with ,                     of Granada Television,
        I contacted Mr Chris Bryer , Head of Factual Programmes at
        Yorkshire Television in an attempt to establish what material
        was still in their archives following their production "First
        Tuesday".


        After our telephone discussion he agreed to see what was
        available and contact me further. The following day he
        returned my call and advised that he and Roger Finnigan
        (Senior Producer and co-producer of the First Tuesday
        programme) had discussed my telephone call /various aspects of
        Houldsworth's evidence. He made the following comments:•


        1.     They had conducted an interview with Roger Houldeworth a
               few weeks after the Disaster and were looking to see if
               any video footage of that remained.


        2.     They have a written transcript of the aforesaid Roger
               Houldsworth's interview.

        3.     They had found some footage of police video tapes which
               had been supplied to them by South Yorkshire police when
               thmy were researching/making the First Tuesday programme.
0 7 - M a r ’- 9 7   09: 3 4 P    CPS   CENTRAL    CASEWORKCCP    0171   273   8050     p   .0 8
      04-MflR-9T 15:49           TREOOR HICKS ENGLAND WORTHSIDE     23                P0i




               4.      The circumstances of thm supply of video tape* were aa
                       follows:-
                            An approach was made to South Yorkshire police.
                            Thm request required ratification by Peter Wright,
                            the then Chief Constable.
                             At a subsequent meeting with Peter Wright, a box of
                             VHS video tapes were handed to Messrs Brier and
                             Finnigan.
                             Working copies (broadcast video tape format)of the
                             VHS video tapes were made by Yorkshire Television
                        (Note; these were the tapes viewed by me. )


              Mr Brier confirmed that both he and Roger Finnigan remembered
              carrying out the interview with Houldaworth and that it was
              interrupted by a police officer. He later confirmed that this
              was Superindent Burton (?) who at the time was in charge of PR
               at West Midlands police.


              It was agreed that we should meet so that I could examine
              whatever video footage they had and that meeting took place on
              Friday 24 January 19$7.


              Meeting At Yorkshire T - Friday 24th January 1997
              Following a preliminary discussion mainly surrounding
              Houldsworth's evidence and the relevance thereof, we crossed
               to another building and entered an editing suite.

               We viewed at length several video tapes including references
               Pl-Part 1,2 & 3 and P4-Part 1 & 2, which clearly showed that
               the score board caaera (camera 5 on map attached as appendix
              A) was working.


              The pictures from this camera were clear enough to enable
              identification of individuals and in only one case was there
              any evidence of the flaring (whitening of screen) appmaring.
                                                       0171     273   8050             p
r— 9 7   0 9 : 35P   CPS   CENTRAL    CASEWORKCCP
HIRR-an 15:50        TREUOR HICKS ENGLAND UORTHSIDE         m                      P08




                                                                                   7
   The clarity of the images va.9 more than satisfactory and                       «
   therefore raised a serious doubt in my mind regarding the
   truthfulness of evidence by the police officers responsible
   for operating Che CCTV.


  Tapes PI-Part 1,2 & 3 shows several different sequences taken
  from the scoreboard camera ( camera 5) from the earliest time                        y'
  of 1200hre through to 1423 and then 1S02 through to 1523hrs.


  Although there is no footage recorded from this caaera between
  1423 and 1502 it is more than probable that the caaera was
  working perfectly well throughout this period. The screen in
   the police control box would of course show the output from
  this camera even when it was not recording.

  Tape P4- Part 1 6            2 include similar footage timed at1557        and
   through until 1722 when the             tape runs out.


  These sequences include some very clear shots of the front of
  of the Vest Stand and Pen 3/4 on the terraces. Camera 5 can be
  seen to pan, tilt             and soom, especially when lookingat agroup
   of four people at            the front of the terrace.


  Both sequences of video tape show the arrival of a Limousine
  Registration NTV2 and comparing the video time bases we were
   able to establish that tho footage had come from two video
   machines -which fits the configuration of the Sheffield
   system.

   I contacted Roger Houldsworth by telephone and he confirmed
   that the two video machines in the police control box operated
   in parallel.  This would appear sensible as it would enable
   recording via either VCR of any of the two *sequencing0
   devices output enabling the police to either view or record a
   specific incident while the other machine was still on auto*
   seq u en ce.
07-Mar--S7 09:35P CPS CENTRAL CASEWORKCCP                  0171   273 8050     P. lO
    04-riftFi-3'l lb:bl TRFUTin HICKS ENGLAND U0T1THSIDE
                                                                             Pag




         Xt la my opinion that this footage has never been seen he form
         by myself and I believe has not bmen inel-udmd in any police         iy js tty

         compilations and/or other tapes that I have seen.

        From my knowledge of close circuit television and of thiB
        particular CCTV ayntan, thin evidence is uncontroverslal proof
        that earnera 5 ~ the black and white scoreboard camera wee    .
        working between the hours of eay 1100am and 1700pm. in a h '*
        cases bar one, thm iuagea are clear and cannot be described aa
                                                                        t
        inferior.

        Xn addition to the proof of quality, thm sequences contain
        pan. tilt and zoom actions which not only prove that those
        facilities were functioning, they prove that the operators
        (i.e. the policeman) were using the camera and da facto must         U J t AQf"
        have known it to be working and been able to eee the terraces.fj&tiO&tL tt+iQ
                                                                      Q\£t © 3 0
        Hesmre Brymr and Finnigan operate in the television world and Q~~ 15 0 ? ~        2S
        have produced many documentaries (Including First Tuesday)
        which have relied upon video evidence. They gavm ac the
        Impression that in their opinion this footage was more chan   »
        adequate.

        Subject to rechecking research and/or other footage, Messrs
        Beyer and Finnigau appear to agree with Biynelf that thin
        supports Houldsworth' a evidence th* t the CCTV equipment
        viewing Fens 3 and 4 was functioning satisfactorily, both
        prior and subsequent to tha opening of Gate C.

        Furthermore, they advised that the transcript of their
        interview with Houldsworth tends to support Houldaworth'a
        statement and in effect corroborates his position has noc
        changed between the disaster and now regarding the performance
        of the equipment.

        Xt ie my belief that the footage I viewed totally auppvrLs
        Houldsworth's position.




                                               5



                                                6
0 7 -Mar''-9 7 0 9 : 4 3 P C P S C E N T R A L C A S E W O R K C C P   0171   273   8 0 5 0    P ■0 4
      04-Wfl-9n 15:51      TREUQR HICKS ENGLAND UORTHSIDE
                                                                          m                   P10




            I was loaned a working copy of the tapes so that I could look
            st all tha relevant sections in detail and I would confirm
            that thm compilation attached is a true copy of that working
            copy. YTV can confirm that the original tapes, including those
            with footage from camera 5 were supplied to them by South
            Yorkshire Police.

            It has been agreed that Granada Television, Yorkshire
            Television and the Hillsborough Family Support Group will
            continue to work together on further research of this and/or
            other evidence to establish to what degree it is contradictory
            to the case presented to the inquest jury/ others.




            Trevor Hicks                                         Date:-
07-Mar*-97   G9:35P        CPS    CENTRAL        CASEWORKCCP               0171     273     8050                   p.ll
MAR-03-97 17 =02 F R O M . BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                        ID.                                    HMlio   *




                                   The Hillsborough ttw w ter: April 1989.


                                                   Opinion



       Introduction

        1    ! am asked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
              appropriate legal course to follow in the light of three areas o f fresh evidence that
              have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters o f Liverpool
              Football Club, died in tho Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
              cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, held in April and May 1990,
              and later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, verdicts of accidental death
              were recorded on the victims .

       2     A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six o f the
             bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a ftcsh inquest. The main
             complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
             presented in (he Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as Annex A. In
             summary form, those main complaints were,

             2.1      The Coroner imposed an arbitraiy cut-ofF point in lime of 3.1 5. which had the
                      cftcct o f excluding relevant evidence as to the failure to implement the “Mqjor
                       Disaster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                      emergency services promptly.

             2.2      The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances o f the deaths
                      o f the 95: he failed therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                      o f the victims were alive after 3,1 S, and might have been saved by prompt
                      medical attention (paragraphs S.S to 5.12. and 7)

             2.3      The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected In seventeen pages of his
                      summing-up on the subjcct, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many o f the
                      Liverpool supporters were under the influence of drink. The report by Lord
                       Taylor, which was severely critical o f the police, had ruled out the
                      consumption o f alcohol as a cause of the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

             2.4      The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                      sclcclion of evidence and treatment of witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

             2.5      The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial task to perform, in
                      directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                      and unlawful killing.




                                                      1
o y -M ,r~ -9 7   G 9 -.3 5 P   CPS   CENTRAL        CASEWORKCCP               0 1 7 1   2 7 3   BOBO    -------------------
 .MAR-03-S? 17.8S FROM.          SKUCS CAKPBBUL CO                       ID«                                     PAGE          3




                    The inquest verdicts were not quashed. The judgment of the Court is at Annex R.
                    The Court was strongly influenced by the &ct thei the lawyers originally instructed
                    for the families had acquiesced in many of the Coroner’s decisions (eg page 7), that  v
                    the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have made a difference, or had \/ /
                    been properly excluded (pages 14* 36); that the directions of the Coroner to the jury
                    wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
                    40).

                    Since 1993, as I am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                    Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
                    that live legal system failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
                    circumstance* of death. After the 1993 judicial review it seemed to me that the
                    disaster would probably rccede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
                    has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my                                ,
                    professional opinion, provide strong evidence of perjury by individuals police officers
                    at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the      '                  “v
                    coursc o f justice at the inquest. None of the following matters were made known at
                    the inquest.

                    The evidence of Roger ftouldswcrth. Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldywprth,
                    dated 25,h November 1996, attaching a statement of May 1989 and supporting
                    documents, and commenting on evidence given at tbe Inquest (Aancx. Q - Contrary to
                    the evidence presented, no cameras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures of the
                    I eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video / v \* (
                    tapes and M r HouLdsworth’s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number o f '         •
                    officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at large in
                    December 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
                    disaster. ( The evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldsworth i* at Annex D)

                    The new videotape evidence. Vory recently, a member of the Family Support group                        f
                    has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies of ^ (JMftQi •
                    those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
                    told that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the            v*} LO ,
                    South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
                    inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks o f the Family Support
                    Group in the presence o f Mr liouMsworth, Mr Philip Hammond o f the Family                                          '
                    Support Group, and Ann Adlington of my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates UXWeP U r r m
                    that policc officers were lying, and that the pictures o f all relevant areas of the grourwU,       . * 1^.
                    were clear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by ^
                    Mr Houldsworth in his evidence of November 1996. Hvenls in Ac relevant area may '                Ctl w
                    not, for various reasons, l\ave been recorded on tape between 230 pm and 3 pm, but
                    they were clearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

                    I have also been shown a copy of whal was, I am told, presented to the jury. It is a
                    very hadly duplicated and blurred picture o f individuals escaping from the stricken
                    pens shortly after 3 pm, in which it is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The        ^

                                                            2
                                                                              0171     273     SOBO                   P.13
O y - M a r - 9 7 0 9 : 3 6 P C P S CENTRAL. C A S E W O R K C C P
  MAR-e-3-S7 17 •83 FROM. BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                        ID <                                        PACE




                   tape has bad interference in the picture. It appears that this tape is a copy at several
                   generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
                   the videotape o f which the new evidence is a much better copy, but it presents only             AtKA
                   events after 3 pm.                                                                                  T

                   The importance of the new evidence. The question whether the police could and did               bo/cr*-
                                                                                                                             i
                   notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest. On Day 77,
                   puyc 125, the Coroner directed the jury rAnnex KV.

                   “The assessment of the terraces” is a “very important factor” and “maybe the single
                   most important factor in the whole inquest*’. “The total sum of cvidcnce from tlie  \ /
                   Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
                   that none o f them noticed any problems with the pens until 3 o-clock”.

                   None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue in the
                   cam? in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner aa the critical time. I       l-fc w i i f
                   believe (hat the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance lo JU M .S fluJM c& f'
                   the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

            10      1he evidd.ee pf Dr Ed Walker In Februaiy 1997 the evidence of Dr Walker came to                   C S M hit-
                   light; see Annex F. . The cvidcnce at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
                   appear* at Annex G. The new ©vidcnce discloses that Philip Hammond junior had /
                   “sinus rhythm and cardiac output" after arrival at the Nonhem General Hospital,
                   Sheffield. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
                   criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
                   points out in his letter of 7* February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that of Dr
                   Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3"1May 1989 by Dr Wardrupe, who was
                   closely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15“*June 1989 to
                   stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
                   at the inquest.
                                                                                                               /
            11     It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr Walker’s
                    evidence. At page 10 of the Divisional Court's judgment of November 1993 the
                    Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3. IS cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
                    the evidence disclosed the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousncss leading to rapid
                    death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
                                                                                                                /
                    revouling remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his letter of 3rt May 1989 “Almost
                    immediately the department was flooded with large numbers of acutely ill patients
                    requiring urgent resuscitation*’. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
                    structured by the Coroner on an utterly different factual assumption.

            12     The previous investigation. One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
                    in which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
                   exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
                   questions arise as to ihe process by which evidence was selocted by the West
                   Midlands Polico who assisted the Coroner.

                                                            J
07-Mar^V       0 9 :3 7 P   CPS   CENTRAL       CASEWQRKCCP               0171     ^ 3    SOSO        -------
 HAR*®3-07 17.04 T R O H - BRUCE CAMPBELL CO                        IO<                                     PACE   6




          12      Conclusion. In my view these new pieces of evidence call fur a full police enquiry or
                  public inquiry. Exhibits such as (he tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
                  analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
                  production of evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
                  this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director o f
                  Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with ft full copy to the Home Secretary,
                  who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few months.

          13      I hope that the Director might feel able to allow a senior lawyer in fwr ofTicc to meet 'yf
                  two nr three o f the Family Support Group, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this
                   advicc.




          3 Raymond Buildings
          Gray's Inn
          London WCI


          3rd March 1997.                                                     Aiun Jones QC
                                                                                   P .15
        97    Q9-37P      CPS   CENTRAL    CASEWORKCCP   0171     273    8050
Q 7-Mar-97    ©9* 3 7 r   u




                                CROSS BEfEREyCg Or PAGE NUMBERS

             COUljggli'3 OPINION                         PAGE HUMBER IK BUMDLE

             Paragraph 3:       Page 7                       Page       30
                                Pages 14 - 36                Pages       37 - 59
                                Page   9                     Page        32
                                Page 40                      Page        63

             Paragraph 8:       Page 125                     Page 578
                     Hillsborough Interested Parties
    * Mrs.J .McBrien
    / L, D and M Jones
     y/Mr and Mrs O'Neill
    ^/Mr S.Edwards
    ^ M r and Mrs Clark
    ^ M r s . R .Robinson
    y Mr and Mrs J P Joynes
    y^Mr and Mrs. S Roberts and Miss S Roberts
     y j W Saunders

    r-
         Mr G.W. Wright
    *1 Mr T. Hicks
I" Hillsborough Family Action Support Group (HFASG)
^        Solicitor representing HFASG
         Claire Curtis-Thomas MP    (NEW MP for CORBY NEVER BEEN
r        WRITTEN TO BEFORE) ref DQC 186/97
         Miss J.Gower
                         Statement of Dr Edward C Walker dated 20 July 1989




                         Action Number A8559 referring to warning of Dr Walker dated

                  2      2 April 1990




                         Statements of James Wardrope, Consultant in charge          of

                  3      Accident and Emergency, Northern General Hospital




                  4
                         Transcript of   evidence   of James Wardrope   on Wednesday 18
                         April 1990




                  Jjj    Body file of Philip Hammond, Number 93




                         Transcript   of   evidence    of   Professor     Alan   Usher,

                  6      Pathologist, on Wednesday 18 April 1990




                         Transcript of evidence of Dr David Slater on Friday 4 May


                  7      1990




                  8
                         Transcript of evidence of Dr Ernest Gumpert on Friday 4 May
                         1990




                  9
U niversal i n
OFFJCESUPPUES     |( J
UDIV110C        _____
                                                                                     <2 o




        URGENT
PRESS COVERAGE                                                                CPS
FOR ATTENTION OF:                       ^
NO. OF PAGES TO FOLLOW: _ 1


TH E ATTACHED P R E S S CO VERAG E IS PROVIDED:



                             F O R INFORM ATION ONLY    [   ^
                             FO R A D V ICE/ A CTIO N   [    ]




REM A RK S:

                             S I

                                   M              ,




PLEA SE PASS A C O PY T O :




                                                                 FAX:        0171 329 8377



 DATE: \^t{i ‘       '__________                                 T IM E :.




Z00/T00®   DH HHOA-NOSaVHa         HDiiO SS3RM SdO      LLZS 6ZC T I T O ®      62=60   86. t O/ 9 1
                                                INDEPENDENT
                                                   16/04/98

                             Hillsborough fight goes on 4
                             THE FAMILIES or the 96 people who died in the Hillsbor­
                             ough tragedy vowed yesterday to continue to fifilu for a new
                             public inquiry on the ninth anniversary of the disaster. About
                             4,000 people were si Liverpool Football Club’s stadium to hear
                             families group chairman Trevor Hicks attack the Government
                             for not acting after (he Hillsborough investigation ordered by
                             the Home Secrctaiy, Jack Straw, Iasi year. Mr Hicks, who lost
                             two daughters, said: “Wc are not going away... wg will do every­
                             thing ncccssaty to ccmcludc this unfinished business."

                                                  THE MIRROR
                                                    16/04/98


                                               Battle vow
                                               on Hillsbro’*
                                              T H E F A M I L I E S of
                                              Hillsborough victims arc
                                              to fight on tor a new
                                              public inquiry.
                                                 A bout 4,000 people
                                              gathered yesterday at
                                              L i v e r p o o l ' s Allfield
                                              stadium for the ninth
                                              a n n i v e r s a r y of t h e
                                              Sheffield disaster which
                                              killed 96 soccer fans.
                                                 F am ilies          Group
                                              chairman Trevor Hicks
                                              a t t a c k e d t h e Home
                                              Secretary for failing to act.
                                              a n d s a id th e g r o u p
                                              m ay l a u n c h p r i v a t e
                                              prosecutions.
                                                 M r Hicks, who lose two
                                             •daughters in the disaster,
                                              s a w "la ck Straw has
                                              failed us and the isemory
                                              o f those who died.”




                                                 ■t




                                                           8


ZOO/ZOO®   DH HHOA-NOSHVHd          aojjo SS3Hd SdD
                                                                               11C8 6ZE T1T0£2>   6 2 :60   86, t O / 9 J
