                                                                                           JO L K1TOK J
Karen M Watts and David R Leather

                                                    Victoria House, 23 South Road, Waterloo, Merseyside L22 5PE

                                                    Tel: 0151 474 9922 Fax : 0151 474 9933 DX :13638 Waterloo




  The D irector of Public Prosecutions                                                i
  50 Ludgate Hill
  London E.C.4 M 7EX

  O u r ref D R L /H 29

 30.6.98.



 Dear Director,

 The H illsborough Disaster 1989
 Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

 We wish to inform you that the Hillsborough Family Support Group, which we represent, has
 taken out summonses against these tw o retired senior officers of the South Yorkshire Police and
 we enclose copies of the summonses for your information. The group has instructed Alun Jones
 Q C and Julian Knowles to conduct the case. You were of course involved in the matters that led
 the Secretary of State to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a “Scrutiny” in 1997-8 into
 the history of the m atter and we assume you have extensive documentation in relation to the
 case.

 You will see that it is alleged that the tw o officers are guilty of manslaughter and misfeasance in
 public office and that M r Duckenfield is guilty of attempting to pervert the course of justice at
 the Hillsborough stadium when the disaster occurred.

 We are writing to you to request documents. We wish to have:

  a)         all original witness statements in your possession, if any;
  b)         indexes to all relevant material in your possession;
  c)         indexes of and descriptions of material which were but are no longer in yo u r possession;
  d)         copies of all documents and statements you still have but which we do not have;
  e)         a copy of the advice from August 19990 of tw o leading counsel that there was insufficient
              evidence to prosecute;
  f)         any further advice given by counsel after 1990 on the question of prosecutions;
  g)         any other material relevant to the case, including police reports, before or after August
              1990.

  We enclose for your information a list of the material in our possession which emanates from the
  Taylor Enquiry, the Inquest and the Scrutiny.
We are anxious to ensure that we have as many of the original papers as possible because we shall
have to serve original signed witness statements for the purposes of the committal proceedings.

The advice of counsel of August 1990 was made available to Lord Justice Suart-Smith , who
quoted part of it in his report. O u r reading of that report suggests that counsel may have applied
wrongly a test based on recklessness, as opposed to the gross negligence form ulation held to be
correct by the House of Lords in R v Adomako [1995] 1 A.C 171.

Further, we wish to discover, from the report itself, the extent of the evidence and other material
and reports that formed the basis of the 1990 decision. It has become clear since the “Scrutiny”
that tw o versions of statements from South Yorkshire police officers exist; those that contained
criticisms of senior police officers and other assessments by officers of the relevant events; and
those from which such observations were deleted. We have only recently been given access to the
original versions. We suspect that your departm ent was given only the edited statements. There
may be other versions or statements, whose existence is disclosed in the advice, w hich influenced
the decision not to prosecute, which we have not yet seen.

We also wish to see the advice for the purposes of assisting us generally w ith the conduct and
preparation of the case. As proceedings have now begun and summonses have been issued by the
South Sefton Magistrates C ourt, we consider that it is clearly in the interests of justice and the
fair and efficient conduct of the case, that we should have access to all the inform ation that your
department and counsel then had and which you subsequently received.

Should you wish to meet us to discuss this further, please let us know. We look forward to your
reply.




Yours faithfully




                                              2
                    SUM M O NS TO DEFENDANT

                         IN THE COUNTY OF MERSEYSIDE                                      2270

                PETTY SESSIONAL DIVISION OF SOUTH SEFTON


                             The    26th day of       June,   1998


Informations have been laid this day before me, the undersigned Justice of the Peace, by

ANN ADLINGTON, (Solicitor) acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group


that you DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD


of


on the 15th day of April, 1989


at      Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield


1.      Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
        Contrary to Common Law

2.      Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
        Contrary to Common Law

3.      Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
        Contrary to Common Law

4.      With intent to pervert the course of justice, did an act which had a tendency to pervert
        the course of justice in that you lied about the circum stances in which gate C at the
        Football Stadium becam e open.
         Contrary to Common Law



YOU ARE THEREFORE HEREBY SUMMONED to appear on Friday, the 17th day of July,
1998,    at   10.00 a.m. before the MAGISTRATES’ COURT sitting at the COURT HOUSE,
MERTON ROAD, BOOTLE to answ er the said informations.




Justice of the P eace for the County aforesaid.
                    SUM M O NS TO DEFENDANT

                        IN THE COUNTY OF MERSEYSIDE                                  2270

                PETTY SESSIONAL DIVISION OF SOUTH SEFTON


                            The    26th day of        June,   1998


Informations have been laid this day before me, the undersigned Justice of the Peace, by

ANN ADL1NGTON, (Solicitor) acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group


that you BERNARD DEAN MURRAY


of


on the 15th day of April, 1989


at      Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield


1.      Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
        Contrary to Common Law

2.      Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
        Contrary to Common Law

3.      Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
        Contrary to Common Law




YOU ARE THEREFORE HEREBY SUMMONED to appear on Friday, the 17th day of July,
1998,    at   10.00 a.m. before the MAGISTRATES’ COURT sitting at the COURT HOUSE,
MERTON ROAD, BOOTLE to answ er the said informations.




Justice of the Peace for the County aforesaid.
a)   Transcripts o f evidence to the Taylor Inquiry;

b)   Transcripts o f evidence to the Inquest;

c)   Transcripts o f families’ meetings with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith;

d)   Report prepared by J D Phillips, Deputy Chief Constable Devon and Cornwall Police,
     on behalf o f South Yorkshire Police;

e)   Reports and statements recently supplied by the Home Office and referred to in the
     Scrutiny (index attached);

f)   Body files relating to various deceased (index attached);

g)   South Yorkshire Police Computer Data Base Record

h)   The Wells Report prepared by Richard Wells, Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire
     Police
