                                                                                                                                     Central Catmortt
                                                                                                                                           U ntied H a use

  Facsimile                                                                                                                                    P ic c a d illy
                                                                                                                                         rot* r a t t/><2

                                                                                                                         Oirea Line: C
                                                                                                                         Swtichboard: Ql90J-tSG 070
                                                                                                                           rn c s '-m le : C
                                                                                                                               OX .Vo. iSZO* fork*
Attention of: - t ls u u i^ is * ^ ^ u d o f c w c is

Address: ^                  kcu^. , UcdS


From:


CPS U/l*
    Division:
         IJIWU..


Dace

This fax transmission consists of this page plus                           z            others

Please acknowledge receipt:


If cransmission is noc properly received please call 0 l 9 0 4 - - l ^ ^ ~ $ { .




                              C rt)w „ p ro s e c u tio n S e r« c e • « < » /*» •* m     i n e r t i a o f i'u tu z e
 iss D. H. Sharpling
I ief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                          CPS
                                                                                                                CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                United House
                                                                                                                Piccadilly
                                                                                                                York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                 Switchboard:   01904-450070
 r                                                        i                                          DX No:     65204 York 6

                                                                               Facsimile:   01904-
        Hammond Suddards,
        Solicitors                                                          Direct Line:    01904-
        2 Park Lane
        Leeds                                                             Our Reference:             YBF/3341/89
        LS3 1ES
 L                                                        J               Your Reference:            PCM.CHI.57-9


                                                                                                     31 December 1998


        Dear Sirs

        RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

        Thank you for your letter of 23 December 1998.1 note the indication you have given
        of the Assistant Chief Constable’s view on the question of voluntary disclosure in this
        case.

        The position of the CPS is that we would wish to give voluntary disclosure of
        appropriate material to the HFSG as soon as possible. By ‘appropriate’ I mean that
        material which would normally be disclosed, such as copy witness statements and
        copy exhibits. It is not our intention to make voluntary disclosure of documents which
        attract either public interest immunity or legal privilege. Therefore we will not
        voluntarily disclose advices or correspondence between us and the police.

        We have considered carefully where we believe the interests of justice lie in relation
        to disclosure and we have concluded that they lie in favour. Accordingly we propose
        to indicate to the HFSG on 6 January 1999 that we will make disclosure of material to
        them as soon as possible after that date.

        I appreciate the position of the Assistant Chief Constable but we can see no proper
        grounds for withholding voluntary disclosure at this stage. In particular, we do not see
        that the commencement of judicial review proceedings is in itself a sufficient ground
        for withholding disclosure. We are not aware of any other legal obstacle which would
        operate to prevent disclosure at this stage.

        We are trying to be fair to all involved in this case and, given the contents of your
        letter of 23 December 1998, we thought it only right to give you an opportunity to
        make any further representations which you consider might affect our decision about
        voluntary disclosure. Accordingly, if there is anything you wish us to consider please
        would you let me know by noon on 6 January 1999.




                          Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests of justice
I apologise for the tight deadline but I am aware that there is a hearing on 7 January
1999 and I have indicated that as far as possible a decision will be made before then.

Yours faithfully




Christopher H. Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
