From:              Leanne Brophy
To:                CROSTONG
Date:              17 December 1998
Subject:           Hillsborough

Robin Booth rang re the draft press statement. He is aware that Chris Newell sent an e-mail to Chris Annexure
on 15.12.98 at 13.12pm giving his suggested revisions to the second paragraph of the statement. Robin
understands you sent down an e-mail of the statement to Chris Newell leaving out his amendments. Robin
would like you to redraft the statement together with Chris Newell's amendments and e-mail it down to Chris
Newell also. You can access the e-mail under Chris's name. You may well wish to speak to Robin about this. (
rang 12.30pm)
From:               Chris Newell
To:                 CCU.BOOTHR
Date:               17/12/98 (Thu) 9:15am
Subject:            Hillsborough

Robin

I am due to see the Attorney General at 4.00pm today. If you are available, you are welcome to join me. As I
mentioned to Chris Enzor yesterday, there is no need for either him or George Croston to attend.

I am aware of the various draft letters; and the draft press notice, Q's & A's and line to take on private
prosecutions. I am rather busy until lunchtime today, but will be able to look at them in detail later, before going
to see the Attorney. Could we provisionally fix a meeting between you, Clare Stocks and me for 2.30pm? If that
is difficult for either you or Clare, please let me know.

I am copying this message to Amanda Campbell, so that she is aware of the position and can brief the Director
as she thinks appropriate.

CWPN

CC:                 CCU.SHARPLID, DCOS.SALISBUL, CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, CP...
From:               Clare Stocks
To:                 DCE.NEWELLC, DCE.Iongmana
Date:               16/12/98 (Wed) 3:02pm
Subject:            Hillsborough

Chris
We have been discussing via e-mail how to formulate a 'general line1as per your email on our private
prosecution policy.

We realise that it is fraught with difficulties in terms of commenting on the strength of evidence, but it is a
question which will be asked nevertheless and we need to be ready for it. We don't think it will work just to say
we are not prepared to comment on our policy, especially given the high public interest in this case.

We have drafted the attached as a suggestion and would be grateful for your further views. Thank you for your
comments on the press notice - it has been amended accordingly.

Clare

CC:                 CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, SALISBUL, CPSHQY.CCU.CROSTONG, ...
General Line on Private Prosecutions:

The CPS has a policy by which private prosecutions, which are brought to our attention, are
reviewed. We have three options after a review of the evidence is carried out:-

•       To take over the case and discontinue it

•       To allow the private prosecution to continue

•       To take over the case and prosecute it

The policy is different to that of the Code for Crown Prosecutors, which states that we can only
bring cases where there is sufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and that the
public interest requires a prosecution.

The policy in considering private prosecutions enshrines the individual's right to bring a private
prosecution, which is contained within Section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.
It recognises that there will always be some circumstances where although the CPS will not
take over and run a prosecution, it is right that the private prosecutor be allowed to continue
with their prosecution.
From:               Lyn Salisbury
To:                 CPSHQL.DCOS(STOCKSC), CPSHQY.CCU(enzorc)
Date:               16/12/98 (Wed) 3:03pm
Subject:            Hills -Reply -Reply -Reply -Reply

thanks - most helpful - Clare will follow up with Chris N.

CC:                 CPSHQY.CCU(crostong),
From:               Chris Enzor
To:                 CPSHQL.DCOS(salisbul, STOCKSC)
Date:               16/12/98 (Wed) 2:26pm
Subject:            Hills -Reply -Reply -Reply

Point taken.
I have thought carefully about Clare's draft but I cannot improve on it. It is worth noting in passing that there will
be some cases which meet the Code tests but we do not step in (eg. because the private prosecutor does not
wish us to do so). Thus it is not as if it is as simple as saying if the case passes the Code tests we will step in a
prosecute it. I mention this to illustrate just how far from the Code tests we are. But I do not think we should try to
include material like this - it will only confuse.
Next step - put Clare’s draft up to Chris Newell, I guess. I agree that if we do issue it, a strong health warning
must be given.


CC:                  CPSHQY.CCU(crostong),
      f




From:              Lyn Salisbury
To:                CPSHQL.DCOS(STOCKSC), CPSHQY.CCU(enzorc)
Date:              16/12/98 (Wed) 1:24pm
Subject:           Hills -Reply -Reply

I hear what you say - but the reality is that we are going to be asked the question about private prosecutions in
general and we really cannot not answer them - we need something. We can give the journalists a "health
warning" about the case being live so they should be careful what they print.

Help!

CC:                 CPSHQY.CCU(crostong),
                                                Moum ■       "fc uWot ifs>d M

                      k r _ i ■*. a* Mil «■"» ^                                   w^              <*•
                        (Wu*h 4^             Z^6-. ^
                                                 Cu-
Chris Newell
DCE                                                                                       /
CPS HQ                                                                                /
DX 300850                                                                         /
LUDGATE EC4                                                                   /



CC           Dru Sharpling
             Robin Booth
             George Croston




RE:          HILLSBOROUGH -         /
             THE ATTEMPT PERVERT COURSE OF JUSTICE CHARGE


1            I have spent some time over the last couple of days thinking about the
             complex issue of whether to take over the attempt pervert course of justice
             charge alone, i.e. intervening in part in the Hillsborough prosecution. I have
             looked very carefully at-your letter to Stephen Wooler and I hope you will not
             think it unhelpful of me to raise the issue again.

2            In your letter you set out a tentative conclusion that it is possible to take over
             part of a private Prosecution in order to discontinue it and leave the remainder
              of the case to fee run by the private prosecutor. This follows the arguments
              contained in George Croston’s review and I support those arguments.

3            Further support for this view may be derived from the argument that our
             policy on private prosecutions is in effect a duty, where a request has been
             made by either party that we take over “the case” for whatever reason. Our
             own Policy states that where there is clearly no case to answer a prosecution
             conwnenced in such circumstances would be unfounded and would therefore
             be an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution.

4           / Having discussed this briefly with Dru, she pointed out the case of Doody -v-
        /     Secretary o f State fo r the Home Department [1993] 3 A ll ER 92. A t page 106,
    /         Lord Mustill summarises the principles to be applied in the exercise of
/             statutory powers. The following principles can be summarised thus:
•    Statutory powers must be applied in a manner which is fair in all the
     circumstances
•    Standards of fairness are not immutable and may change over time
•    The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in
     every situation; the context must be taken into account
•    Fairness will often require the opportunity for a person affected to make
     representations either before or after the decision is taken
•    Fairness will often require that a person affected should know the gist of
     the case against him in order to make representations.

If the relative seriousness of the charges were reversed, i.e. a private
prosecution consisted of several charges, the most serious of which was so
weak that there is clearly £case to answer. In those circumstances, I suggest
we would conclude that we would have little choice but to intervene in the
most serious charge and discontinue it. Our position on the other charges
would depend on our assessment of the strength of the evidence. If, as in
Hillsborough, we concluded that the charges fell between clearly no case to
answer and realistic prospect, I suggest we would let the private prosecution
continue on those charges only.

The question I pose here is whether there is any logical distinction of
substance which can be made between that hypothetical situation and the
Hillsborough situation? In my view, there is not and I refer to paragraph 4.1
of the Code, “if the case does not pass the evidential test, it must not go ahead,
no matter how important or serious it may be”. The Code does not permit a
distinction to be made on the basis of the seriousness of the charge when
applying the evidential test.

I think there are other arguments which militate in favour of taking over the
attempt pervert course of justice charge and I thought it would be helpful if I
briefly rehearsed these as I think there are some dangers for us if we do not
act.

I argue that taking over the case in part is more readily justifiable than not
intervening at all. In developing these arguments, I am mindful that our policy
on private prosecutions has been exposed to both the prosecutor and
defendants. I am also aware that the defendants are funded by South
Yorkshire Police and further that they have each put together very powerful
defence teams. There is every reason to suppose that they will go for judicial
review whatever our decision.             There has already been a hint in
correspondence when the defence argued that they considered the code tests
ought to have been applied. To the best of my knowledge, there has not been
a challenge on our policy on private prosecutions and the defence may well
consider that this is potentially fertile ground for them.

Leaving aside judicial review, I think there is still a problem in justifying a
decision not to intervene in part on its merits. If asked about the attempt to
pervert the course of justice charge, we could fairly quickly be backed into a
corner on the basis that we considered we could intervene in part, we thought
there was clearly no case to answer but we were influenced by our decision on
      the other charges. It will be difficult to maintain justification. I appreciate
      that we could attempt to avoid the issue by declining to comment on an
      individual charge basis. (In any event we would have to be extremely careful
      in what we say to the press as the case will still be sub judice, of course). Here
      it is appropriate to note the distinction between justifying our decision to the
      parties and justifying it more widely to the press.

10    I agree that it would be difficult to explain a decision to intervene in part,
      given the tight limits on our ability to explain a decision in relation to a case
      which continues before the courts. It ought not to be impossible, however, and
      the decision would be capable of being justified to the parties on the basis of a
      proper application of our policy on a charge by charge basis. I suggest also
      that we would be in a much stronger position should judicial review
      proceedings be commenced. We would then be able to demonstrate with ease
      to the court that we had considered our policy, we felt it should be applied on
      a charge by charge basis and we had applied it accordingly.

11    The converse argument is that we might find it difficult to sustain the non
      intervention line before the Divisional Court as we would immediately have to
      concede that we had not applied our own policy. This could even taint, in the
      eyes of the Court, a decision in relation to the other charges. The defendants
      would have a much better chance of persuading the court that the whole
      decision was wrong if they were able to point to part of it and criticise it with
      some certainty. I pose the question whether this could in itself put the entire
      policy on private prosecutions at risk?

12    I appreciate that my points of view may well be unattractive. I hope they are
      usefiil, if not in this case, then in any wider debate which may take place.




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework: York
14 December, 1998
Tel:
Fax:____________
DX: 65204 - YORK 6
«
From:                Chris Enzor
To:                  CPSHQL.DCOS(STOCKSC, SALISBUL)
Date:                16/12/98 (Wed) 11:43am
Subject:             Hills -Reply

Tricky one this!
Thanks for agreeing to amend the press notice. Please may I see a copy of the amended version.
As to policy on private prosecutions, you mention that we use the Code when talking about cases in general.
True, but we very rarely comment on cases where we are starting proceedings, other than to say that that is
what we are doing. If we decline to prosecute, then we say so and refer to the Code but there are then no
proceedings in existence which might be prejudiced. Here, we have a major problem because discussing our
policy in detail will do several things:
1. it will expose this policy in a way in which it has not been exposed before
2. it will inevitably lead to a conclusion being drawn about our view of the strength of the evidence in a case
which is not ours.
I can see your draft is very carefully constructed. It does reflect the aim of the policy without spelling it out in
detail. If we use it, I suggest we will still need the warning to editors that they must not publish anything which
might prejudice the case etc.etc.
I suspect, however, that Chris's point about publication of policy generally will still mean we cannot use it. The
other problem is that in giving some information, we open up more questions and we end up being asked in
detail what test we applied. We would definitely not be able to go to that level of detail.

    CC:              crostong
From:               Clare Stocks
To:                 CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, SALISBUL
Date:               16/12/98 (Wed) 11:01am
Subject:            Hills

I have noted Lyn's and Chris' comments and will change the press notice accordingly if you are happy with this.

I am still a bit concerned about the private prosecution policy issues, as I know that we will be asked - if we don't
tell them, our openess and accountability etc will be challenged, especially as we make a virtue of using the
Code on every other occasion.

I have drafted a line (attached), which tries not to dwell on the strength of evidence issues, but I am not sure
whether even so it will be enough - any views ?

As you can see I have not put it through to Chris yet, as I thought we'd better work up something firs t!

Clare
General Line on Private Prosecutions:

The CPS has a policy by which private prosecutions, which are brought to our attention, are
reviewed. We have three options after a review of the evidence is carried out:-

•       To take over the case and discontinue it

•       To allow the private prosecution to continue

•       To take over the case and prosecute it

The policy is different to that of the Code for Crown Prosecutors, which states that we can only
bring cases where there is sufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and that the
public interest requires a prosecution.

The policy in considering private prosecutions enshrines the individual's right to bring a private
prosecution, which is contained within Section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.
It recognises that there will always be some circumstances where although the CPS will not
take over and run a prosecution, it is right that the private prosecutor be allowed to continue
with their prosecution.
From:             Chris Enzor
To:               CPSHQL.CCU(BOOTHR), crostong
Date:             16/12/98 (Wed) 8:04am
Subject:          Hillsborough: Draft letters and press release -Reply

George - the press release will be amended by Clare Stocks as a result of Chris Newell's comments he made
yesterday.
The briefing will need amending as a result of CN's comments - re Home Sec. I suggest we discuss.
I suggest you amend the name of the Chief Constable of Merseyside! Now Mr N. Bettinson (unsure of spelling).

CC:                CPSHQL.CCU(LENNONC),
From:                Chris Newell
To:                  CCU.BOOTHR, CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, CCU.LENNONC, DCOS.S...
Date:                15/12/98 (Tue) 1:12pm
Subject:             Hills - draft press notice & Q&A -Reply -Reply

I have seen the flurry of E-mail messages of earlier. I must emphasise the point about timing that Chris Enzor
has already made. Assuming that we hear from the Law Officers this week (and I am reasonably confident that
we shall), we must inform the parties of our decision by close on Friday.

As far as the press notice is concerned, I suggest that the second sentence should read: "A fter a careful
review" - not re-review - "o f all the evidence, and having taken account o f all the representations made to
the CPS by the defendants and the private prosecutor, the CPS has decided not to take over the conduct
of these proceedings."

I agree that the Director does not need to be consulted about this, or involved in the drafting exercise, but I think
that he should be kept informed of the timetable and have advance sight of what is going to be said.

What do you have in mind, Lyn, when you refer to a fact sheet on private prosecutions? Are you thinking of a
summary of our Service policy in relation to private prosecutions? If so, this raises difficult questions, in which
others will have an interest - principally, Garry Patten. I am not sure where we are now on publication of, for
example, the Prosecution Manual, but there are implications for that issue, if it is still live.

The difficulty that we are facing is that any public discussion of our policy will lead directly to a discussion of its
application to the evidence in this particular case, thereby creating the prejudicial debate that we want to avoid
(and which we must not be seen - or even thought - to have fuelled).

I appreciate that the parties know what our policy is and that one side or another, for one reason or another, may
broadcast it. If that happens and we are questioned about it, we shall probably have no option but to confirm
that we have a policy and to indicate in general term s what it is. I think that we must then decline to answer
any questions about the application of the policy to this case, as any such comment from us might prejudice the
ongoing proceedings. I also think that it would probably be unwise to offer any information to journalists about
our policy, unless asked, because to do so would be to invite the further questions that we do not want to
answer.

I should welcome any comments on these thoughts.

CWPN

CC:                  longmana
From:               Chris Enzor
To:                 hboro
Date:               15/12/98 (Tue) 8:55am
Subject:            Hillsborough

Following a brief discussion with Robin this morning, please could the following be done:
1. Clare - please will you copy the latest draft of the press release and Q&A to Robin Booth and Chris Newell
2. George - please will you work up the draft letters we propose to send, telling of our decision, and send copies
to Robin and Chris for comment (a.s.a.p, please)
3. George - please will you start preparing a separate draft letter to the defendants' solicitors which answers the
question we are almost bound to be asked 'how did you reach your decision?'.

For information.
Chris - for the avoidance of doubt, having considered the Doody case, George and I agree that the decision not
to take over any of the charges is correct.
Also, the Home Office is included on the circulation list because of the particular interest shown by this Home
Secretary in the case, as evidenced by his appointment of Stuart-Smith LJ to conduct a scrutiny.
From:              Chris Newell
To:                CPSHQL.CCU(BOOTHR, LENNONC), CPSHQL.DCE(longmana),...
Date:              15/12/98 (Tue) 9:02am
Subject:           Hillsborough -Reply

Chris

Thank you. I note the position. I look forward to seeing the various drafts in due course.

I understand why the Home Secretary has an interest in this case, but I am not yet persuaded that he should
have any (or a copy of any) specific briefing, as opposed to an advance copy of the press notice. Do others
have a view on this?

CWPN

CC:                 CPSHQY.CCU(JENNINGP),
                                      HILLSBOROUGH.




The issue of partial intervention in a private prosecution is raised by Chris Enzor in his
   minute of 14/12.1 have discussed this further with him and note below the points
   considered.

Re para.3: it may be more helpful to see the role of the CPS as being to exercise a
   discretion in relation to private prosecutions which should be guided by the principle
   that the CPS will only take over a private prosecution when there is a particular need
   for it to do so on behalf of the public. The right of private prosecution is a
   constitutional right enshrined in the POA 1985. That right should only be constrained
   where necessary to prevent its abuse.

Re para. 6: there may be no logical distinction between the two situations envisaged by
   Chris Enzor, but there is a practical and rational distinction in the exercise of the
   discretion by the CPS. The two situations are not the same. In the Hillsborough
   situation there is no ground under the CPS policy to intervene in the charges which
   make up the main part of the case. The balance of the case is strongly in favour of
   non-intervention. In the hypothetical case, the charges which make up the main part of
   the case are charges where the CPS consider that there is clearly no case on the
   evidence. In that case it is necessary for the CPS to intervene on a charge-by-charge
   basis in order to achieve a just result. ( The evidential position requires intervention
   but once the CPS has intervened to take over and discontinue the main charges it
   would be bound by the Code to discontinue the lesser charge although to do so would
   defeat the policy on private prosecution.)

In the present case the practical considerations which provide the basis for exercising the
    discretion in favour of non-intervention are: firstly, that on the main charges the CPS
    have not concluded that there is clearly no case; secondly, that continuation by the
    private prosecutor on the one peripheral charge, (and, in the context, lesser charge)
    would not place the one defendant ( Duckinfield) in significantly greater jeopardy
    since he will in any event be facing proceedings for manslaughter and other offences;
    and the defendant has an alternative remedy if he believes that the prosecution for
    attempt pervert,etc has no evidential basis either to argue abuse of process or to
    make a no case submission at committal.




Robin Booth
14 December 1998.
      *



%   From:              Chris Enzor
    To:                robin
    Date:              14/12/98 (Mon) 1:49pm
    Subject:           hillsboro

    Re-draft of the paper to Chris Newell attached. Please can I trouble you/Carol to pass it up to Chris, as I doubt
    he has MS Word.
    (Copied to Mike for info only)

    CC:                 crostong.mike
%
    Chris Newell
    DCE
    CPS HQ
    DX 300850
    LUDGATE EC4



    CC       Dru Sharpling
             Robin Booth
             George Croston




    RE:    HILLSBOROUGH -
    THE ATTEMPT PERVERT COURSE OF JUSTICE CHARGE


    I have spent some time over the last couple of days thinking about the complex issue of whether to take over the
    attempt pervert course of justice charge alone, i.e. intervening in part in the Hillsborough prosecution. I have
    looked very carefully at your letter to Stephen Wooler. I initially started this minute on the basis that I felt there
    were powerful arguments in favour of partial intervention. I have since reconsidered, but I thought it might be
    helpful to expose these arguments in case they are useful at a later stage in the event that the policy is rewritten.

    In your letter you set out a tentative conclusion that it is possible to take over part of a private prosecution in
    order to discontinue it and leave the remainder of the case to be run by the private prosecutor. This follows the
    arguments contained in George Croston/Es review and I support those arguments.

    Further support for this view may be derived from the argument that our policy on private prosecutions is in
    effect a duty, where a request has been made by either party that we take over 6the caseo for whatever reason.
    It is important here to note that any asduty/E is very limited in its application.

    The right to bring a private prosecution is enshrined in statute, of course. It is considered an important
    constitutional right and is one which should not be interfered with lightly. To intervene when it is not strictly
    necessary to do so would be to act to the prejudice of the private prosecutor. Our own policy states that where
    there is clearly no case to answer a prosecution commenced in such circumstances would be unfounded and
    would therefore be an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution. Thus we must be sure that there is clearly no
    case to answer before stepping in to discontinue. The principle underlying the policy here must be to give
    maximum effect to the right of the individual to bring a private prosecution.

    Dru has drawn my attention to the case of Doody uv- Secretary of State for the Home Department [1993] 3 All
    ER 92. At page 106, Lord Mustill summarises the principles to be applied in the exercise of statutory powers.
    The following principles can be summarised thus:

    Statutory powers must be applied in a manner which is fair in all the circumstances
    Standards of fairness are not immutable and may change over time
    The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in every situation; the context must be taken
    into account
    Fairness will often require the opportunity for a person affected to make representations either before or after the
    decision is taken
    Fairness will often require that a person affected should know the gist of the case against him in order to make
    representations.

    I suggest we should consider the principles set out in Doody in making our decision.

    If the relative seriousness of the charges were reversed, i.e. a private prosecution consisted of several charges,
    the most serious of which was so weak that there is clearly no case to answer. In those circumstances, I
    suggest we would conclude that we would have little choice but to intervene in the most serious charge and
    discontinue it. Our position on the other charges would depend on our assessment of the strength of the
    evidence. If, as in Hillsborough, we concluded that the charges fell between clearly no case to answer and
realistic prospect, I suggest we would let the private prosecution continue on those charges only.

The question I pose here is whether there is any logical distinction of substance which can be made between
that hypothetical situation and the Hillsborough situation? On one view, there is not and I refer to paragraph 4.1
of the Code, 6if the case does not pass the evidential test, it must not go ahead, no matter how important or
serious it may be8. The Code does not permit a distinction to be made on the basis of the seriousness of the
charge when applying the evidential test. It could be argued that there is a read across to the private prosecution
policy, ie. where there is clearly no case to answer the charge must not be allowed to proceed no matter how
serious (or trivial, I might add) it is.

I think there are other arguments which militate in favour of taking over the attempt pervert course of justice
charge and I thought it would be helpful if I briefly rehearsed these as I think there are some potential dangers
for us if we do not act.

It could be argued that taking over the case in part is more readily justifiable than not intervening at all. In
developing these arguments, I am mindful that our policy on private prosecutions has been exposed to both the
prosecutor and defendants. I am also aware that the defendants are funded by South Yorkshire Police and
further that they have each put together very powerful defence teams. There is every reason to suppose that
they will go for judicial review whatever our decision. There has already been a hint in correspondence when the
defence argued that they considered the code tests ought to have been applied. To the best of my knowledge,
there has not been a challenge on our policy on private prosecutions and the defence may well consider that this
is potentially fertile ground for them.

 Leaving aside judicial review, I think there is still an issue in justifying a decision not to intervene in part on its
merits. If asked about the attempt to pervert the course of justice charge, we could fairly quickly be backed into
a corner on the basis that we considered we could intervene in part, we thought there was clearly no case to
answer but we were influenced by our decision on the other charges. It might be difficult to maintain a
justification. I appreciate that we could attempt to avoid the issue by declining to comment on an individual
charge basis. In any event we would have to be extremely careful in what we say to the press as the case will
still be sub judice, of course. Here it is appropriate to note the distinction between justifying our decision to the
parties and justifying it more widely to the press.

I agree that it would be difficult to explain a decision to intervene in part, given the tight limits on our ability to
explain a decision in relation to a case which continues before the courts. It ought not to be impossible, however,
and the decision would be capable of being justified to the parties on the basis of a proper application of our
policy on a charge by charge basis. It could be argued that we would be in a stronger position should judicial
review proceedings be commenced. We would then be able to demonstrate with ease to the court that we had
considered our policy, we felt it should be applied on a charge by charge basis and we had applied it
accordingly.

The converse argument is that we might find it difficult to sustain the non intervention line before the Divisional
Court as we would have to agree that we had not applied our own policy on an individual charge basis. This
could taint, in the eyes of the Court, a decision in relation to the other charges. The defendants would have a
better chance of persuading the court that the whole decision was wrong if they were able to point to part of it
and criticise it. I pose the question whether this could in itself put the entire policy on private prosecutions at
risk?

Having exposed some of the arguments in favour of partial intervention, I readily accept that there are
arguments which go the other way.

In paragraph REF _Ref438272840 \r \h 8 I pose the question whether there is a logical difference. At one level
the answer is probably not, in pure logical terms. However there are powerful practical/rational arguments which
enable a distinction to be made.

Where the more serious charge fails the aeclearly no case to answer/E test, it would be likely that it would be
appropriate to step in and take over and discontinue, even on a partial basis. It would be wrong for the defendant
to be in before the court where there is clearly no case. Intervention would thus be necessary to achieve a fair
result. Whilst the defendant would still face other charges, it would be unfair on the defendant to face the trauma
of the more serious charge.

The distinction where the weak charge is less serious is that the defendant will continue to suffer the trauma of
the more serious charges. It is unlikely that continuing to face the less serious charge would unduly add to the
trauma of the proceedings. There can be little doubt that the manslaughter charges in the Hillsborough case far
outweigh the attempt pervert charge in their seriousness.

Further, the defendant retains another remedy, ie. asking the court to discharge the charge at committal
proceedings. True, this is available in the case where the weak charge is the more serious, but the trauma
argument would still be in play. This can be put in another way, will the defendant suffer prejudice as the result
*
       V




%   of non intervention?

    The question then becomes, is partial intervention necessary in the interest of fairness? In this context,
    necessary really means essential.

    Taking all factors in account, the decision may be perceived to be finely balanced, with competing factors on
    both sides. That being the case, the decision ought to be exercised in favour of non intervention. Further, the
    Doody arguments lend considerable support to the view that the decision, unlike the Code test, must not be
    taken in isolation from other relevant and appropriate factors.

    I understand that the view at this stage is that it is likely that the decision will remain in favour of non intervention.
    I hope that this minute may be helpful in exposing these arguments for use at a later stage in the event of a
    policy re-write.

    George Croston has seen this minute and he agrees with the views expressed.




    Chris Enzor
    Branch Crown Prosecutor
    Central Casework: York
    14 December 1998
    Tel
    Fa>
    DX: 65204 - YORK 6
    j1/2\
From:             Chris Enzor
To:               crostong
Date:             15/12/98 (Tue)10:25am
Subject:          Hills - draft press notice & Q&A -Reply -Forwarded

for info
I have replied thqt we are committed to 18 Dec
From:               Lyn Salisbury
To:                 CPSHQL.CCU(BOOTHR, LENNONC), CPSHQL.DCE(longmana, ...
Date:               15/12/98 (Tue) 10:21am
Subject:            Hills - draft press notice & Q&A -Reply

I do not think we should show the Director the pn or q and a; if he is not involved he should not become so now.
I think we should send the Law Officers the pn and and q and a when agreed; how about a fact sheet on private
prosecutions? We can send it to journalists, put it on the Internet etc. Would no doubt come in handy in the
future also. As for timing - if we do Bridgewater this week we could do this one on 21 Dec. I don't think it matters
too much as long as they are staggered as you say.

In the press notice it sounds like the case is against the solicitors, not their clients - so suggest "proceedings
which" or "proceedings against their clients which".

CC:                 CPSHQY.CCU(ENZORC),
DRAFT QUESTION AND ANSWER

NB. The CPS will not comment in detail on this case at this stage as it is still sub judice. We must not give any
impression one way or the other about our view of the strength of the evidence.


1.       W hat test has the CPS applied in deciding whether to take over these proceedings ?
A:       An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about our view of the strength of the
         evidence. We can not comment.

2.      Why has the CPS not taken over the attempt to pervert the course of justice charge ?
A:      We have considered each of the charges in the context of the case as a whole and have decided that the
        appropriate course is not to intervene in the prosecution..

3.       Can the CPS take over only part of a case and discontinue it?
A:       We consider that we can, but we do not think it would be appropriate to do so in the circumstances of this case.

4.      W hat happens now?
A:      The case will continue. It will be up to the parties to decide what action to take next.

5:      Is Judicial Review likely?
A:      It is a matter for the parties whether they seek to commence proceedings by way of judicial review.

6:      Why w on't you take over manslaughter and discontinue when you wouldn't prosecute it yourself?
A:      An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about our view of the strength of the
        evidence. We can not comment.

7:      Why can't you take it over and run it?
A:      An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about our view of the strength of the
        evidence. We can not comment.

8:      Isn't this unfair on the individual who then has to foot the costs?
A:      The right for individuals to bring a private prosecution is established inlegislation.We have not been    asked to
         take over the case to prosecute it.

9:      How many private prosecutions are there every year?
A:      The CPS is not necessarily made aware of every private prosecution there is, andtherefore we don’t compile any
        statistics.

10:     How many does CPS take over and run or discontinue in a year?
A:      We do not compile these statistics.

11:     W hat happens if there is a conviction at the end of the day, does this mean the CPS was wrong not to bring
        it, and will you refund the private prosecutors' costs?
A:      This is hypothetical; but it doesn't mean the CPS was wrong. We can not comment any further as to do so would
         lead to a conclusion about our view of the strength of the evidence. Costs will be a matter for the court to
         determine at the end of the case.

12:     Who made the decision?
A:      The decision was taken by Mr Newell, Director of Casework Evaluation.

13:     Was the new Director involved?
A:      He has been kept informed of key developments.
14:     Why hasn't he made the decision in this case?
A:      Before he became DPP he advised one of the parties. Therefore he has not made any decisions in this case.

15:     Why has it taken you so long, the private prosecution started in July 1998?
A:      A thorough review of the case was undertaken. This involved consideration of representations made by the
        private prosecutor and the defendants. Some of these were received as recently as October 1998.

16:     Has the Attorney General been involved?
A:      The Attorney General has been kept informed.
W hat happens if the case is thrown out at half time (e.g. like the Lawrence case)?
That is a matter for the private prosecutors. However the same rules of court apply in a private prosecution e.g.
you cannot be tried for the same offence twice.
DRAFT

CPS STATEMENT

HILLSBOROUGH CASE - ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD, ADLINGTON V MURRAY


In early July 1998, solicitors acting for Chief Superintendent David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD, (retired) and
Superintendent Bernard Dean MURRAY (retired) asked the Crown Prosecution Service to take over and discontinue the
proceedings against them which have been started by Ann Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

After a re-review of all of the evidence, the Crown Prosecution Service has decided not to take over any of the charges.
This means that the private prosecution will continue.



                                                         -ENDS-


Notes to Editors:

1.        Mr. Duckenfield faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform a public duty and one of
          attempting to pervert the course of justice; Mr. Murray faces two charges of manslaughter and one of wilful
          neglect to perform a public duty.

They are next due in Leeds Magistrates’ Court on 19 April 1999.

As the case is continuing, it is still sub judice.
