                                                                C < = ^J;                   CfOSifcrvv
                                                                                                            m
•
Miss D. H. Sharpling
ihief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                      CPS
                                                                                                            CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                            50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                            London EC4M 7EX
                              '   1:      1&33
                                                                                                  Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
    r                       i i*j f ^                      ~i                                          DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4

     Keva Coombes Esq.
     Legal Advisor                                                             Facsimile: 0171-     273 8450
     Hillsborough Family Support Group
     1st Floor                                                               Direct Line: 0171-     273 8099
     Central Buildings                                                     Our Reference:
     41 North John Street                                                                         YBF/3341/89
    LLIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                      j              Your Reference:




                                                                                                  27 August 1998



            ’OLf
                   Rr (oooijp?
        RE: HILLSBOROUGH : ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENF1ELD & MURRAY

        Thank you for your letter of 17 August and enclosures. I understand Mr Croston in our
        York office has explained to Ms Adlington that he holds all the CPS case papers and is
        briefing me during Miss Sharpling’s absence on leave. This has resulted in a slight delay in
        responding.

        I note the concern you express about the papers remaining in the custody of the South
        Yorkshire Police. In the absence, however, of any indication of impropriety I do not feel
        it is appropriate for me to request the South Yorkshire Police to make alternative
        arrangements for the safekeeping of the original papers.

        It is our understanding of the correspondence you enclosed from the police that they are
        deferring the consideration of your request for voluntary disclosure until the CPS review
        decision has been made.

        We have no record of CPS guidance given in the terms you describe. It may be that there
        is some confusion between the policy" on voluntary disclosure and that of the responsibility
        for storage of the material. However my understanding is that the material is the property
        of the South Yorkshire Police and the question of where the material is to be held is a matter
        for the Chief Constable to decide.

        It may be of assistance, and we would have no objection, if you were to discuss the
        disclosure point with Messrs Hammond Suddards, the solicitors representing the South
        Yorkshire Police.




                             Crown Prosecution Service * Working in the interests of justice
You will appreciate that the Police Complaints Authority(PCA) supervised the original West
Midlands Police investigation which generated the material held in South Yorkshire.
Accordingly you may wish to contact the Chairman, Mr P W Moorhouse, to ascertain
whether or not the PCA feel they have a remit to assist.

I appreciate your wish to obtain disclosure of documents in the possession of the police and
the CPS as quickly as possible. It is my firm view that consideration of voluntary disclosure
should be deferred until after the CPS review decision has been made. If our decision is to
let the private prosecution continue then voluntary disclosure will be given as expeditiously
as possible (except for material subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege).

I understand Mr Croston has informed all the parties involved in the prosecution that the case
review ought to be completed by the end of September. This is date may be subject to
revision by any new material that is brought to our attention. The Director will then be
consulted before any decision is made. I understand the next hearing is on 30 October at
Leeds Magistrates’ Court and that provisional dates for an oral committal have been set for
mid-December.

Finally I want to make it clear that, although I have replied to your correspondence in
Miss Sharpling’s absence on annual leave, I will not play any part in the review process
which is being handled by Mr Croston. This is because I was involved in the case and
decision not to prosecute which was made some years ago after the West Midlands Police
enquiry. I say this because I received a file of material yesterday from Ms Aldington which
has also been sent to Mr Croston. I have sent this extra copy of the material on to Mr
Croston.



               <vl^CaJe£-,



M G KENNEDY
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
