                                                    THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                               ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                            9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                     RECEIVED
                                                                               LONDON SW1E 6JP
enquiries 0171-271 2400              2 0 OCT 1999
le             0 1 7 1 - 27 i 2403
     Fax No:   0171-271 2433
                                     DIRECTOR,
                                     CASEWORK

     C Newell Esq
     Director, Casework
     Crown Prosecution Service
     50 Ludgate Hill
     London EC4M 7EX
                                                                      19 October 1999




 HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
 ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD

     I attach for your information a copy of a letter dated 13 October, but
     received on 18 October, and enclosures, received from Mr Duckenfield’s
     solicitors. You will see from this th a t the solicitors have made an
     application to the Law Officers for a nolle prosequi in respect of Counts 4
     and 5 of the indictm ent th a t has been preferred against Mr Duckenfield.

 You are, of course, wholly familiar with this case, and received assistance
 earlier in the year from George Croston. The decision on this application
 will be for the Solicitor General (the Attorney is precluded because of his
 involvement as counsel advising the then DPP in 1990) b u t I would be
 m ost grateful if you could supply your observations on the application.
 Any observations th a t you are able to make will be p u t before the Law
 Officers and may, if appropriate, be disclosed to both the prosecution
 and defence solicitors in this c a s e /in particular, it would be helpful if
 you would comment on the assertion th at counts 4 and 5 effectively
 negate the decision of the Director to discontinues and on the
 appropriateness, in the view of the CPS, of a nolle prosequi being entered
 in these circum stances.'

     We have received notification from the prosecutor th a t she will wish to
     make representations herself. I attach a copy of Ms Adlington’s letter of
     18 October and my reply. You will see from the letter from Winkworths
     th a t they in tu rn will wish to have an opportunity to respond. I will of
     course send to you any further correspondence th a t I receive.

     The letter from the Defence Solicitors does not specify the date when the
     trial in this case is to take place b u t you mentioned today th a t you think
                                                                     190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH. CN
th a t the trial will take place next year. You will see from my reply to Ms
Adlington th a t I have set out a timetable which should enable a decision
to be reached by the end of the year. On the basis of this, can we work
towards a reply from you by 13 December?




STEPHEN PARKINSON




                                                         190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH. CN
                                                       THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                  ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                               9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                                  LONDON SW1E 6JP
G eneral enquiries 0171-271 2400
Direct line             0 1 7 1 - 2 7 1 2403
              Fax No:   0171-271 2433




          Ms Ann Adlington
          Hillsborough Family Support Group
          1st Floor Central Buildings
          41 North Jo h n Street
          Liverpool L2 6RR
                                                                         19 October 1999




          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
          R V DUCKENFIELD

          T hank you for your letter of 18 October addressed to the Attorney
          General. I have been asked to reply.

          I have not been provided with the date of the forthcoming trial, b u t I
          u n d erstan d th a t it is not to take place before the end of this year. In
          those circum stances I suggest the following timetable for receipt and
          consideration of your subm issions and the reply of those representing Mr
          Duckenfield:

              1.        Your Subm issions to be sent by 16 November;

          2.            The reply of Mr Duckenfield’s representatives to be sent by 30
                        November.

          I hope th a t this timetable will enable a decision to be taken before the
          close of the year, or early in Jan u ary .

          W ith-regard to your final paragraph, the Attorney has received from Mr
          Duckenfield’s solicitors representations dated 24 September 1998, 2
          October 1998 and 9 October 1998, b u t no annexes to those
          representations.




                                                                        190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH.AA
I am copying your letter and this reply to Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors.




STEPHEN PARKINSON




                                                         19QCT99.H1USBOROUGH.AA
                                                 THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                             ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                          9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                             LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0171-271 2400

Direct line         0 1 7 1 '2 7 1 2403
          Fax No:   0171-271 2433




          Messers Winkworth Sherwood
          Solicitors and Parliam entary Agents
          35 G reat Peter Street
          W estminister
          London SW1P 3LR
                                                                    19 October 1999




          HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
          ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD

          T hank you for your letter of 13 October which was received in this
          departm ent on 18 October. The Attorney General received on 18 October
          a letter from Ms Adlington, a solicitor for the HFSG, which I enclose,
          together with a copy of my reply. You will see th a t I set out a timetable
          for the receipt of further subm issions.

          The decision in this instance will be taken by the Solicitor General when
          all representations have been received.




          STEPHEN PARKINSON




                                                                   / 90CT99.HILLSBOROUGH. WS
POO'. iQU-:q8




       S up vtf'

                             H illsborough Fam ily Support Group
                                                                                      ------------
                                                                  009323
                                                                                         19 OCT 1999      /v

                                                                                              P T ^ rv*
  Lord Williams o f Mostyn QC
  The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
  Attorney General’s Chambers
  9 Buckingham Gate
  London SW1E 6JP

  18 October 1999



  Dear Sir

  Hillsborough Disaster
  R v Duckenfield

   I am in receipt o f a letter sent to you on 13* October by Winckworth Sherwood who
   represent M r Duckenfield in the above matter.

   I have instructed Alun Jones QC to settle representations in response to W inckworth's
   application. I should be grateful if you would indicate your timetable for receipt and
   consideration of such submissions.

   Finally I note that Winckworths have forwarded copy representations made by each o f the
   parties'tc/the E le c to r. Could you please confirm t o you have in fact received the A nnexe
   referred to in HFSG submissions dated 24® September and supplementary submissions dated
   2nd October.

    Yours faithfully




        Pi
    Ann Adlington
    Solicitor




                     Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
                   1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
W IN C K W O R T H C S H E R W O O D                                                                          35 Great Peter Street
SOLICITORS         AND                                                                                        Westminster
                                                                                                              London SW1P 3LR
Our ref:                                                                                                      Telephone: 0207 593 5000
                                                                                                              Fax: 0207 593 5099
                                                                                                              DX: 2312 VICTORIA
                   D EP^S
Lord Williams o f Mostyn QC                                                                                   Direct Line:                   0207 593 5107
                                                                                                              Direct Fax:                    0207 593 5044
The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
Attomey-Generals Chambers                                                                                     Email: sbeastwood@ winckworths.co.uk

9 Buckingham Gate
London SW 1E6JP                                                                                               13 October 1999




Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD

We write with the benefit o f Mr W illiam Clegg QC’s advice, on behalf o f David
Duckenfield to invite you to enter a nolle prosequi in relation to two counts o f an indictment
he faces at the Crown Court sitting at Leeds.

The defendant was the senior police officer in charge o f the Hillsborough Stadium at the
time of the disaster in April 1989 when 95 supporters died as the result o f crushing. He has
been committed for trial on three counts by the Magistrates Court, two counts o f
manslaughter and one o f misfeasance in public office. We do not invite you to enter a nolle
prosequi in relation to these counts.

The remaining two counts o f the indictment contain allegations o f falsely telling persons
inquiring into the causes o f the disaster, that the crush had been caused by spectators who
had broken down a gate, and o f failure to correct the false belief relating to that cause,
induced by the alleged statements: Two counts are based on these allegations, firstly, a
charge o f making statements tending and intended to pervert the course o f justice, and
secondly, misconduct in public office. It is the history o f these allegations that prompt this
invitation.

Originally the defendant was summoned on four charges, the three now represented by the
first three counts o f the indictment and a fourth charge alleging that Duckenfield did an act
which had a tendency to pervert the course o f justice.

On the 1st July 1998 we invited the Director o f Public Prosecution to take over the conduct
o f the proceedings under Section 6 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 and to
discontinue them under Section 23. On the 18th December 1998 the Crown Prosecution
Service wrote indicating that they would not take over the proceedings and discontinue. We
sought further information in a letter o f the 23rd December and received a reply on the 1st




                                                            R O G E R FITTO N    TI M W A TT S                Th e firm is a m em b e r o!
PARTNERS                    S T E P H E N W IG GS
                                                                                 JO H N HUDSON                an international n e tw or k o f law yers.
NICH OLA S O W ST O N       HU GH MACDOUGALD                PAUL I R V I N G
B R IA N H O O D            J O H N REES                    RONALD FARRANTS      R A N J E E V RAl            The firm is regulated by The La w Society
PA UI M O R R I S            P E T E R WILLIAMS             R O B E R T BOTKAI   CONSULTANTS                  in the conduct o f investment business.

MK'-IIAHL T H A T C H R R   ANDREW MURRAY                   SIM ON EA STW OO D   F R A N K R O B S O N OB R
                                                                                 G E O R G E BU LL*           *Non-solicitor lax consiillant
A l.IS O N G O R I OV        C H R I S T O P H E R V IN E   NAOMI GOODE
Continued

February 1999 which stated, in reference to the allegations that Duckenfield had done an act
attempting to pervert the course o f justice:-

        “I had formed the view that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge.”

There followed an application for judicial review before the High Court, judgm ent being
given on the 30th March 1999. Mr Newell writing on behalf o f the Director swore an
affidavit that dealt with the position o f partial intervention at paragraph 5 and 6. The Court
having considered the matter quashed the decision o f the Director so far as it related to the
charge o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice.

Thereafter the Director reconsidered the question o f intervention and discontinuance o f that
charge and by letter dated the 12th April 1999 concluded:-

        “I have decided that the C.P.S. should take over that single charge in order to
        discontinue it... The reason is that there is clearly no case to answer on that charge”.

The committal then proceeded on the three remaining charges and Duckenfield was
committed for trial on the 20th July 1999. Thereafter an indictment was settled which
included the original charge discontinued by the Director and a further charge relating to the
same allegation.    ’

It is against this background that the request is made for a nolle prosequi in relation to those
two counts.

The decision to discontinue the proceedings was made by the Director in the context o f the
judicial review decision after hearing lengthy representations by both sides. It was not a
decision that was subject to any further application for judicial review, by the prosecutor.

If the only charge being faced by Duckenfield had been the charge discontinued by the
Director then clearly there could be no question o f any indictment embracing those
allegations and the effect o f the decision to discontinue would be to end the proceedings in
relation to that allegation. This, I anticipate, was the expectation o f the Director.

To permit the prosecutor to reinstate those charges in the form o f counts four and five in the
indictment would be to permit the prosecutor to effectively negate the decision o f the
Director to discontinue. It is only the fact that in respect o f other charges, not the subject o f
this application, Duckenfield happened to be committed for trial independently o f the
charges discontinued, that rendered this course o f action possible. Clearly the ability to
indict a person ought not to be dependant upon circumstances such as those found in this | j
case.                                                                                               I\ '

We do not believe that there has ever been a case in the past where an indictment has been
drawn including charges previously the subject o f a decision by the Director to discontinue.
It is submitted that the situation is unique and ought to be remedied by the entering o f a
nolle prosequi in relation to counts 4 and 5 o f the indictment. This would have the effect of
preserving the decision o f the Director in relation to the allegations that are reflected in the




                                                  2
L0198
Continued

charges that he discontinued while permitting a trial to proceed in relation to the three
remaining charges that were not discontinued by the Director.

Enclosed with this letter is a copy o f the indictment, a copy o f the representation made by
each o f the parties to the Director, the first decision o f the Director and his subsequent
reasoned decision, the Affidavit of Mr Newell, the judgm ent o f the Divisional Court and the
subsequent decision o f the Director pursuant to that ruling.

A copy o f this letter is being sent personally to Ms A. Adlington the prosecutor. She has
not instructed solicitors in private practice to act for her but is herself an employed solicitor
with the Liverpool City Council.           We ask for an opportunity to respond to any
representations she chooses to make as in the past representations by the prosecutor have
inadvertently contained factual inaccuracies.

Yours faithfully




WINCKWORTH SHERWOOD




                                                3
L0198
