                                    INDEX



                                                    Annex   Pages


Copy Informations dated 10.7.98

Submissions as to Issue o f Summonses                       1-5

Chapter 1 to 5, 9 to 11, 16 Taylor Report           A       6-36

R v Bow Street Magistrates Court Ex P South Coast
Shipping Co (1993) 96 Cr App R405                   B       37-40B

R v Adomako (1995) 1AC                              C       41-60

R v Dytham (1979) 69 C rA pp R387                   D       61-69

R v Vreones (1891) QB360                            E       70-79

R v Selvage and Morgan (1982) 73 C rA pp R333       F       80-85

Chronology                                          G       86

Hansard 18th February 1998                          H       87-93

Correspondence                                      I       94-116
                           IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE


THE INFORMATION o f ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, who states that




             THE DEFENDANT


             BERNARD DEAN MURRAY


             On 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

             (1)    Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (2)    Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (3)    Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                    Contrary to Common Law



                   ft .
             DATED THE 10TH DAY OF JULY 1998
                                 IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE




    THE INFORMATION o f ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf o f the Hillsborough Family
    Support Group, who states that


                 THE DEFENDANT


                 DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD of
•                                                                                   I

                 On the 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

                 (1)    Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                        Contrary to Common Law

                 (2)    Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                        Contrary to Common Law

                 (3)    Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                        Contrary to Common Law

                 (4)    With intent to pervert the course o f justice did an act which had a
                        tendency to pervert the course o f justice in that he lied about the
                        circumstances in which gate C became open.
                        Contrary to Common Law




                       Q ■ f \ d iA *\Q ljS r\ .
                 DATED THE 10TH DAY OF JULY 1998
                       In Re David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray



                           Submissions as to Issue o f Summonses



The informant

1     Ann Adlington is solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, which supports
      this application. The Group’s members are relatives o f victims o f the Hillsborough
      disaster in April 1989.


The issue o f summonses.

2     A magistrates’ court has jurisdiction over any indictable crime committed in England
      and Wales by virtue o f section 2 o f the Magistrates Courts Act 1980.

3     The Informant applied to the South Sefton Magistrates Court for summonses identical
      to those now sought. Those summonses were issued on 26th June 1998. Solicitors for
      Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray objected that under section 1 of the Magistrates Court
       1980 there was no power in a justice in Merseyside to issue a summons. There
      followed correspondence between the informant, the court and the Clerk which is
       attached as Annex /. The summonses were withdrawn by consent for the reasons set
       out in the letters.

       The Informant appeared, together with leading counsel, before the Chairman of the
       Bench at South Sefton and the Clerk to the Justices when the summonses were
       granted. The same annexes were presented to the justice as are attached to this
       application, except Annex I. These submissions are a slightly expanded and modified
       version of those presented at South Sefton.

       The decision has been made to lay informations before this court because Mr Murray
       lives in |          ~| in the county o f West Yorkshire, and a justice in Leeds has
       jurisdiction to issue the summonses, on any view, by virtue o f section 1 (2) (c) of the
       Act, because Mr Murray resides in his “area”. The “area” to which the section applies
       is by virtue o f section 1 (8) a ’’commission area”. This phrase has the meaning, by
       virtue of section 150 of the Act, as amended, given by section 1 of the Justice of the
       Peace Act 1997, namely “every metropolitan county” and “every retained county”.
       Leeds and                 are therefore in the same “area”.

        A justice therefore has jurisdiction to issue a summons to Mr Duckenfield, who lives
       in                by virtue o f section (1) (2) (b). It is submitted that it would be
       “expedient” to proceed against Mr Duckenfield in Leeds, rather than commencing
       separate proceedings against him in Dorset.

                                               1
7     Leeds has been selected by the Informant because it one o f the nearest convenient
      locations for people travelling from Liverpool which is unlikely to be the subject of a
      technical jurisdictional challenge.

8     The justice is therefore invited to consider first the summons againstMr Murray, and,
       if it is granted, to consider the summons against Mr Duckenfield.

The reasons fo r the laying o f informations

9     David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray, then respectively a Chief Superintendent and
       a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police Force, were on duty in the control box
       at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield, on 15th April 1989, when a semi-final of the F.A.
       cup was to be played between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football clubs.
       Attached are chapters 1 to 5, 9 to 11, and 16 o f the Taylor Report. The facts set out
       therein form the basis o f the allegations against the two potential defendants. {Annex
       A)

10    Other sections of the Taylor report make other criticisms of the police in general, and
       o f other bodies.

11    Lord Taylor said at paragraph 265 of his report;

               “The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was
               the failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut off access to the central pens
               which were already overfull.”

12     The evidence of forensic pathologists called at the mini inquests in 1990 was that in
       almost all cases death resulted rapidly from unconsciousness that was caused by the
       crushing that followed the inrush of spectators, in full view o f the two men, following
       the order to open the gates, and a failure to divert the incoming spectators from pens 3
       and 4.

13     Mr Duckenfield was in overall charge, and primarily responsible for the decisions and
       lack of decisions which led to the deaths. Mr Murray shares in this responsibility. He
       knew the ground much better. He had been in an important position o f responsibility
       at the identical semi-final the year before, when the Liverpool supporters were also at
       the Leppings Lane end o f the ground. A similar concentration o f supporters in the
       pens 3 and 4 had occurred, as was clear to him, but crushing had been avoided by the
       simple expedient o f diverting the incoming supporters from the tunnel which led to
       those overcrowded pens.

14     In 1989, Mr Duckenfield was entitled to call on Mr Murray’s experience. Mr Murray,
        like Mr Duckenfield, failed, in breach of his duty, to take, or to demand, or to
       recommend, the obvious steps to avoid the obvious dangers.




                                               2
The right to bring a private prosecution

15     This right was preserved specifically by section 6 o f the Prosecution of Offences Act
       1985. The provision was reviewed in R v. Bow Street M agistrates Court, ex parte
       South Coast Shipping Company (1993) 96 Cr. App. R. 405 (Annex B).

Manslaughter

16     It is alleged that the actions and omissions of the two were a substantial cause of
       death; that they owed the deceased a duty of care and were negligent; and that a jury
       is entitled to find that the negligence was of such a gravity as to amount to a crime
       within the principle in R v. Adomako [1995] 1 A.C. 181.

               “The essence of the matter which is supremely a jury question, is whether
               having regard to the risk o f death involved the conduct of the defendant was so
               bad in all the circumstances as to amount in their judgment to a criminal act or
               omission.” [1995] 1 A.C. 187E. {Annex C)

17     This test was not thought to be correct in 1990 when the DPP decided not to
       prosecute any individual in relation to the disaster. The prevailing legal view was that
       involuntary manslaughter o f this kind involved the complicated concept of recklessness
       deriving from statutes setting out crimes of causing death by reckless driving and of
       criminal damage.

18      In Adomako, the House o f Lords did not change the law. It declared that gross
        negligence rather than recklessness was and is the basis of the crime. That approach
        governs the facts of this case.

19      Two representative victims have been selected for the manslaughter allegations.

Misfeasance in public office

20      The same facts will be put forward to support allegations o f this offence, the
        ingredients o f which are set out ini? v. Dytham (1979) 69 Cr. App. R. 387 {Annex D).
        Proof that gross negligence was a substantial cause of death is not a necessary element
        of the offence.

Doing acts tending and intending to pervert the course ofpublic justice.

21       This allegation against Mr Duckenfield alone refers to the allegation that he lied about
        the cause o f the disaster, shortly afterwards, when he must have realised that inquests
        and/or other legal proceedings, would flow from the tragedy. He falsely and
        deceitfully alleged that the gates had been broken by the supporters. (Taylor,
        paragraph 98)

22      The offence is very wide. It consists in



                                                   3
               “The doing o f some act which has a tendency and is intended to pervert the
               administration o f public justice”

               R v. Vreones [1891] Q.B. 360, 369, (Annex E ) and it includes;

               “conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, whether or not
               they have yet been instituted but are within the contemplation o f the wrong­
               doer whose conduct was designed to affect the outcome o f them. That
               conduct includes giving false information to the police with the object of
               among other things putting the police on a false trail.”

               R v. Selvage and Morgan (1982) 73 Cr. App. R. 333 {Annex F)


The history o f the case


23     This is set out in the chronology, Annex G . Verdicts o f accidental death were
       recorded by the jury in 1991, and were not overturned by the High Court in 1993. The
       verdicts are, however, no bar to the bringing of criminal proceedings, and it is the
       contention o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group that the inquest proceedings
       were deeply flawed. No prosecutions of any kind have been instituted.

24     A “Scrutiny” into the new evidence which the Group suggests became available after
       the judicial review proceedings was conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
       Home Secretary in 1997-8. He upheld the findings of Taylor LJ, but found no grounds
       for referring the matter to a fresh inquiry, for quashing the inquest verdicts, or for
       requesting the Director of Public Prosecutions to re-open the investigation.

25     A summary of the “Scrutiny” is to be found in Hansard, for the 18thFebruary 1998
       {Annex H). The facts as set out in that report show why the institution o f proceedings
       is justified. A full copy o f the report o f Lord Justice Taylor and the “Scrutiny” of Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith will be supplied on request.

26     Preparations for the committal bundle are well advanced. Statements of dozens of
       witnesses are available now, although the prosecutor does not yet have the originals.
       Reliance will be placed on admissions of basic facts made by the two proposed
       defendants in evidence to the Taylor enquiry and the inquest. It is not thought that the
       justice will consider it appropriate at this stage to consider the evidence, but these
       copy statements and transcripts o f evidence will be supplied if requested.
The timing o f the prosecution

27     It is submitted that this is not a factor in the decision whether to issue summonses.
       However, it is pointed out here that although the prosecutor has had the transcripts of
        evidence given to the Taylor Enquiry and to the inquest, the majority o f the eye­
       witnesses now relied on were not known to the prosecutor, because they had not given
        evidence at those earlier enquiries. These statements have been disclosed to the Group
        in the last year, in the course o f the “Scrutiny”.

28     Further, the prosecutor believes, and has grounds for this belief, that the Director of
       Public Prosecutions was given selective and incomplete accounts o f the disaster in
        1990, to the advantage o f the South Yorkshire Police, when the decision was taken
        not to prosecute anyone in connection with the disaster. This matter is at present the
        subject of further study.



3 Raymond Buildings
Gray’s Inn
London WC1


10 July 1998                                                         Alun Jones QC
.,JV|l t Hon Douglas Hurd CBE, MP
ecretary of Stale for the Home Department


                      THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                                 : 15 APRIL 1989

                                     INTERIM REPORT GFINQUIRY

                                             INTRODUCTION
   1. On 15 April 1989 a football match to decide a semi-final round of the FA Cup competition was to be
played between the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Clubs. The neutral venue chosen was Hillsborough
Football Stadium, Sheffield Wednesday’s ground. Only six minutes into the game, play was stopped when it
was realised that spectators on the terraces behind the Liverpool goal had been severely crushed. In the result,
95 died and over 400 received hospital treatment

  2. On 17 April 19891was appointed by you tocarry out an Inquiry with the following terms of reference:
      To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
      recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.
  3. Two Assessors were appointed to assist me: Mr Brian Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire,
and Professor Leonard Maunder OBE, BSc, PhD, ScD, FEng, FI Mech E, Professor of Mechanical
Engineering at the University of Newcastle upon Tyne. Their help has been invaluable and I am very grateful
for their expert advice and wise counsels. While the sole responsibility for this report is mine, I am comforted
in the knowledge that both Assessors agree with it.

  4. Mr Robert Whalley was appointed Secretary to the Inquiry. He and his assistants have worked
prodigiously and skilfully to give me all the advice and support I could have wished. I also wish to acknowledge
the help I have received, as always, from my clerk, Mr Ernest Pott.
  5. The policing arrangements for 15 April were in the hands of the South Yorkshire Constabulary. The
efficacy of those arrangements and their implementation was from an early stage called into question. It was
therefore decided that the investigation of the disaster and the gathering of evidence for this Inquiry should be
conducted by an independent police forcc. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable of West Midlands
Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me; he appointed Assistant Chief
Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge of the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both of them.
    6. On 18 April I visited Hillsborough Stadium. I inspected the scene of the disaster on the terraces and all
 relevant parts of the stadium and its approaches. My Assessors and I have made further visits during the
 I nquiry. I also visited Liverpool on 21 and 29 April.
    7. The Lord Mayor and the Sheffield City Council kindly offered to make iheaccommodation and facilities
 of Sheffield Town Hall available for the hearing of oral evidence. This offer was gratefully accepted and 1would
 like to record my thanks for those facilities and for the co-operation afforded to the Inquiry by the authorities
 in Sheffield.

    8. On 28 April 1989, Ihelda preliminary hearing to announce the date when the oral evidence wouldbegin,
 to give some directions as to the procedure I intended to follow and to hear applications from those wishing to
 be represented at the hearing. I accorded representation to the following:
       (i) Those bereaved or inj ured as a result of the disaster.
       (ii) The Football Supporters’ Association.
       (iii) The Football Association.
       (iv) Sheffield City Council.
        (v) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club together with the Football League, the Club’s casual staff and
              their insurers, the Sun Alliance.
        (vi) South Yorkshire Constabulary.
        (vii) South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.
Subsequently, during the hearing, 1further accorded representation to:
     (viii) Trent Regional Health Authority, for the South Yorkshire Mc'.ropoliian Ambulance Service
           (SYMAS).
and (ix) Dr W Eastwood, consultant engineer to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

  91 Since the circumstances of the disaster raised urgent questions of safety, especially ai football grounds,
you'indicated at the outset that you would welcome any recommendations, even of an interim nature, which 1
might be able to give in advance of the new football season due to commence in mid-August 1989.1therefore
announced at the preliminary hearing on 28 April that I would conduct an oral hearing with all possible
expedition as the first phase of the Inquiry to discover the facts and causes of the disaster and enable me to
make any immediate interim recommendations necessary in the short term,                     -T~

   10. The West Midlands Police investigation began on 24 April. A “Freephone" number was advertised to
enable members of the public, especially those who had attended the match, to offer their evidence to the
Inquiry. Initially this number was available for three days on 28 different lines. The response from the public
was such that the lines were continued for a further three days by the end of which 2,666 calls had been
received. There were also many written offers ofhelp. Some 440 West Midlands officers were deployed on the
Inquiry. To service this operation, special police offices were established in Birmingham, Liverpool and
Sheffield and computer technology was used to the full. In all some 3776 statements were taken. There were
also some 1550 letters to Ministers, to the Inquiry and to me personally all of which 1 read. The police,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the BBC had video cameras filming at the ground on 15 April. In
aggregate, they recorded some 71 hours of film covering the period before, during and after the disaster. Thus
the material gathered and potentially available for presentation at the oral hearing was enormous. From this
 mass it was essential to select only sufficient good and reliable evidence necessary to establish the facts and
 causes of the disaster.

   11. Where it seemed likely that any allegation or criticism might be made of the conduct of any person or
 party, the Treasury Solicitor, after consultation with Counsel for the Inquiry* wrote to the party concerned
 setting out the likely'grounds for complaint. This followed the practice established by the Royal Commission
 on Tribunals of Inquiry (the Salmon Commission).

   12. The hearing began on 15 May. It continued, sitting long hours, for 31 days concluding on 29 June. In
 that period, 174 witnesses gave oral evidence. Counsel’s submissions were delivered in writing on 7 July and
 on 14 July 1 heard ihcir brief oral submissions supplementing the written argument.

   13. Witnesses were not sworn. Since this is a departmental inquiry, there was no power to administer the
 oath but there was no instance of any witness giving evidence which I considered might have been different
 had he or she been sworn.

    14. The witnesses called were only a small fraction of those from whom statements were or could have been
 taken. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that they were sufficient in number and reliability to enable me to reach the
 necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from presenting an interim report in the
 required lime and would not have added significantly to the relevant evidence. I have, however, been able to
 take into account many written statements in addition to oral testimony.

    15. Apart from the evidence called by Counsel for the Inquiry which was drawn from statements taken by
 the West Midlands Police and others volunteered by individuals, each of the represented parties was given full
 opportunity to put forward any witnesses they considered should be called. A final submission was made by
 Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police that since the investigation by West Midlands Police is still continuing,
 all the evidence has not been assembled and it wouid be unsafe for me to make findings of fact. I should
 therefore make clear that the invest iption continues principally to furnish as much detail as possible to HM
 Coroner for the City of Sheffield as to the cause of death, the precise position at death.and the care and
 movement of each of the 95 victims individually. I am assured by Chief Constable Dear and Assistant Chief
 Constable Mervyn Jones that it is most unlikely any further evidence gathered will significantly alter or add to
 the history of events which emerged at the hearing.

    16. I should like to thank all those who made it possible for the oral hearing to take place so soon after the
  event and for evidence to be efficiently presented and tested so as to give a full and fair account of what
  happened in all its aspects without irrelevancy or duplication. 1pay tribute particularly to the West Midlands
  Police for their speed and dedication in gathering the evidence and to all those responsible for processing it.
    giost eloquent tribute to the fairness and thoroughness of the police investigation came from the Secretary
  jhe Football Supporters’ Association. He said there had been initial anxiety in Liverpool as 10 whether that
investigation would be fair and objective. His Association therefore collected 200 witness statements
themselves. Having heard the opening statement by Counsel to the Inquiry based upon the evidence gathered
by the police, he found that it accorded entirely with his Association’s evidence and the initial anxiety was
•wholly dispelled.                                                j

  17. Before and during the Inquiry 1 derived great assistance on a wide range of technical issues from the
Health and Safety Executive who providentially have a laboratory in Sheffield (the Research and Laboratory
Services Division) where tests were conductcd and repons prepared swiftly and efficiently. This was done
in close consultation with Professor Maunder. I am most grateful to the Director, Dr A Jones, and to the
Deputy Director, D rC E Nicholson, for their invaluable help.                                       _

  18. I wish to commend Counsel to the inquiry, Mr Andrew Collins QC, Mr Alan Goidsack and Mr
Bernard Phillips for their industry, care and fairness in selecting and presenting the necessary evidence; also.
Counsel for all those represented who tested that evidence fully but expeditiously. This Interim Report could
not possibly have been prepared in so short a time had I not had the whole-hearted co-operation of all those
mentioned and many others.

    19. The second phase of the Inquiry will be directed to making final and long term recommendations about
 crowd control and safety at sports grounds. 1 need to consider in depth information, opinions and arguments
 from a wide range of sources and contributors both here and abroad. It was clear from the outset that this
 second phase could not be carried to completion before the next football season. However, ai an early stage of
 the oral hearing I invited evidence from all who wished to contribute to it and specifically from many sporting,
 local authority, emergency service and police bodies as well as technical consultants. 1 asked that submissions
 should be in writing and should be made promptly so that the second phase of the Inquiry could
  follow immediately after the first. 1shall now proceed to consider the large body ofwritten evidence which has
  been submitted. 1 shall want in some instances to have further oral evidence or discussion in conjunction with
  my Assessors. We will also need tqjnake a number of visits and inspections.
                                 * "
     20. I now present my Interim Report and Recommendations. I shall prepare nny Final Report and
  Recommendations as soon as reasonably possible.




   1 August 1989                                                                                PETER TAYLOR
                  PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?

                                                 CHAPTER 1

                         THE GROUND AND PRE-MATCH ARRANGEMENTS

Fixing The Venue                                                              4
  21.     On 20 March 1989. the Football Association (the FA) requested that their Cup semi-final between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest be held on 15 April at Hillsborough Football Stadium. The corresponding
semi-final between ihe same two teams had been held there in April 1VS8. The arra’jj’emen'.s had been
successful in the view both of the police and of the host club. Sheffield Wednesday (the Club) were therefore
willing to accommodate the 1989 match. South Yorkshire Constabulary were prepared to police it but only if
the ticketing arrangements were the same as those for ! 988. Otherwise, the FA would have to look elsewhere.
Those arrangements did not please Liverpool or its supporters either in 1988 or 1989. They thought the ticket
allocation was unfair for reasons to be explained later. Reluctantly, however, ihe police requirement was
accepted and the match was fixed for 15 April at Hillsborough.

The Ground
  22. The Hillsborough Stadium is some 2£ miles to the north-west of central Sheffield in the district of
Owlerton. The ground was opened in 1899 on what was then a greenfield site by the river Don. The pilch lies
roughly east lowest. Apian of the ground and its immediate environs is ai Appendix 1.

  23. The west end, with which this Inquiry is principally concerned, is known as the Leppings Lane end. The
east end abuts on Penistone Road, the A 61. To the south is the river Don and to the north a residential street,
Vere Road, which runs between Lcppings Lane and Penisione Road North.

    24. Alongside the river is a private roadway giving access to the south stand, to the Directors’ and players’
 entrances, and to the administrative block under the stand. The roadway gives both vehicular and pedestrian
 access between Penistonc Road and Leppings Lane, but there are gates which can shut i; off at each end. There
 is some ear parking along this roadway principally for Directors, players and employees of the Club. The south
 stand dates from 1914 and is the oldest at the ground. It is all sealing with places for 8,800. 5,500 of those arc
 roofed over and 3,300 are uncovered.

   25. The north stand is also all seating and accommodates about 9,700. Behind it is a gymnasium or sports
 hall. There are also a first aid room and police room close by.

   26. The east end is all terracing and is known as theSpion Kop. It was enlarged and roofed over in 1986 and
 now accommodates some 21,000 standing spectators. There are crush barriers in the Kop running parallel to
 the goal line but no dividing fences to prevent free movement from side to side.

    2~!. At the west or Leppings Lane end of the ground there is terracing close to the pilch. Behind it is the west
 stand which provides covered seating and was built in 1965 for World Cup matches, some of which were held
 at Hillsborough in 1966. The covered stand accommodates 4,456 seated spectators. The terracing in front of it
 extends higher in the corners between the stands and its total capacity was stated to be 10,100. At both the Kop
 end and the west end access ta the pitch is barred by perimeter fencing. The fencing is about eight feet high
 mounted upon the low wall at the foot of the terracing. At the top of the fencing the wire returns back at a sharp
 angle for some 15 inches to make it difficult for anyone to climb over towards the pitch. There are gates at
 intervals along the perimeter fencing to afford access between terrace and pitch. These gates are less than z
 metre wide and were designed to be opened only from the pitch side for police purposes or in an emergency.
 They are marked and numbered on the plan Appendix 1.

    28.     Unlike the Kop end, the west terracing has not only crush barriers parallel with the goal tine but radia
  fences at right angles to it, dividing the area into pens. This division was begun after an Fa Cup semi-final ii
  1981 when crushing occurred dueio overcrowding and gates had to be opened. Il proceeded in stages, the fina
  arrangement being shown on the plan Appendix 1. The first section of the west terracing moving south to nortl
  contains gates 1 and 2 and is known as pens I and 2 although in fact constituting only one pen. Next is pen
  with one gate; next pen 4 with one gate; pen 5. which is extremely narrow, was intended as a sterile area t
  divide pen 4 from pen 6. This was to isoiate home and away fans on occasions when both might b
  accommodated on the west terracing in separate pens. Finally there is pen 7 at the north-west comer. Pens 5,
  and 7 each have a perimeter gate. At the back of the pens, under the front o f the west stand, there is a gate i

                                                          4
     pr

»cach radial fence. When those gates are open, the back row of ihe tcrracing is intended to permit access from
 pen to pen along the whole west Side. In practice, when substantial numbers are presenj, those gateways are not
 readily visible or accessible. The present layout of the pens, fences, crush barriers and gates has resulted from a
 series of piecemeal changes. The nature and effect of those changes must be considered later.

The Turnstiles                                                              :
  29. Because of the housing in Vere Road there is no access from the north side of the ground. Along
Pcnisione Road Noah there are some 46 turnstiles which usually give acccss both to theK.op and to the east
end of the north stand. They are marked 43 toS8 inclusive on the plan. The 12 numbered 77 to 88 are designed
to feed ihe north stand but were not used for that purpose on 15 April in order to segregate supportensof the
two teams as appears later. Two of them, 77 and 78, were however usee for access to the Kop.

   30. At the south side of the ground there were 24 turnstiles (numbered 19 to 42 on the plan). Those
 numbered 37 to 42 led to the Kop and the rest to the south stand.

   31. In summary, the south and east sides of the ground accommodated some 29.800 whose access on the
 day was through 60 turnstiles.

    32. The other two sides of the ground, north and west, with a capacity of 24,256 were fed solely from the
  Leppings Lane entrance where there were only 23 turnstiles.

  Travel to the Ground
    33. Most supporters were expected to come by road although rail transport was available. Nottingham
  supporters travelling by train would arrive at the main line Sheffield Midland Station whence they would be
  directed and escorted northwards by the police. They would arrive at the ground along Penistone Road.
  Nottingham supporters travelling by coach, mini-bus or car would approach Sheffield from the south mainly
  on the Ml. Again their arrival at the ground would predominantly be via Penistone Road or Herries Road.

     34. Liverpool supporters travelling by normal rail service would arrive at Sheffield Midland Station just
  like their Nottingham counterparts. The police aimed to segregate the rival fans and put them into separate
  coaches. Liverpool fans could alternatively travel by special train to Wadsley Bridge, a British Rail station
  catering solely for football supporters and situated to the north of the ground. A police escort was available to
  conduct them on foot to the Leppings Lane entrance. Those coming from Liverpool by road would approach
  Sheffield either via the M62 and down the M1 from the north or across the Pennines from the north west. All
  such routes would bring them to the ground via one or other limb of Leppings Lane as shown on Appendix I.
  Broadly, therefore, arrivals from Liverpool would be from the north and west; arrivals from Nottingham
  would be from the south and cast.

   Allocation of Places and Tickets
     35. Experience in recent years has produced a policy of segregation to prevent trouble between supporters
   of rival teams. The need for this policy to be maintained was endorsed and emphasised by the Popplewell
   Report following the Bradford City disaster in 1985. Accordingly, before the 1988 semi-final the police decided
   that sections of the Hillsborough Stadium should be allocated so as to achieve efficient segregation of
   Liverpool and Nottingham Forest fans. The section to be granted to each was determined by the direction
   whence each predominantly approached. Thus, Liverpool were allotted the north and west sides of the ground
   for which access was from Leppings Lane. Nottingham Forest were allotted the south and east sides with access
   from Penistone Road.

      36. The effect of the decision was that for this all-ticket Cup Tie, Liverpool were allotted only 24,256 places
   as against 29,800 for Nottingham Forest. This, although average attendance of supporters at home matches
   was substantially higher at Liverpool than at Nottingham. Moreover, with standing tickets at £6 and seats at
   £12, Nottingham Forest had 21,000 standing places compared with Liverpool’s 10,100. So, Liverpool’s
   allocation was more expensive as well as smaller. Understandably, Liverpool were aggrieved by the allocation
   of places and tickets. They sought with some support from the host club and the FA to have it changed in
    1988, but the police were adamant. To switch ends would, in their opinion, have involved rival supporters
   crossing each other's paths when approaching the ground thereby frustrating attempts at segregation and
   creating a risk of disorder. In 1989. when the same plan was proposed, Liverpool again challenged it. The
   police, however, maintained their view, adding that those who had attended in 1988 would be familiar with the
   arrangements and that any change would lead to confusion.

                                                              5
Access from Leppings Lane
   37. As the plan Appendix I shows, the approach to the west turnstiles is across a narrow neck or forecourt ai
a bend in Leppings Lane where, coming from the north, inurns to the sOuth-west and crosses a bridge over the
river Don. Parking areas for the Liverpool supporters had been arranged north and west of the ground. They
were therefore expected to arrive on foot along both limbs of Leppings Lane and would converge on the
forecourt at the bend. In an arc across that forecourt is a line of railings with six sets of double gates. Inside
those perimeter gates is the short approach to the turnstiles. As shown in the photographs Appendix 2. the
latter are in two sections divided by a fence. The northern section consists of turnstiles 1 to 16. Numbers 1 to
 10 gave access to the north stand. Thus there were 10 turnstiles for the 9,700*with north stand seats. Their
tickets were marked “Entrance A” and were colour-coded brown. Turnstiies 1 to 10 correspondingly had the
letter A above them and brown boards on the wall.
   38. Turnstiles 11 to 16 were for those with seats in the west stand. Thus 4,456 were served by six turnstiles.
They were the next block to the right of those marked A. However, instead of these turnstiles and the west stand
tickets being marked B as might alphabetically have been cxpected, they were marked C. Their colour-code on
tickets and boards was red.
   39. On the other side of the dividing fence in the approach area, there were only seven turnstiles to serve
 10,100 with tickets for the west terracing. Those seven turnstiies were labelled A to G. This was because there
 had originally been 18 turnstiies at Leppings Lane and the sequential numbering continued from 19 upwards
 on the south side of the ground. When the number at Leppings Lane was brought up to 23 the present
 arrangements o f l to 1-6, A to G and then I9upwards was adopted to avoid re-numbenngall round the ground.
 However, above the lettering A to G was a large letter B. “Entrance B" also appeared on tickets for the west
 terrace. Thus, the three blocks of turnstiles encountered by a ticket holder at the Leppings Lane end read from
 left to right A, C, B. The colour-code for west terrace tickets and the boards beside turnstiles A to G was mauve.
 To the right of turnstile G is a tubular steel barrier to divide the queue for that turnstile from the roadway to the
 south stand.

 Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles
   40. Turnstiles f to 10 gave access to a passageway leading tothe north stand. There is an exit gate (marked A
 on Appendix I ) between turnstile 1 and the adjacent housing.

    41. Inside turnstiles I to 16 is a concourse leading to pens 6 and 7 and the steps to the west stand. There is a
  wall dividing this area from that inside turnstiles A to G. It had been built to segregate home and away fans at a
  time when the Club intended they should share the west tcrrace. That idea was nol pursued but the wall
  remained. There was, however, a gateway in the wall which did permit access between the two areas. An exit
  gate (marked B on Appendix I) was provided from the area inside turnstiles 11 to 16.

    42. Finally, anyone using turnstiles A to G entered a concourse bounded on the left by the wall just
  mentioned and on the right by the wall of the private roadway coming from the south stand to Leppings Lane.
  There was an exit gate in the latter wall (marked C on Appendix 1) just inside turnstile G.

    43. All three exit gates, A, B and C, were of concertina design. They could be opened only from the inside
  and were not intended for entry of spectators into the ground.

    44. Those entering through turnstiles A to G had three options once inside the ground. They could b'
  moving to the right go round the south end of the west stand and gain entry into pens I and 2. They could g<
  through the gap in the dividing wall towards the concourse behind turnstiles 11 to 16 and then round the nort
  end of the west stand into pens 6 or 7. However, there were no conspicuous signs inviting them to take either c
  those courses. The obvious way in was straight ahead of thz turnstiles where a tunnel under the middle of tl"
  west stand gave access to pens 3 and 4. Above its entrance in large letters was the word “Standing” and a laq
  letter “B". Thus B ticket holders were drawn towards the tunnel.

     45. The length of the tunnel is some 23 metres. It rises slightly at first then levels off but finally descen
   towards the terraces at a gradient of 1 in 6. As it emerges onto the terrace, the w ay ahead isbisected by the rad
   fence between pen 3 on the right and pen 4 on the left. A short spur of brick wall projects forward from each si
   of the tunnel at its mouth. Those emerging are thus guided straight forward rather than to either side. T
   photograph at Appendix 3 shows the west stand and terraces.

     46. As with the layout on the terraces, the configuration of the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the areas ins
   them was effected by a series of piecemeal changes. Again, it will be necessary to analyse their resultant eff«
      _rig Arrangements
     7.      At the 1988 semi-final, policing had been under the control of Chief Superintendent Mole, then
tomm andcr ofF Division within whose area Hillsborough lies. He was still in post on 20 March 1989 when
the FA broached ihe 1989 semi-final, but he was due to hand over command of F Division on 27 March to
Superintendent Duckenfield on ihe latter's promotion to ChiefSuperintendent. Both were present at an initial
meeting on 22 March, but on 27 March Mr Mole bowed out and Mr Duckenfield took over. Under him wefe
Sector Commanders, all Superintendents wiih much experience of policing football matches at Hillsborough
and elsewhere. In particular. Superintendent Marshall was in charge of the area outside the Leppings Lane
entrance and the approaches to it. Superintendent Greenwood was in command inside tlye ground, but this
included the area between the turnstiles and the perimeter fence. They thereby swapped roles from the
previous year. Under Mr Duckenfield’s overall command were some 801 officers and men on duty at the
ground plus trafFjcofficersand others from D Division to deal with the influx of supporters into thecitycentrc.
 In all, therefore, some 1,122 poiice were deployed for this match amounting to about 38 per cent of irfTlotal
 South Yorkshire force. Included in the mounted section of 34 were officers from Liverpool and Nottingham to
 assist respectively in marshalling their home supporters. The total at the ground was divided into serials
 consisting usually of eight to ten Constables plus a Sergeant and an Inspector. The serials were posted to duties
 at various stations in and around the ground in three phases; before, during and after the match. All of this
 was provided for in an Operational Order which followed closely the Order drawn up for the 1988 semi-final
 and look into account the force’s “Standing Instructions for the Policing of Football Grounds”. The Order
  described the duties of each serial at cach phase. It was supplemented by ora! briefings before and on the day of
  the match.

 Sheffield Wednesday's Arrangements
   48. The Club provided 376 stewards, gatemen and turnstile operators for duty on 15 April. The stewards
 were briefed as to their duties on the morning of the match by police Inspectors and were allocated round the
 ground. They wore yellow tabards. The Club’s control room, situated below the south stand, could
 communicate by VHF radio with the stewards. Closed circuit television was installed bv the Club with
 screens in their control room showing ail the turnstiles round theground. A computerised counting system was
 incorporated in the turnstiles. This flashed onto a screen in the Club control room the running total of
 spectators passing through the Turnstiles section by section. Thus, at the Leppings Lane end, there would be
 separate running totals for turnstiles I to 10 (north stand), turnstiles 11 to 16 (west stand), and turnstiles A to G
 (west terraces). When the total for any section was within 15 percent of its permitted capacity a warning pulse
 showed on the screen. For the west terracing that warning would occur when the numbers were within 15 per
 cent of the total terrace capacity of 10,100. What the system could not do was monitor the distribution of fans
 On the terracing, pen by pen. It could give no warning therefore if one pen was full beyond its safe capacity.

 Police Communications
   49. The nerve centre for police control is the control room or box situated at the south-west corner of the
 ground between the south stand and pen 1 of the west terracing. The box is elevated and reached by a number
 of steps. It has windows commanding views, across the pitch and straight along the line of the west perimeier
 fence. The box is very small and has seats for only three officers. Superintendent Murray was in control of it
 and was advisor to Mr Duckenfield as he had been to Mr Mole the year before. Next to him sat Sergeant
 Goddard who operated the radios. The third seat was for Police Constable Ryan who operated the telephone
 and public address systems. At the back of the box stood Police Constable Bichard who was in control of the
 police closed circuit television system operated by a row of consoles on a bench in front of him and behind the
 three seated officers.

     50. There were five television screens showing views of five roving cameras fixed at high points on the
  stands and directed both inside and outside the ground. There was also a master screen which flicked in
  rotation from one camera view to another and which made a video recording. The cameras have a zoom
  facility to close in on any point or interest. Specifically, there were good camera views of the west terracing, of
  the Leppings Lane turnstiles and beyond them of Leppings Lane itself.

    51. The Tannoy public address system was relayed through speakers fixed at vantage points inside the
  ground and outside the turnstiles. It was used by a disc jockey, housed under the police control box, to relay
  music before the match, but it could be overridden by the police. Messages could be relayed through all
  speakers or if appropriate to one area only.
   53.     Radio contact al Hillsborough from control lo serials operating both inside and outside the ground was
UHF on channc! 25. There was a W1 FU portable base station in the control box and if it failed there was a
stand-by station under Ihe operator’s bench. Hand sets were issued to ali ranks or Sergeant and above.
Community Constables on duty would already have their own, Other Constables had no radio.
Communication was on “talk through” i.e. any message from any source would be heard by everyone tuned in
and if ijiore than one source spoke messages could become garbled. Ear pieces were issued to some officers in
an attempt to overcome the loud crowd noise which made receipt of signals very difficult. There were other
radio channels open to Sergeant Goddard: VHF to policc Headquarters at -Snig Hill, channcl 35 to FI
Sub-divisional Headquarters at Hammerton Road and channel 19 used by CID. There was also a set tuned to
Sheffield Wednesday’s radio system between its control room and the stewards.
                                                  CHAPTER 2

                                  15th APRIL: THE BUILD-UP TO 2.30pm

Early Arrivals
  54. 15 April 1989 was a warm sunny spring Saturday. The match yas a sell-out. so 54,000 ’.icket hoiders
were expected. Others would come without tickets hoping to acquire them or even to gain^access otherwise.
The following account concentrates, as did the evidence, on the western approaches and the Liverpool
supporters since the disaster occurred at their end, They began to arrive in the Hillsborough area quite early in
small numbers. Some brought cans of beer with them and were seen drinking as they walked; others took
advantage of the weather and sat about on walls and open spaces. When the public houses opened;«n'any
resorted there, drinking inside or spilling out into the sunshine. Leppings Lane and its environs comprise a
mixed shopping and residential area. Local residents saw groups of Liverpool supporters keen to find a public
house or off-licence. Many were asking for tickets or “spares". There were a few touts selling them at inflated
prices. From an early stage, some of the fans were using private gardens and yards to urinate. As the morning
wore on, numbers increased. Requests for tickets and trespass to urinate also increased. Still the prevailing
mood was one of carnival, good humour and expectation.

Public Houses
  55. There were some 74 shops with off-licences in and around Sheffield. In general, they opened at 8 am.
Liverpool supporters did visit them but the evidence did not suggest a great amount of alcoholic drink was
bought there.

   56. Opening time at public houses was in general 11am. Some remained closed all day. Of the others, some
 72, mostly in the ciiy, were frequented by local patrons only. Some 23 public houses, however, served over a
 hundred Liverpool supporters each. Another 51 served more than 20 each. Little trouble was reported, but
 many supporters drank enough to affect their mood. At first excitement: later frustration.

 The Gathering Crowd
   57. Towards the end of the morning, fans gathered on and around the bridge near the Leppings Lane
 cntrancc. They seemed reluctant to enter the ground early. All turnstiles were open at 12 noon and one or two
 as early as 11.30 am. Some 53 police had been deployed to operate outside the turnstiles and in the Leppings
 Lane area. They enquired at random whether fans had tickets. Those who had not were advised to go away;
 nevertheless, many returned more than once. Those who had tickets were guided in the right direction. The
 police tried to persuade them to enter the ground early. Officers, male and female, had been posted outside
 each turnstile with the duty of searching entrants for weapons, drink or drugs. Once through the turnstile, an
 entrant was liable to be searched again by one of a serial of officers positioned just inside.

    58. At about 12 noon Chief Inspector Creaser asked Superintendent Murray whether the pens on the west
 terrace were to be filled one by one successively, but was told that they should all be available from the start and
 the fans should find their own level.

   59. By 2 pm it was apparent to those inside the ground and those monitoring events in the police and Club
 control rooms that the number of Nottingham fans in their places greatly outnumbered those from Liverpool.
 The Kop and the south stand were filling up steadily, but the north and west stands were half empty. It was
 noted about that time that the turnstile figures showed only 12,000 had entered as against 20,000 at the same
 time the previous year. On the west terraces, although pens 3 and 4 were filling, the wing pens 1,2,6 and 7 were
 nearly empty. At 2.15 pm a Tannoy message asked fans in pens 3 and 4 to move forward and make room for
 others.

    60. There had been three special trains from Liverpool in 1988. This time, there was only one. It arrived
  early, just before 2 pm, at Wadsley Bridge station. The 350 passengers were met by both mounted and foot
  police officers who escorted them in a crocodile down Leppings Lane. They were orderly and passed through
  the turnstiles into the ground by about 2.20 pm without incident.

    61. By this time the police Traffic Division reported that the Liverpool routes were clear, so the majority of
  Liverpool fans were in the Sheffield area. The numbers converging on the Leppings Lane entrance were
  increasing rapidly. Between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles the crowd became congested. There was no
  longer a separate queue at each turnstile but a single phalanx filling the whole approach area. The foot officers
  outside the turnstiles were no longer able to search everyone and had difficulty in searching even selectively.
                                                                                                             #
Mounted officers in and outside ihe turnstile area were having difficulty manoeuvring in such a dense crowd. 3
The police were beset by fans bemused by the tickct and turnstile labelling asking for directions. Many had]
been drinking but up to and just after 2.30 pm the mood remained good.                                       i
                                                                                                              ]
  62.     Superintendent Marshall was on foot amongsi the crowd. He became anxious about the numbers-
coming down Leppings Lane and spilling out onto the roadway where buses and cars were moving. At 2.17 j
pm he radioed to control to have motor traffic in Leppings Lane slopped. 5"his was eventually done at about;
2.30 pm. Up to this time, despite the large mass outside the turnstiles and the numbers still approaching, there!
was still no panic in the crowd; no perception of crisis by the police. In the control room Mr Murray, who could-
sec Leppings Lane on the video, advised Mr Duckenfield that they would get everyone in by 3 pm. Mr:
Duckenfield reaffirmed to him the policy about a delayed kick-off. It would be ordere^only if there was some;
major external factor such as fog on the Penninesor delay on the motorway: not if spectators merely turned up'
late even in large numbers.
                                                    CHAPTER 3

                                     T H E C R I S I S AT T H E T U R N S T I L E S


 . 61 ln *h<L20 m ,“ ut«        2' 3° pm 10 2-5.° pm the; s were crucial developments both inside and outside
the ground. In pens j.and 4 there was a steady increase in pressure as more fans came through the tunnel to the
favoured area behind the goal. By 2.M) pm these pens were already full to a degree which caused senous
discomfort.10 many well used to enduring pressure on terraces. The numbers at that time were clearh in lx a s l
of the max,mum dens.tysu.ted by the Home Office Guide lo Safety at Sports Grounds (1986 S h e G
Gutde) ,.e. 54 persons per 10 square metres. (Although the Green Guide has no statutory or l e i l force w H h e
only official advice avatlable about safety a, sports grounds.) In the wing pens !, 2J a n d
ample room and bare patches o f concrete were visible.                   \
                                                                                                   f
                                                                                                  th ere '™ stiU


   64 Meanwhile the crowd grew at the Leppings Lane entrance. As more arrived at the back the crush at the
front grew worse. Entry to the turnstiles became more difficult. Their efficiency w a s i m n S r i ,
reduced. Arrivals at the back exceeded deliveries throueh the turnstiles so the'buildTn i n r - 1 ^ r t f
officers outside were unable to function and in danger themselves so they went throuth                  a
a p in through gate C where they did what they could to relieve
officers were surrounded by the dense mass of people and became ineffective S u n e r i m l n ^ , L I T
the midst of the turmoiL He extricated h i m s X d stood on a " arape" o
dmnken fan tried to pusn him off: a beer can was thrown at a mounted officer. But these wire isolated acK bt
individual, the menace came from the massive numbers singie-mindedly determined to be in for the kick-off
^ n r n i X r i 1^ 1118 0Ul' T ba<± of the crowd fans were *™»rated by the lack of progress as 3 o’clock
th? f W n J i T 6’ m° S- y° UI!S mCn Wh° h3d beCn drinking’ tried t0 Push and force their way forward At
the front, people were jam m ed together and against the turnstile walls. Some panicked ^
intensified. Some youngsters and women were fainting and in distress. Thev were helped out throueh the




o f a h i n r i ^ i ^ 01' ^ c° mmunicatlons offlcer “ me promptly and switched to the standby station With the use
S i S S S S c o n t r o l c0ntact ^ restored. D e s p i t e t h i s t w Q Q f M r
were sent TheThird                      Reinforcem?nt*’ “ eluding mounted officers from Penistone Road’
nm          ^ ,    request, for a Undrover, was received direct by its driver PC Buxton who arrived at 2 4fi
m oun^donw h ^         a y l0Udspeaker not 10 Push- This was n° more effective than the Tannoy The
them I p i n S the c r o w T o m s T d e ^ o 0Utside.the perimeter * « « ■ An attempt was made to shut
tu m ttiw tka            outside, to enable, the throng insiae to be dispersed or at least thinned throueh the
areater n u r n h ^ rf f Ure/ r0m * lthout’ however’ °Pened the gates again. Mounted officers, now reinforXd to
with the obiect of             •* °°      across the eIbow °fLsppings Lane from the sweet shop to the bridge again
d e sp erate^ S ^ id u d s f o S n a i r 0' 6       ^        They WCrC successfuI in this fo« ° n i e minutes despite
m o^dra^ati(^reH ef^tbs^u-essurera^ un ° r between the horses. However, this exercise was overtaken by a

“Open the Gates”

over 5.OOO^uhe h e a d ^ f th t        Pm the crowd          and outside the turnstile approach had swelled to
of breath and ^ e a t i n s n L W i       Condltl? ns h*d becom“ “ tolerable. Those who got through were short
and asked them in f o r c e f u l C0™p.Iain*d.10 P°Ilce o n c e rs on the concourse inside the turnstiles
could not D a s s ^ h r o u ^       ? u S° melh‘n^ Exit gates A and B were being shaken. It was clear the crowd
asking that kick-off be              t j,   Pm ? °      Constable Buxton radioed from the Landroverto control
     B      Kicic-on be postponed. The suggestion was acknowledged but rejected.

                                             T CT ^ d had b“ 0m' “" " “ “ SeaWe. Although loth todo so,sinceit
Otherwise lie feared fata! v   ^         h' d' ™ “ re? ue!I                    be ° P « * d to relieve the pressure,
"dioed S n t r o H o ^ 2 ? h T           T ' '      ? ” ■<*<>««« outside the ground agreed. At 2.47 pm he
request 2 " e C o o e ^ r ,  f          “ t,         ' r ‘ I * * 'Pm' Whilst Mr ^ ' " M d was considering the

Marahali repeated his request. Itill no^esponse from control. H T r e p S t S l f a t h i f d ^ S S               “I

                                                            11
gates were not opened someone was going to be killed. In the control room, Mr Duckenfield had not made a
decision. Mr Murray asked him "Are you going to open the gates?”. M r Duckenfield gave the order and Sgi
Goddard radioed to M r Marshall “Open the gates”. Neither the Club control room nor an y police officers
inside the turnstiles were told of this order before or after it was given or of any action it would require.

  68. At 2.52 pm, gate C was opened wide. Fans behind turnstiies A to G and from the concourse beyond
camc round 10 flow through it in large numbers.                         '

  69. About two minutes later the pressure outside gate A led Sgt Higgins to radio, despite the gateman’s
objection, for it to be opened. If it was not, he said, “It’ll go and someone will get killed”. Permission was given,
but this time reserve serials were alerted to monitor the inrush towards the north stand. G^ie B was also briefly
opened against the gateman's wishes and about 200 of those pressed at turnstiles A to G gained entry to their
left.'                                                          \

  70. The largest entry, however, was through gate C. In the five minutes it was open about 2,000 fans passed
through it steadily at a fast walk. Some may have had tickets for the stands. No doubt some had no tickets at all.
The majority had tickets for the terraces. O f these, some found their way either right to pens 1 and 2 or left
through the dividing wall to 6 and 7. But a large proportion headed straight for the tunnel in front of them.
                                                                T H E D IS A S T E R

  71.      The initial influx through gate C, augmented by entrants via the turnstiies. came throusz :he tunnel
with great momentum. Fans spoke of being swept through, feet-off the ground. The 1 in o gradier.: accelerated
their progress. Upon reaching the crowded pens, some wished to go back but were unable to dc so. The new
arrivals found themselves pushed forward and the pressure became intense. At 2.54 prri, shcr„v ane: this
influx began, the teams came onto the pitch. As usual, this was greeted by a surge forward. Mar.v -.vers now
acutely uncomfortable and some were in distress. The mass seethed about but voluntary m ove-cru bv anv
individual was difficult; hands down could not be raised and some fans found it hard to breathe. Sail the flow
continued through the tunnel causing further surges forward. There were shouts for help and for lie za?Fs to be
opened to the pitch Police officers on the perimeter track did not fmmediately react. In the deafenim noise
^ om^ hanlm§ andsho^ ”}g they did not at first recognise the problem. Realisation came at different moments
to different officers in different places.

, f l 2‘         SPrang ° ^ Cn “]?der the irUense Pressure from within. An officer quickly closed :l Shortiv
d           !! t Prang        ° cers tned 10 shut ix- Those Peking to escape were urged and pushed back. Gate
4 was opened by a policeman wno noticed the crushing. People began to spill out through it and           directed
 o he wing pens where there was still ample room. Meanwhile, gate 4 was closed aaain and then re-ooened At
         , onsl^ble’ n°w aUve 10 ^ e crisis, followed strictly his written orders and radioed for permission to
o p e n th a t gate. R e c e iv i n g n o reply, h e to o k it u p o n h im s e lf to o p en it.


      JUSt b5 ° r! 3 pm\ lhe .m atch kicked off- At the same time>^ te C, which had been closed at 2.57 pm
was reopened and a steady trickle continued to enter through the tunnel.

tn 2'i,7op?ovPM hefCrUSh’ fanS beSa? dimbing the radial fences out of Pens 3 and 4 into pens 2 and 5. Others
Nearthe from f               Penm eter fence but were at first turned back by police who feared a pitch invasion
thev were heM                             were wf kened to the point of collapse and in some instances death but
n r«            K ^        y             r° Und- Further ^       most were so Preoccupied with the sain of being
p essed against b o n e rs and with breathing problems that they saw nothing of the game. But at the rear there
were many who, although cramped, were watching the football unaware of the distress at the front.

L'vemool fant S ’               ^ Liverp° o1. struck the crossbar at the Kop end. There was a rear from the
thH nfh«           t r    SS^ C ume 3 P0WertUl SUrge foraards in Pen 1 Tbe severaI surges which occurred after
 ne; nh"        83 C “ m e d ^ P r e s s u r e down the pens towards the pitch. The force became such as to twist
               ,Sv k S ° a C™ th bam er towards the from of Pen 3. The evidence does not esadlish with
th S fJ f™           happened. Probably it was triggered by the surge at 3.04 pm. But I am sure it occurred after
          L **         so greatly increased the pressure in the pen. When the barrier broke those ^ c r a it had
                            towards the perimeter fence. Many fell and the involuntary rush of-.hose behind
              1° ^ T1-Thc w ishing force was transmitted and dispersed so that all along the front of oen 3 fans
were pressed hard up against the low wall and the wire mesh of the fence above i t

 barV r t r    n° ban if r br° ke- Nevertheless those at the front were crushed against wail and fence. Further
     ’ two faamcn were bowed and some individuals succumbed to the pressure around them.

 n, l 7K.iUT S ° n terraces are common. Usually, they go forward, then recede. Here, with the weight of
 l i f ^ l iS ere Was n0 receding. The Pressure slay=d and for those crushed breathless bv it, standing or prone,
 d e a tT         aWay’       rd ie f 031116 m f° Ur minutes there would be irreversible brain damag:: if longer,

 faJ fc *•wthC contr° 1 room no-one noticed the overcrowding or anything amiss in pens 3 and 4 until the first
  ans sput out onto the penm eter track just before kick-off. Then, the officers in command assumed that there
 o ffir^       S    P      invasion. They called up reserve serials waiting in the gymnasium and ail available
 onicers elsewhere to go to the pitch. A request was made to HQ for dog handlers.

 noLc,HSJ £ fjinl?Kd?nl ? rC“nW° ° d’ li!C Ground Commander, was by the players’ tunnel at the kick-off. He
 o S S ^ S ? a c k and went tothewjst,end!>ehmd the goal. As he approached, he did not think the pens
 s i t u a r i o n ^ r M e^ t Verl - KSC k S!W 0SC prCSSCd against lhe fence- Even then, he thoueht the
 and sknali^-              ?I f            UP^ - P? rclICVed the pressure- He lim b e d on the wall beiow the fence
 T hosS l ^ i              \        k '5 ° “     ° t0 movc back’ 0ther officers joined him. It was impossible.
           fans wh0 wouid have wlshed 10 comply were powerless to do so. Behind them, there we** still manv
          W - x -.   1-V

            u n a w a r e o f th e c r is is , w a t c h in g the g a m e. T h c football c o n t i n u e d to j o y o u s s h o u t i n g a n d singing rou n d the rest £ ,
         " o f th e g r o u n d w h i le t h o s e c r u s h c d a n d trapped slow ly e x p ir e d .

                 on        vvv,f»n Mr Greenwooo
                                      _         s signals _____
                                                       , to move_ back n<-n ,r» / 4 fnilttfc-:
                                                                       provea       truitiess,. hnce tried
                                                                                                     u i t u to radio for the m a tc h to b e
                      Pd A t firs h is m e s s a g e w as n o t received bv c o n tr o l, s o h e s ig n a lle d w it h h is arm s to w a m s th e control
             * ° P Mr'   D u c k e n f ie l d s e n t M r M urray d ow n from the b o x t o h a v e th e m a i c n s t o p p e d v,a tne linesman the
             2   gree d^emergency d r ill B e fo r e h e c o u ld d o so. Mr G r e e n w o o d ran o v e r th e p itch to the reteree w n o s t o p p e d the
              s a m e . It w a s 5 ‘/: m i n u t e s p a s t 3.                                                                         •




< * 2.




                                                                                                        14

                                                                                                                                                                         .r-r&g?
                                                  CHAPTERS

                                              THE AFTERMATH

Rescue Attempts
   81. From 3 o clock, gates 3 and 4 had been, open and remained so. Ai first, fans had walked or staggered out
winded and faint. But the final surge at 3.04 pm. and the struggle to reach the open gates, caused a horrendous
blockage of bodies. The dead, the dying and the desperate bccame interwoven in the sump at the front of the
pens, especially by the gates. Those with strength left clambered over others submerged in*the human heap and
tried to climb out over the fence. They were now helped by poiice and other fans who hauled them up and over.
Numbers of fans were climbing over the radial fcnces into adjacent pens. At the back, many were hauled up
into the west stand to relieve the pressure.

   82. The steps from the sump at gateways j and 4 were so congesjcd with bodies live and dead that each had
to be prised from the pile by the police. Initially, no officer took',effective charge. A number of individual
officers and fans worked frantically to free those trapped but the gateways were so n arrow that onlv two or three
could get at ihe entwined bodies Willing hands got in one another's way. More officers arrived from the
gymnasium and elsewhere in the ground. Many used their own initiative to help those laid out on the pitch, to
assist in getting others over the fencing and to comfort the distressed. But some stood in groups near the
perimeter fence not knowing what to do. They had been summoned in response to what was thought to be a
threat to public order. W hat they found was a horrific scene of carnage and some young officers were shocked
 into impotence by what they saw.

  83. It was truly gruesome. The victims were blue, cyanotic, incontinent; their mouths open, vomiting; their
eyes staring. A pile of dead bodies lay and grew outside gate 3. Extending further and furtheron to the pitch, the
injured were laid down and attempts made to revive them. More and more walking survivors flooded out on to
the pitch as the players left. The scene was emotive and chaotic as well as gruesome. As the enormity of the
disaster was realised, many of the fans milling about were bitter and hostile to the police, blaming them for
what had happened. Officers were confronted, abused, spat upon and even assaulted. A small number of
hysterical fans had to be subdued.

    84. Adding to the chaos, a number of press photographers dodged about among rescue workers ap p aren tly
 avid to secure photographs at point blank range of those dying through the wire mesh and those laid on the
 pilch. Angry fans sought to assault them. Poiice had to intervene.

   85. At about 3.12 pm, Chici Superintendent Nesbit. Commander of the Traffic Division, arrived on the
 pilch. He look charge at gate 3 and organised a chain of officers to simplify and expedite the extraction of
 casualties from the pen. In the absence of any mechanical means, police and fans together pulled and worked
 at the wire mesh with their bare hands and their feel lo breach the fencing. They succeeded in both pens,
 enabling officers to get in and fans lo be got out.

   86. By now, some oiiicers of their own initiative went round from the pilch to the tunnel where they met
 other officers from the turnstiles and the west stand. Together, they tried to persuade fans at the rear of the pens
 to go back through the tunnel. Some complied, but many resisted, wishing lo stand their ground. Casualties
 were brought out through the tunnel, and as the pressure in the pens was relieved, officers were able to get
 further in and bring out more casualties, dead and alive. They were laid on the ground in ihe concourse outside
 the tunnel and attempts were made to revive them.

 First Aid
   8/. The St John Ambulance Brigade had some 30 personnel posted round the ground for the match - 25
 aduhs and 5 junior cadets, They were quickly on the scene when the first casualties emerged and sought to
 revive them. Their Divisional Superintendent. Mr Weils, tried unsuccessfully lo help those pressed against the
 tencing by feeding oxygen lo them through the mesh until they could be gol out.

   88. Dr Purcell, Sheffield Wednesday’s doctor, came from his seat in ihe south stand and attempted
 resuscitation. Assisted by a male nurse from the crowd, he moved from patient to patient doing what he could,
 but in most cases it was too late.

   89. Ai 3.13 pm a St John's ambulance came onto ihe pitch at the north-east corner and drove to the
 perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and nurses on ihe public address .system until
 nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the minutes ticked'pasi, some of them came onto ihe pitch to help o f their
            ft* >1 ' ' ' ‘
i'jr- . r’crwn accord when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and reaiised the gravity of the situation. Many
         'fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the dying, in some cases their own relatives
          and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled
          and the unskilled but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord. The
           rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.                         .                   ■

            90. There was an urgent need to get casualties off the pitch and to hospital. There were six stretchers in the
         first aid room and three in the St John’s ambulance. They were quickly brought into use. Then the fans
         improvised by tearing down the hoardings around the edge of the pitch and against the stands so that lengths of
         board could be used as stretchers. Improvising in this way, parties of fans and police ran repeatedly the length
         of the pitch bearing casualties to the north-iast corner. A number were dead on arrival there.

         In the Control Room
            91.' M r Duckenfield stayed in the control room. Chief Inspector McRobbie was there in civilian clothes as
         an observer. M r Duckenfield sent him down to the track to tell a policewoman at gate 1 to admit those
         displaced from the centre pens. Mr Duckenfield did not realise there were injuries until he saw someone laid -
         on the pitch. Even then, he did not realise the nature of the problem or its scale.

            92. M r Murray returned from his attempt to stop the match and Mr Duckenfield sent him down again lo .
          clear the pitch and assess the situation. A message was broadcast requesting fans to clear the pitch. This was
          because Mr Duckenfield could not from the control room see clearly what was happening for the milling and •
          increasing numbers.                                                                                 v ^

            93. The Assistant Chief Constable (Operations), Mr Jackson, had attended the match in civilian clothes as :
          a guest of the Club. He came from his seat in the south stand to ask what had happened. Mr Duckenfield was
          unable to say, he did not tell Mr Jackson that the exit gates had been opened on his authority. Mr Jackson went
          down to the pitch to discover the situation.

             94. At 3.06 pm M r Duckenfield, still primarily concerned about public order, caused a message to be sent
          to Headquarters asking for Operation Support. That was a call for all available additional police resources to
          come to the ground to strengthen the police presence.

             95. M r Jackson was told by Mr Greenwood that there were casualties and returned immediately to control
           to make sure emergency services were alerted. Meanwhile, M r Murray had seen the plight of those behind the
           fence. He radioed to control that a fleet of ambulances was required. He also asked for a TannOy broadcast to
           those in the pens to move back but there is no dear evidence that it was made.

             96. Only when M r Duckenfield received the request for a fleet of ambulances did he realise the nature and
           gravity of the situation. Then, supported by Mr Jackson, he caused messages to b e sent converting Operation
           Support into calls for the Major Disaster Plan.

           No Information
               97. Apart from the message to dear the pitch and the belated call for medical assistance about 3.30 pm, no
           information or advice was broadcast on the public address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd
           might turn hostile or might all attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
           given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those close enough at the west end
           to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority of the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially
           Nottingham supporters in the Kop, still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by
           Liverpool fans. They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infimated some Liverpool fans who
           were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end. The police feared violence might result on
            top of the existing disaster. Accordingly, they deployed a large number of.officers to form a line .across. the
            width of the pitch at the Kop end and advance up to the halfway UnesweepingaS^J|iverpbbl fans back'as they
            moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothin^^JA er officers wercposted to
            the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same purpose. To thosejfastigssed and d istra^ ^ Jrfso
            wanted urgent action, this large contingent of passive officers was seen as an affiron0Feeiings against tKepolice
             intensified.                                                                                "

            Misinformation
             98.    At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr^               -n a lsao fth t F&and Mr
            Graham Mackreil, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the conu
            Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities and the game w aslikdj
       i e h a d been forced and there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
    sc r e e n sfocussed on gale C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said “Thai’s the gate thai’s been forced: there's
    ./been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little later live on television.' He spoke of ihe two siorics
 I p concerning the gate - the fans’ account that the pciice had opened it, the police assertion that the fans had
&A'- forced their way in.

       99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club’s boardroom. Mr Duckenfieid went there and
     met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr
     Duckenfield indicated the match was likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that
     he did not want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the emergency
     operations.                                                                             °

     Public Announcements                                                     \
       100. Later the managers of the two teams were asked to go to the control room. They were invited there to
     make a public announcement to calm the crowd. Mr Kenny Dalglish agreed to do so. He told the crowd that
     there were problems and asked them to assist the ponce and those rendering first aid. He asked for calm and his
     message was well received. It was then 3.56 pm. At 4.10 pm it was announced that the match was abandoned
     for that day. Again that message was received calmiy by the crowd most of whom behaved resDonsiblv as thev
     dispersed.

     Fire Brigade
        101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3.10 pm a request came from the
     perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garaae
     close by without success. At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
     hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

         102. There was no arrangement for a fire officer to be present during the match. However, the Major
      Disaster Plan required all emergency services to be alerted. After ’phone messages which must be described
      later, fire appliances arrived at.both Leppings Lane and Penistone Road at 3.22 pm. At both entrances their
      arrival surprised police who were uninformed as to why they had been called or where they should go.

        103. At Leppings Lane a police Inspector told Station Officer Swain “I don’t reallv think we need vou’ .
      Another police officer then asked for more resuscitators as people were dying so Mr Swain radioed for ten fire
      appliances. Each carries oxygen and resuscitation equipment.

         104. At the Kop end, Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and Station Officer
      Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. i he emergency tender came along the roadway by the south
      stand but owing to its height was unable to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings
      Lane entrance losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch with
      resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium. Mr Fletcher and his men ran
      along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the
      fence, the cutting equipment was not required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed
      from the pens. M r Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen assisted in carrying
      victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.                                  ~~

       South Yorkshire Metropolitan .Ambulance Service (SYMAS)
          105. Before 1986 there had been no SYMAS representative routinely present at Hillsborough matches. The
       Club was content, as indeed are many other dubs, to rely upon the St John’s Ambulance Brigade and a 999 can
       u necessary. From 1986 onwards, after representations, the Club provided two seats in the south stand for
       SYMAS staff at League matches. At one stage it was suggested they would be best placed in the north stand
       close to the gymnasium which had been designated as the casualty centre in the event of a major incident. The
       south stand seats were allotted as they placed the SYMAS staff closer to the players' tunnel should a player be
       injured. These seats were, however, not available at Cup semi-finals. SYMAS representatives nevertheless
       attended at the semi-finals by arrangement with the poiice in 1988 and again in 1989. The SYMAS officers
       stood on the ramp leading to the pitch at the north-east corner. They had one ambulance outside the ground
       and one on standby.

           106. On 15 April 1989. Officers Higgins and Eason were at the ground with an ambulance and crew. They
        noticed fans on the track and went to the Leppings Lane end whilst the game was still in progress. They began
        to attend to casualties. Meanwniie, at 2.59 pm, there had been a call from Police Constable Waugh at police
                                         *wnwB*********




Headquarters to the Hillsborough police control asking if ambulances were required. This was on the
instruction of Chief Inspector Edmundson who had heard over the radio, as had Police Constable Waugh
himself, crowd noise and snatches of speech from Hillsborough suggesting distress and possible injuries. The
reply from the control box was: no repons of injuries but keep standing by. At 3.07 pm after hearing from the
ground that there might be injuries, police Headquarters notified SYMAS that ambulances might be required.
Then, seconds later, Mr Murray's request for a fleet of ambulances was relayed to SYMAS. They reacted at
once. Ambuiances began to arrive at the Leppings Lane entrance at 3.13 gjn and at the Pcnistone Road
 entrance at 3.17 pm. In all. some 42 ambulances attended, 31 of them from SYMAS and 11 from
 neighbouring authorities. By 4.30 pm, they had conveyed some 172 casualties to the Northern General
 Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

Gymnasium                                                                        • ^ v ^        -
   107.     The gymnasium had been in use for serving meals to the police. When.the MajorDisaster Plan was
ordered, it was cleared and divided into two. One end b& ait^a'iiraporaTy'm oriM r^tK epiherw as used as a
casualty clearing area for the injured. As the stretchers, designed' and Improvised,-brought in more and more
casualties, the scene was initially and inevitably chaotic and harrowing. ."There: was intense distress amongst
the injured and bereaved; relatives were reluctant to be parted from the dead and sought to revive them. There
were people looking for missing friends and relations: there were recriminations, there were scuffles. Some of
those involved were the worse for drink. Doctors and nurses had followed the casualties in from the pilch and
sought to attend the injured as best they could in the adverse circumstances. Those in most urgent need of
 hospital treatment were taken to ambuiances as they arrived, triage being employed to determine priorities.
 Doctors were requested by the poiice to examine each person thought to be deceased to confirm and certify
 death. A police Constable was detailed to attend and guard each of the dead and a photograph of each was
 taken by a police photographer so that relatives coming to identify bodies could be spared the ordeal of
 searchin&amongst all who had died.

 The Dead and the Injured                                                                                    ... :
   108. O f the 95 who died, the evidence suggests that at least 16 and probably 2 irarn e
 opened at 2.52 pm. That is established by the statements of relatives and
 but survived.

    109. By commendable hard work, a team of pathologists headed. b y J jR ro fi^ ^ TU^er^c»m ptet^.®
  post-mortem examinations on all the deceased within 48 hours. They found
  and seven female. Thirty-eight were under 20 years of age, 39 were between 20 arid29 j ^ K a ^ onlythrM w r i j
  over 50. In virtually every case the cause of death was crush asphyxia due t<^con^r 6 ^OTro j | t t e ^ £ ^ ^ f l i
  against other bodies or fixed structures so as to prevent inhalation. In all but n i n e ^ ^ ^ d ^ tw ^ f f ie ^ I e a f i ^ 'r i
  In one, pressure on the chest had been so great as to rupture the aorta; in sixcas«JfiC T eij^rea3^injuH «w t^^
  head, neck or chest; in the remaining two cases, natural disease was a contribulo^fecw felr^18jasesbffies ;
  were fractured. Thirteen of those were rib fractures. However, one was a fractured f^ u r^ O n e a f ig u r e d
  radius and the remaining three involved fractures of bones or cartilages round the voice box- These injuries
  suggest the victims may have been trodden while on the ground.                                      ■

     110. Blood samples were taken from the dead. No alcohol was foundjn any of the females. O f the males, 5!
   had no more than 10 milligrams per cent in their blood which is negligible; 15 had over 80 milligrams per cent
   and six over 120 milligrams per cent.

     111. Although the great majority of those who died were in pen 3, at least five were in pen 4. Most deaths
   occurred at the front of the pens but there were a few fatalities further back.

     112.     In all. some 730 people complained of being injured inside the ground and 36 outside it.^Of the 730,
   about 30% are thought to have entered through gale C after 2.52 pm. The largest category of injury was
   bruising, especially to the ribs and chest.
                                                     CHAPTER 9

                           LACK OF EFFECTIVE MONITORING OFTHETERRACES

  160 Monitorine -he spectators or. the terraces so as to avoid overcrowding involves observmg-the numocrs
?nd their distribution in each area, making decisions as to when an area is “full", tasing steps to ciose a o..
and movina spectator from one area to another, if nccessary. It is a function beset by three proolems. *.
should carry it out? 2) When is an area "full"? 3) Fear of hooliganism.

Who should Monitor the Terraces?
   1 6 1 Should it be the host club via its stewards? Should it be the police? Should it be both? Or shoulc it oe oy
arrangement, depending upon the ground or section of the grouna m question.

    162. in     principle, a football dub which invites th e ‘public to a match on its premises for rewarc is                  4
 r esp o n sib lefor securing safety at that event. The Green Giiice ( 1 9 8 6 ) provides:                                      \

           “ 73 The safe tv of the public inside the ground is the responsibility of those who stage the event and
                administer the ground in which it is held, ie the “ management”. Tms responsioilitv applies in
                both normal and emergency situations...

             195. ...there are five basic duties which stewards are called upon to carry out. These are:

                    /a\    controlling or directing members of the public who are entering or leaving the grouna. to
                           help achieve an even flow of people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal of spectators on
                           the terraces or viewing slopes;

                    (b)    patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies, eg raising alarms or exunguismng
                           fires;
                    (c)    manning entrances, exits and other strategic points, especially exit doors and gates wnicn
                           are continuously open whilst the ground is in use;

                     (d)    assisting police as appropriate or as requested with crowd control; and

                     (e)    undertaking specific duties in an emergency.”

    The Interim Popple veil Report                                                                    _
       163 There was considerable controversy in the course of the public inquiry held by Mr Justice P J P P J ^ J
    in 1985 as to the resoonsibflity of the dub and the police. In paragraph 3.6 oi ms interim report M rJuw ce
    Poppleweil quoted from a report produced for the Minister of Housing anfl Local Government in - .
     follows:-
        “Th* resnonsibilitv for controlling crowd behaviour is divided between the police and the dub operating the
        J o u n d T h e t o a i H n eT d M sio n bring .hat police are resp o ^ b le jo o n o v e m e n ,
        thoroughfares and from public thoroughfares into the ground, while the cion is responsible .or the con
        spectators once they are on the dub s premises .. .
      Mr Justice Popplewell said he did not quarrel with that view and went on to ob serve that in practice the police
      have to take charge and be responsible for controlling crowd behaviour. He then said (paragrapn j . 8).

         “It follows therefore, that as a matter of practice, while the physical safety of the
         maintenance and good housekeeping of the ground must always be the responsibility o f th e d u M h e police
         have to take the de facia responsibility of organising the crowd, with all that entails, d u n n = ga

       Mr Justice Popplewell went on to instance evacuation of the ground as a procedure m wmch only the police
       could bear the responsibility of supervising the organisation of the crowd.

       T h e Final Popplewell Report                              F    R e n n r t T n e r e h e came down m o r e f i r m l y in
          164. He harked back to this subject m cnapter 4 of ms Final Report. There, he a ^                ^ ^ maUer of
        favour of holding the club responsible for crowd saietv. At paragrapn - . i - ft- s


                                                                   28
ty P b G u Z c

           I
                                                                               «'* •   .
                          have regularly attended in large numbers at football etnnnric it            u t!
    J g p a p h e clubs that the responsibility for control of what goes on inside the ground h i s s e d from
                       po>'“ >>?=“ “            » assist in the enforcement o f law and I X Tho e r e s i n s Z



•. -who is putting on me lunction, that the primary and continuing obligation « & ’                                   S °“ nd




   I n    d   ^   S    e ^

   o f S ^ a l r area “ “ Cl“ b in d » * • « * • ■ * »                  —     «° be r e v i ; „ S L T a ~ ; a t ^
                                                                               i


   Arrangements at Hiilsborough                                                 \

   c o l t l o ^ h e ^ n f a t ^ U p ^ ^ ' ' n d ^ e l T ' ^ ? * Hillsboro"ei had * “ P«< responsibility for
   policing at Hillsboroueh over the vears was all one      01 l^e semor o n c e rs who had been concerned with
   policed at Hillsborough for some 10 yean prior                                     DuCkenfield’ wh°      not


                                                           Hedaeimedathe T S ? * 1                     ******* «
   agreement between the Club and the police in aboui i qs? J h            f [ had been a formal although unwritten
   Lane end of the ground. Such a formal aere-menH* \ • • . ? y                . pollce agreed to steward the Leppings
   formal agreement was reached Nevertheless a            ^ " i e a °y 0       niorofI"lcersand I d o notaccept that any
   accepted by both Club a n d p o l i ' c ^ u d T e c t ° ” rranf ment did develop which was known and
   manning exits and e n t i W f ^ c c S l S n i ^ n J T ^               ^    8" ^ 1116 StCWards Were r«ponsible for
   stands and for helping to contrortheexits after                             assisting spectators to their seats in the
   terraces for keeping g a n g W c t e £                                      als° ^ ^ i b l e at the Kop end on the
   supporters. At L l ^         S     S    h     S       H                   ° OWd ^         USUally COnsisted of home
   consisted usually (and alwavs since !QR?\nf         ’          wer^ ,no gangways on the terraces and the crowd
   it would have b ^ n u n r S d T n l s o ’ bll       !'Epor,e!sMr M°'= “ <1«l>er senior officers accepted
   would no, have been e S v l tte” ™ ™ e rS T                    " ’ “ 80                           L » e terrais. They
   supporters. The police accepted, therefore ih^ .U                    1 ^ ™ b“ " '■> some danger from hostile away
   overcrowding could and would not be carried out b v ^ t ^ r l w                      **“ 5 a” d m on«oring them for
   extremely young or somewhat elderlv Thev arc                i         a          stewards have tended to be either
   suitable either by physique or by training J c o p L , ,                                              “ “ they      "0'

   Case for the South Yorkshire Police


   not the police were responsible                                  s“ i,°r "‘ftheTheanrig
                                                                 throughout           ^ to contend
                                                                                             memion'd
                                                                                                   that a"d fromand
                                                                                                        the Club
   He maintained that the police were there essenti^ 0/™ 8           ^    ^ 1113111113was wel1 known lo both panies.
   police evidence to the c ^ r a r y ^ t h t         , t ^ Se? r' Md ‘S ' f T ,a’" i " d ° rdw' QuiK aPa n &°"> »l>e
   been to that effect.                       q“ “ 7' ““ ° ffic,al SKnce ofthe South Yorkshire Police has not always

   Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club Limited

   Football^Chfb for m o n e ^ d u e ^ fo r^ o ^ c e ^ v ir^ °llCe ^ Ul,hon„l.y ^ i n e d a judgement against Sheffield United
   inter aiia, that the police were not nrnvirT P - >V1                  al SneiTield United’s matches. The defence had been,
   performing their                                                                           ^    m     ^      do more than
   argument was that thev had a d d itio ^ i                 i v      Preserv™g law and order amongst a crowd. The police
   Policing as providing fo r      addUl0nai auties' In his Judgment, Boreham J summarised the instructions for

     (a) the maintenance of enforcement of iaw and order;

     (b) the enforcement of the Club’s ground regulations, many of which are concerned with law and order;

     (°) lhe safety and comfort o f the spectators, officials and oiavers.”


                                                               29




                                                                                                                                 :-}~i
  He referred to the argument of Counsel for the ^ourh           r> ■
                                                 “     Yorkshire Police as follows:*
    “Thirdly, here the police were not discnaroiro
    Club’s duties to the spectators whom the Club i n v l w ? k ty l° the pubiic they were in fact discharging the
    to their private premises: it was the a „ V * du                           ^ ° “b Ch° SC 10 invi“ Ia ** num ber
    nave emp.oyea a security firm as banks and others                     “ ! sale'>’.heait" and ccmfon. They could
    the police 10 penorm those duties knowina that the police 4 Dcr P'             ^   ‘i?terests: lhc-' choss * request
    ground proceed services which it was not withfn ih^ scotc J t Payn?e.?1- r0 u n h i>’■ the por.ee within the
    they assisted in crowd management and in ih» enforc'-mem <                  PU° ‘^     y 10 perfbrnv For insIa^ e .
    those wno tried to enter without paying or orohibited^ s p e c t a t o r ^ ? '0^ ^e§'j lations 23 ref^ d entry to
    the.r entry re» did not entitle them to enter. It rr.av be submits Mr Re °fCn‘I?S=on parls.o: the ground which
    omer was me predominant aim but there were other services p ^ w j - '                     ma;ruenance of law and

 The le2med judge found:-



    hanc ,o assist in ,be even, ofL me                                                       re*^ ” to“ « • » * on

 Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End


  Pens w u l d ^ ^ w e ^ l f a ^ o d ^ t crowd°was antic^pa\^Vonly*on^or T         ™              h° Wman>’and wh^h
 confine the tans-to limited spaces (a) to prevent them nm            £       PCnS migm e needed- h was better to
  ' ^ d / T h e practice was then ,o HJ1 t h e ^ s ™ 1£"          ™         “ d     “ ":d““ ^ »>™ber of p o f a
 was full. There would then be a police decision to dose that J         f n ? makm§ a Judgement as to when a pen
 and unsafe for police o fficer 0usllilteste^ rdsj t0° 0          t    f      e      ‘         r' 8a, d?d as
 This meant that monitoring the numbers in anv pen had to be don i f                 terraces with away supporters,
 police were much better placed than the stewards The-e ^ s T p n n T                    P° mtS 0utside il- Here- ^
 television screens there. There were officers on the p e r i m e t e r ? W ^                     C° mr0i b° X and the
 having both police and stewards interfered with the viewin* T h e /            Stewards ,w e r e Piacsd there because
 couia look down on-thepens. Intelligence from all these s o u L l , , Were aif ° pohc!: m the west stand who
 the state of the terraces. When it was n e c , ^ to                         gIVC * e P° Jice 3 g° cd aPPreciation of
 miormea by radio and could take the necessary steps                        PCnS ° mCerS 0n the conc°urse could be
 “Find Their Own Level”


policy was “to k t the f a ^ n d ^ h S ^ ^ * - ^ * p h r a s e ^ A” thC PCnS WCrC ° PCned fr0m 1116 stan and the
the Inquiry. What it meant was that no specific d i r e c S ' ^ " pcated again andagain by police officers at
They Were free to go wherever they wished on the te S c e s T f t h ^ h ‘°         “ ‘" V *8 throu 8h the
  her reason to move their position, then theor~ical!vthev rmiM ' ecz.me “nconifortabie or wished for any
the fans on the terraces would level t h ^ e £ Z t                                       Inlhis wa^ was hoped that
intervention. On these occasions, the gates at the top of the r a r r t/f 0011011 W° U.ld be a5hieved without police
was sought to argue, therefore, that there was fre-dom of mnvem             ^ WCre          d in tfle °Pen position. It
 find their level”.                                  m 01 movernent from one pen to another enabling fans to


had been to achfeve even d istrib u tio n ^ d S o i S J                   tHe ^ h° ie obiect of the radiai fences
   e-y from one pen to another would defeat the obiect and enah|P fS‘UOnS'            11,61111131 ^ e y could move
popular area without inhibition. In practice this did not hannt •         !° g0 fr0.m a less .P°Pu!ar to a more
such that once a substantial number of spectators we™*         ^ oecause the position and size of the gates was
especially i„ those Iowards the t a f w h o m? S e ^ n ^ d S 'f tfe“          “nn° 'k ' 3hl' snd


need not be a s S S s S h ^ p S n c e ' o f IheToen S ' ,"di’fl° “ ‘ ma,imum           for individual pens
practice this simply was not so. The photograph a? A M M d S
very clearly the congestion in pens 3 and 4 c o m ^ d w       i
                                                                   ft
                                                                 V T™ ' ^
                                                                    t    h
                                                                               ^ terrac=       one ar“ -
                                                                             n° nh Sland al 2’59 Pm shows
suggestion that the fans could, if uncomfortable, “S d t S own K t f T ”    ^ 6' ^      ^     ^ ^      ^


when to close one p l f a n d op7 n^M oiher^t ^    ^ ' malCheS the polics had t0 make a Positive decision
                                        er- at seim-unais, wnere overcrowding was much more likely, the police

                                                         30
     ' area w a s “ iuU .

                                       spK iaiors on t K a r a s have




         c ° * a n d .hey are « “ su,f . * ;“ •r^ ? t e t o s b c “a w pack

                                                                                                                               *   -       • —            s,“ di” 8


             I M . U is said .ha. ™ „ y
          discomfon. weathering swaysan                      ^ ^           oflhe lCrraces which many enjoy,                            J         ^ ^ a}, And



           s...argin
                 t iofasafetys beween
                                ^ j as^ n sc o m^.o n ,™
                                                      ^ -* * --                __^—A-■ a n n       IT)
                                                                                                                                       ^         -m
                                                                                                                                                 ^                    -


               ,77. The Green Guide                                                                               *       '°


Ic
 i                                                                            G :j c
                  ,78. Even .aMng .he M ^ ® - ^ y S ^ t a ™ t o f c ° t o o f » h « 5 4 p « « o ^ r ^ ^ ^ | ^


                  adder and cn est«. ■                   ~    ^            deMe thanlhe Gresn u uloc
              s      s    «      ^     ^             ^        -             -     -     "      G “,de“ 7                           7                      .........
                                                                                                                                                                 area
                                                                                •j - j .i—in^ui'rvwithohotographs ot p                                            in a

               Of 10 square metres a l^         ou?tf “ i'safctvExecutive s Sheffield laboratory. W esto o d m a                                              from ouf



                  s r r s r * .* —                                                                  ” ’'
                    ,80. The .endency has been .o a               l        l     o     »       *         »   S        >        “- «
                  to d ™      w y ^ ^ ^ P^ c e “                  fO T > h ti« IW “ 'lm *I,^                     “ <1S O T i r i t Hillsborough, has caused
                                                                                                                                           - « —              ih' prBsure
                  discomfort and someumes. for b n e p e n o d s.
                  eases and .he inciden. passes unrecorded.                                                                                          ^     FA u„til ,987.

                     181. After .he crushing a.                                                                                                                           «

                   ]jffs
                   because »  £ deemed
                             were  w to
                             the p e n s                     be
                                                                      r » - “sbted offwpo,'“
                                                                      fu



                    “the istrategy
                             r =of thespolice.
                                         r ^In the.,^ p - ^ndabk«and indeed
                                                                     * 'commendaole.
                                                                            s M B s S andKcomfortSof the
                    threats to public order. This            of lroublemakers and the need to secure th                                                  ej. and in p3n iCular
                    between the need to quell a mi          O rde' the emphasis was upon preven 10                                                        lhe perir" -n r—
                     majority. In the police Operauonal O r o e ^        ^         fequircmCnt that o f f e r s
                     prevention of access to the tieic o. pla>.
             ®§1

                        i^"5~i,”;"7^“'”^:;‘-:' -"-•••- rj . - -          • • . . ■ ■ -v.?"■■- s v s i# k K ^ s ^ fs « - fS t* '':'-e,K:.^ •.■
T '           v,     , stand should keep watch for anv possible overcrowding on the terraces.lndced, the v»ew.\vas
^     e ^ re sseT in evldenee that packing fans close together on ,he terraces assisted in controlling the unrulysince
      the less room they had the less scope there was for misbenaviour.


      Summarv                                        ed de facto resoonsibilnv for monitoring the pens, their policy on the
        133. A.th°ugh the: pohcw hs1                   lev> and l0 concentrate their own attention on possible disorder.^
      W hilst^n^hVoiy the police would intervene if a pen became “ tu ir , in practice they permmea the tesi ot
       fullness to be what the fans would tolerate.                                                   +
                                              r-       „„„„„j          ■; and 4 were over-full even by this test. Many were
                                                                               « ,« « ^         «. *»ow» ^        ^     «
       courting disaster.




                                                                                                                                      rrreCSKSS
                                  THE BUILD-UP AT 1HE TURNSTILES

^ ^ d e c i s i o n t o o p e n gate C and subsequently gates A and 3 too, was forced on to the nolic- bv .hr
crowa conditions which developed outside tne turnsiiies. The crush was sc scv- t * 'i r r ininri«<
su. tercd and deaths were feared uniess the pressure couic be swift v relieved. Wnvthe crowd pressure had bui?
to such intensity was one ofthe principal issues during the hearing. The suggested causes muSi be considered in

The Physical Lavout
         h£ ve aiready described and illustrated the approach to the turnstiles (ADoendices ! and             <•
Penisione Road and at many other grounds, turnstiles are in a si^ai-hi line ad-auaielv snarM L




The Number of Turnstiles

                                                   S,a”d fr0m * •        La”' ™d " W in * the 23 turnstiles
10.100, ie an ^ e o S S . M S h                    T “            lA G) SerVi" s th' ,erracK had 10 ad">«
served by 60 turnstiles, or just under 5(W per turasti ” C"'       * " * P" ta c “ R° ad t n i 29'800


                                                     47) Ihl ' th' ™ al Which Spem ,ors can ^        through
experience it is unlike’v that the ma °     circu.mstances but siates in general based on observation and
sem i-finafros an all ticket           m.u.m notlona* P er ^ s t i l e would exceed 750 per hour**. Since the
about 1 nnn nM L                  ? requinng no cash transactions, the Club considered that a hieher rate of

s * ®                     S S              3        S £ !S b ssb b b s= s
  189. The Green Guide provides (paragraph      44 ):-


                                           “ 10 adn,il            a‘ a     « » « ’='* »° unciuly large crowds are


                                                    ” 19!5 ^    ”“ 4 and Dr Easro° (>d's i H o « schemes, for
should have realised that the L e n o i n « ? ^ t T ner? atne:Tiaucs are =iementary. Both the police and the Club
t0 admit aji the Livemr.nl c     ppmg? M ne turnstiles anc the waiting area outside them would be under strain

which are inter-linked was fulfilled T hanh •/ ra ®being maintained. In fact neither of these requirements,
                      ,    iumllea. That they might not be so was m my view foreseeable.
The “Late” arrival of Liverpool Fans

u n m i n a S e S l^e 3 caPsTmade2 fo2 S               r ^ lhC lUrnSlileS Sweiled t0 over 5-°°0 ™d became
nigh proponion of them w eredrank -rS         ^ thatl2r?e nurT1Ders o f Liverpool supporters arrived late: a
hell-bent on getting in on time Thev     ,unc(>opei? tIve: a ,hl?n Proportion had no tickets; aU of them were
          on getting m on ume. Thev say this was umoreseeabie and explains why they lost control.

simplv ^ s t e d i l S                                   ^   --4° ?m WCre “late” was much debated.The ticket




Traffic Delays
   I9j. It is unlikely that traffic conditions had anv significant     on tnic r-.,» ,u            •i
i-iverDool traffic rnii.e^              „ a           .            — — on ans. i , ue, there were delays on the
   .        udm c routes. I here were roadwoncs on tne M6 ? which w?c                     • •        .     •
PO.nts thecarriageway was reduced from
             there were loneer delays due to a contraflow and at its junction with the A560 there was heavy
,-nnoectinn due to volume of traffic. However, the Liverpool routes were c lea r by 2.20 pm and those witnesses
w h o complained of delays en route had nevertheless managed to be in range o; the grouna in ample time.

Fine Weather and Drinking                                                                              _
   194 The likeliest explanations for the sparse Liverpool attendance in me ground before ^.30 pm were icur-
fold - the warm weather, drinking, disinclination to enter the ground eany ana prolong the standing, anc a
tendency of Liverpool supporters to cut it line.
   195 The police emphasised that at the 19SS semi-final there was no comparable b u il d - u p of “late” arrivals.
Thev claim therefore that thev had no reason to foresee it in 1989. However, in 1988, although the weatne.
^ s f i n e T w a s 1 T F c o o l e r than in 1989. 15 April was the son of fine spring day which tempted fans to suor
stand about in the sun with a drink. If you had a ticket it would seem more pieasanl and sensible to relax m t..at
way thanTo enter the ground early and stand on the terrace fir an extra hour. Pre-match entertainment m tne
g ro u n d had been advertised but did not take place. Even if it had, it may not have been an encouragement *
 many fans to enter so early.
  Was D runkenness a Major Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?
     196 Of those who arrived at 2.30 pm or after, very many had beer, drinking at pubiic houses or nari
  brought drink from home or an off-licence. 1 am satisfied on the evidence, however, tnat the great ™ajcnt>
  were not dnink nor even the worse for drink. Tne police witnesses varied on this. Some described a ign
   proportion as drunk, as “lager-louts" or even as “animals’*. Others descnoec a generally normal crowd with an
   unco-operative minoritv who had drunk too much. In my view some omcers, seeking to rationahsetheir loss
   of control overestimated the drunken element in the crowd. There certainly was such an element. There were
   voungsters influenced bv drink and bravado pushing impatiently at the rear of the crowd thereov exacerbating
   the crush. But the more convincing police witnesses, including especially Detective Superintendent Mcka
   and Chief Inspector Crease'r as well as a number of responsible civilian witnesses, were in my view ngnt in
   d ^ t o g S f e k m e n t as a minority. Those witnesses attributed the crush to the
 ' anxious to gain entry There was no criticism of the crowd by any of the witnesses in the penod up to _.30 pin
    or even ~ 35 pm. W hat haopened then was not a sudden deterioration in the mood or soonety of tnose
    assembled there No doubt those coming behind would have had more to a n n k and would have inducted u
    u n m l v minority. But the crisis developed because this very large crowd became packed into a confined
    turnstile area and its very density hampered its passage through the turnsules.

       197 SuDerintendent Marshall and other officers criticised the crowd as unco-operative because police
    exhonations to stop pushing and to ease back were not heeded. How could they be?
    had no '-ontrol over their movements at all. Two incidents involving ponce horses illustrate the pomL On
    h o iS w i found afterwards to have c i g a r s bums on its rum p.Clearly that was t h e ^ p K a o l e work o £
    hooligan whether in drink or not. However, there were also eyewitness accounts of a horse bein 8 ph^ “ an
    lifted off its feet bv the crowd. That occurred, as tne police accepted, without malice or intent but
     involuntary consequence of crowd pressure which those by the horse’s flanks could not resist any more than th
    horse itself.

     Reduced Efficiency of the Turnstiles
       198 The labelling of the turnstiles in the order A. C, B was confusing. A fan with a B-ucket who went by
     mistak* to the wrong side of the metal fence would have had the greatest difficulty m gettingb ack and round to
     ™ e s S T S e S m rc o d in g was inefficient because the coloured wooden panels were affixed o the
     turnstile walls so low that they were not easily visible through a c r o w ^ ^ ^ ^ J ^ ® 1^ ”
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was misleading and us layout unhelpful, as M r Mackrell tranuy co

         199. The result was that in the early stages, police officers were
     should co Later as the crowd became more dense, fans were presenting their tickets at in             g
     Tnere were also Liverpool supporters who had acquired tickets for the Kop end butsough                 ^      ^
     Lane. Tney caused delavs in the turnstile operation when entry was refused and aft^ r                 difficult for
      iiutructed thToperators to let them through. There was further delay because the crush
      fans to get into the turnstile entrances. Once mere, tne pressure from bemnd vrasi suchi s,          ^ ^ g in
      them in the doorway or against the paddle o; me turnstile, finally. tnere wer        .. .   h ’ h w;th a ticket
      tr> enter hv offering oavment, by seeking to go over or under the paddi- or by sliding thro gn
       holder All of these”activities slowed dowr. the turnstile rate which at the worst period was on y a ou          .
       hour per turnstile. The waiting crowd therefore expanded and as the minutes passed frustration grew.
             R f l S * * ? and                                                                        S r S S S ^ t a L i n c d ; by
        iscnfled pressure and induced panic at the iron
        S g g ^ a f i o n i o get out of the crush.

„   ^ J ^ l F a n s Without Tickets a Major Factor in th e ®“ 1*                a; ail_lick el matches without tickets. It is not
     ; • 2 0 0 / It has become a fact 01 foolbaI! V* 1 “ b,Aeslimale of :he number without tickets on 15 April. Police
     Vpossible to give an accurate figu re or even- a          ^   csnainly frequent requests for ucxets or spares
       estimates varied from ab o u t -0 0 to about      •         d -f bv the poiice were seen to re:um to the area,
       durins the hours before the bu,ld-up Mans of those a                  witnesscs who most i m p o s e d me did not
                                                                             Th,s accords * . .wo other s o u r r . of

         evidence.
                                                                          in sid e the eround that the Liverpool end was at
            201. First, there was a wide range o f w itnesses^ '     ^                  had many em pty seats and the wing
         a late stage well b e lo w capacity save for pens 3 and The no                    holders l0 come ana they could
         pens were sparse. The match being a se -ou - ‘                d h * Uvefp00l accommodation been fuil by ....



            202 . Secondly, such figures as are               w h h o u T tic k e ^ T h e ^ s h o w ^ a ^ th ^ r m ^ b e ^ ^ ^ ^ s s e d


    •
          by the HSE suggest that no great nu^ beJn^ ed i rou_h „ateC roughly equalled the terrace capacity figure of
          through turnstiles A to G plus those w o          ^            showed 7,038 passed through turnstiles A to G-
           10.100 for which tickets had been sold. Tne Cluo               .       lhe r S E did a study using the video film
           However, the counting mechanism on tumsti e                 ^                 ^ 7 4 9 4 , with a maximum of 7.644
           and projecting figures from the other- turns 1 •          assessed the number who entered the ground wniist
           passing through A to G. Again, using t ^ v i •      According;v, the H S F s best estimate of the total entering
           aate C was open at 2,240 with a maximum                          ^ f lQ 124.1 recognise that these can onl> be




            The “Conspiracy Theory                                                      * tv,« «up “loip" an iv sl of so msny
               203. On behalf of South Yorkshire                       ^ L t i o n 'w a s that fans without tickets conspired
                       supporters was planned to buck
            L i v e r p o o l                                     • ^        ^ tQ adinjt them to the match. The slender
            to arrive late and create such trouble as               sources' overheard conversations in public houses and
             evidence upon which this theory rested came from two sources overnear
             the antecedent history of Liverpool supporters at awav matches.

                * 4 . One witness said he heard three Liverpool su* ^ ^ ^ ^ ' ”^ ^ e^ ^ h a fto e y * h T d ^ o n e * h fs before,
              in without tickets by causing trouble so that              ^ lhey h ad no tickets, that they would go to the
              A n o t h e r witness heard two of a group ofLl^ ° ° l   ettii;g in a Q d that they h a d n o t been stopped vet.




               matches with theobject of showing a P411^ " °                                        summarised as follows,
               or with forged tickets. Without s e t t i n g out the wnole history,

                  206. On three occasions Liverpool fens without                              on24^epteinb<tf 1*9^ 8 , ^ o 'w e re
                (At Watford on 13 February 1988,              L^ggg                   admitted.) A t Norwich on 1 April 1989,
                                                                                  7 5 0   w e r e


                admitted; at Southampton again on 12               72 iicke-s had been returned and fans from both Liverpool
                Liverpool supporters arrived without ticketsbut 1 2 2 u « e s h ^ e e n ^ d ^ wim bledon on 13 May 1989
                 and Norwich were allowed to buy them for cash^ i n c l u d e the Cup finals of 1986 and 1989, when numbers of



                     207. Four points must b*                   ^ereforeroom iiuhT sroim ^onw ch occasion. * t a sell-out fans
                   payment was the matcn a sell-out. 1 ne^e was     -iv
               nrit exoect to be allowed in. even for payment. Secondly, no trouble of the kmd aUeged     encour.icrcd '
            Ae f 9 8 8 -final when Liverpool visited Hillsborough. Thirdly. Liverpool visited H i l l s ^ o i ^ a p m m ;
    .. ' ^ ^ 9 8 9 without any trouble. Finally, no forged tickets were in use on 1> April a p a n from three cruce
      "'^photocopies.

          No Conspiracv                                                                            .        ,.
            ■ W I have alreadv found that there was noi an abnormally large number of tans without tickets on this                          |
             ” c'on With nne or two exccDtions the police witnesses memselves die not suescribc to the conspira ..                          <
          S S r l 1 a ! a t S th a u h “ arte concentration at Leppings Lane from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm did M t» < m
          theo ry . I a m s a tis t ie a i n a i in e lai*                          w ith o u t tic k e ts w h o w ere willing to exploit
          as a result of any concertedP^n T n c « ^ ^ ^ ^ h e ^ w               i t h   the minority who had ^ n k too much.
           ^ S y na g S ^ t e d the problem faced by the police. But thai main problem was simply oncoflarge numoers
         - packed into the small area outside the turnstiles.

           Tne Police Operation at Leppings Lane                            s                                               -r     i -n,,
              209. The Operational Order fo,: 1              3   “ ^ ^ ^ iX X o ^ c m               d » m       ^ « id it.ia l'

           houses!shopsand supermarkets “where looting could take place". Outside the turnstiles, ofiicerswereto ensure
A          supporters entering did not have banners, weapons, missiles cr alconol.

W             210. unfortunately, hooligan behaviour has made all these
            aimed at effecting controlled entry to the turnstiles was one enj oming ch ic k s 'o eJ 1^ re o                - •
            formed”. There was no provision for controlling the entry of tne crowd into the turnstile area.

                2 11. As long ago as 1924, the Departmental Committee on Crowds stated:-


                s —                                               i r : s : s r . : = s r


              situation.
                  2 12. Whether steps were taken and what steps to avoid this happening was left to oral briefing and ad noc
               instructions on the day.

               Previous Experience                                                                                     .   ___ • ,
                   213. TheseniorpoliceoflicerssaidIthadncverhappenedbefor,
                the oniy two previous occasions when the Leppings Lane terraces            -               match was on a Sundav.
                and west sides of the ground were at the two semi-finals, in 1987 and 1988. I n l ^ 7 , th^matchwas on
                scheduled for 12 noon, and kick-off was postponedfor a quarter of an hour because of late a m



                 ™     " s ‘, ^ 9 8 8 , there was a « , large and
                 L eppingsL aneconductedanem cientfnte.ingexerc.se                g              without either opportunity
                 control the flow of fans towards the gr°und.I ao- not believe that so many     ^ Qn lhaloccasion. Yet, the
                 or reason to put their heads together could be mistaken aoou w           y  -       d - jggg and thatlheir
                 police maintain that no filtering exercise otner than on a random basis was conductea
                 policy and practice then were no different from thoseof 1989.                                      ^    ;r

                   215. The answer to this conflict must, I think be that whli^ the. ^ ‘^ jf a n d ^ tr a in a s a p l a t e r .T h e r e
                  practice the policing in 1988 was more efficient and was not pu        • L               2 50-pm as in , 1989.
                  was not so large a swell in numbers approaching the ground_from j 0 pm                    -                 foildWtng
                  Nevertheless, there had been warning signs in 1988. Detective Superintendent McKay ga
                   evidence:
 A    Yes. . . There was a huge build-up around 10 minutes to 3 when many, many Liverpool sapooners
      came at that time. They had been drinking, the ones that I saw and there was auu» ~ ^z"abi'* •—us't
      built-up-sizeable queue.                                                               ~         ,r

 Q    Queue or crush?
 A    Compacted queue, built-up in the area by the turnstiies which I believe are marked A to C-. Thai c*owd
      reached back almost to the gates. It never got any bigger than that and the turnstiles ooeraied reiativelv
      treely and they dealt with that crowd. Fans were still arriving at about 10 past 3 but bv then th e ..

 Q This crowd that you have described of the late arrivals at about 10 to - was it an o r d e rly crowd?

 A Oh no. No. The orderly crowd had gone in. and when I say they w e r e not an orderiv crowd, obviouslv
    mixed amongst those people w ere. . .                       *;                     "

 Q     Of course, but taking it generally?

 A     But by and large they had taken a lot of drink on board and they were in such numbers that sxciudin*
       tnem trom the ground was completely out of the question.                                           °

  Q    Were they standing in an orderly queue or was there some pushing and shoving?

  A There was a lot of pushing and shoving. There was an urgency to get into the ground.

  Q But fortunately it does not appear to have been in nearly such numbers as this year.
  A It wasn’t.”

Police Intelligence in Advance

„ n W ^ P5 ? t fr0m thatJ ^ perience in 1988' the tendency of Liverpool supporters to arrive late was not
 ntaiown. Witnesses said that they get through the turnstiles at their home ground, Anfield. Q u i t e a u i c k i v and
S r S f r 0t to am ve early. Indeed, a general recent tendency to postpone arrival was noted bv the
bnenield City Council Advisory Group, with police present, on 23 March 1988. The minute reads:-

                        questi° n was concerned, a pattern has developed of people arriving some 15 minutes
  .none 7     ? x? v San?! ^ 0pmg t0 gam admission- Tnis trend may be due to the banning of alcohol at
  sports grounds which could lead to people going elsewhere for refreshment prior to the football match. As
                         °Perated Quite effectively for the majority of the time, and that the late arrival
  problem could perhaps only be dealt with by education of the spectators” (sic).

        In S°    3S Liverp001 ^ P P o rters’ behaviour at away matches may have been indicative of what police
problems might arise on 15 April, most of the facts should have been available at the planning staze. As in other
iorces, oouth Yorkshire Police had a liaison officer whose job was to seek, receive_and collate relevant
information as to the visiting supporters. The Association of Chief Police Officers’ Guide to Policing Football
Highlights the importance of such liaison:-

  ,.11, IS ^ P o n a n tth a t the officer responsible for policing the match determines the pre-match planning in the
   lght of the intelligence at hand. Whilst that intelligence can be obtained from a variety o f sources, the prime
  source tor football intelligence is the Police National Intelligence System which is based on the network of
  police liaison officers. Summaries completed by police officers of the home d u b force are forwarded to the
  visiting club s liaison officer making available intelligence about fans’ behaviour at both home and away
  tixtures. This information will be collated and made available for future matches involving that d u b ”.

  218. The FA had also laid down in a memorandum issued in the 1985/6 season measures to be adopted by :
the away club which included the following:-

   It is the responsibility o f the away club to advise the home club of the recent behaviour of their supporters'
  at away matches, irrespective of whether the behaviour has resulted in disriplinarv action bv the Football
  Association or not” .

   219. It does not seem that information of this kind was passed to the Sheffield Wednesday G uo or played
                                                    .. .    :
          • , k , W h Yorkshire Police plans. Had the iatlc?
    ■ S i S f u m m L c d above * may well have influenced PoUce s.ra.ef | | e i i ^                                ^     ^     ^     ^      ^        | ;

 f W      There is presently a proposal that a n a u o n a l computer-based police football intelligence ^ m                        shot*)        •     ‘
5: ^ c t up lo make the necessary information readily available.

 Police In tellig en ce on th e Day .                                                                                  available from the
    2 2 1 . T h e unfilled space in the Liverpool areas ms           .            ^                               in ih e com rol room l0                   j
  Club's computer and o b s e rv a i.o n so n th e v c e o £             ^            ^          ^    mQb;ie (Jango) pairols
  monitor the numbers arriving and s t i l t c a m           . P             .          ^ numbcr* still to come. But at 2.30
  detailed to monitor licensed premises in the distr                                          o'clock" he seems not to have
  pm when Mr Murray told Mr D o M u M                                             w ,re many more stilt to c o m e . Certainly. Mr

                                                        ' « C0UW r‘° l "                   ^         kn°Wn lhal lherC W" C $l          ^
   Liverpool ticket holders to arrive.

   Mr Marshall and Mr Greenwood _                                                M( Mar3hr.ll was in chargc of the
     222. The division o f c o m m a n d between these two i - ^ ^ ^ rQads ^               ln practicc he operated ■
   serials outside the perimeter gates in the LeP P '£ ;eemvoocrs area as Ground Commander extended from the
   inside and just outside the turnstile area M                       pavers' tunnel. He was wholly unaware of the


    p ^ u r e E e . No-one in the control —            thought to tell h,m.

    Control Lost                                         .                       4Q     pressed unrestrained into
       223. In the result, the large con.cenlral'° " ° ^ ^ vere fully'open. When that area was full, later arrivals
    the turnstile area through the perimeter g               * rQad' As aireadv recounted, the foot officers at the
    swelled the crowd out to the forecourt an            ^ through the tu m s tiW The mounted ofTicers could not
     turnstiles became trapped and endangf                   Jh       me oul 0f the turnstile area. There were then
      operate amidst such a dense <iyow^ ^                    g ^ ^ ^ vcni more fans joining the mass until it had a chance to



        224. Despite knowledge o f the difficult
      turnstiles and the tendency o f fans to arri^ ’n _ '  d    Leppines Lane to traffic before ,2.30 pm and the
      crush such as occurred. Even on the aay>        de‘  ld have promp”led those in command to take precautions
      other available intelligence already summ        •           d   d nd cordcns 0f mounted and foot officers
       against such a crush. If some ot thepenm eter g*etad^been c         ^    ^ lurnstile area could have been
       had been placed a little distance from those 8* “ ’                       produced the frustration and the
       controlled before that area became                              much. Eariier control of entry would have



          n > It should moreover have been obvious by
        no, be admitted until well after 3pm. Hada,dec«,onto                               ^         f^           ’reduce<L A combin.tion of
        f o n tS X r in ta r d * ^ V o H f e k - o f r w o u ld prooably have obviated the need to open the gates.


         ^ I ^ ^ ^ ^ r i ^ u s ^ g e s in h 's evidence. Mr                                          ^m o't^lji^b^Theni^w as thaTa^oup
         postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the                                   -                COming out. Finally, he did not
         of photographers at the tunnel had                                                in fact come onto the pitch until 2 54 p m ^ o
          ^ ^ tT ^ a f te /e a te ^ w s ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ n s ta h ^ e ^ u x to n ^ h a d ^ s k ^ fo r                                               there

                                                                                                   " K d s“       d have b“ " c'" a n n , h " o n , °

          r00m'                                                                                ,      -       •         Hiccussed with Mr Murray.



                                                                             33
    aS&Lvij


                                                                                                     grow aha
                                                                                                       .-. Faced
                                                                shouid have been his param ount consideration.
          a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd saietv«
     w i t h

^   . Kick-off snouid have been deiayec.


      Summary                       . . . .              .h«- were ’•eauired to serve left no margin of safety against
      > 22S. The 'layout oi the tumsmes ana tne num ‘ '            \     lh£ dav did nol caler for it.nhe arrival cf a
      an uneven flow of fans. Because ponce strategy in ^                 ^ unmanageable crush, i he presence of
      la ru number of supporters                                , £ * , * 4 d o t Problem. Having lost control and




        other action.
                               T H E BLUNDER ON OPENING TH E GATES

  ->o The decision to order the ooenins of the gates was not accompanied of followed by any other oroer to
d.;r;vilh lhc conseauences. When gate Cwas opened, a steady stream of about 2.00C tans pourec tnrougn::
over some live minutes. Clearly they were going to go into the ground sotnewnere ana umess tney were aivertc-
      iikeiiest route was through the tunnel for reasons already given. No warning was issuea from -.r.e con.ro.
        hat he gate was to be opened. Serials on the concourse were not alerted. Neither tne Q u o control room
^ the Chief Steward at the Lepotngs Lane end was warned. Not even Mr Greenwooc. tne Grounc
Commander, was informed. From 2.47 pm when Mr Marshall made his first request untu _ o , p m wn.n M.
Duckenfieid acceded to it, there were five minutes in which orders ccuia have oeen given as to
 was to be absorbed. It was not done. In evidence. Mr Duckenneid oegan cy saying m at no otuc m .c . an
 wrone decision but he later conceded he had erred in this regard. He said he aid not conisiaer^vh^e £ e P;°P
 would go when the gate opened. Even after it opened, wnen ne coulc see the influx on the teievisio.. s ^ . - . n c
 order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. Mr Ducicciaieid said it did not cross                °       ^
 officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those officers cdula not have known ,rom the.,
 full pens 3 and 4 were. T hat was a matter for the control room to m onitor from its ow . observations *nG jsiua
 intelligence from around the ground.
   ■>30 Since pens 3 and 4 were full bv 2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been closed off whether gate C was tc
 be”opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out in 1988. All t h a t ^ n e c e ^ r v was
 for a few officers to act as a cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and oivert fans e          J              ^
 1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior omcers on auty at the tim -. It ciq no, ug- e ... -
 debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the planning for 1989.

    231. Planning apan, however, it should have been dear in the control room where there was a v i e w of the
  pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If orders hac oeen S*ve*\1; . 1*a \ ^
  when gate C was opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas of tne wings anc ,n„ Q.sasu..
  could still have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of tne first magnitude.

     232 Significantly, when permission was given to open gate A, Mr Duckenfieid did order serials to go to that
   pan of the concourse to m onitor the influx towards the north stand. He dia this Decause he feare°
   went to the north stand w ithout tickets, they would not get seats ana, there pemg no Pe n m e ‘e;
   north side, they might invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation
   as against safety and the risks of overcrowding. Because those entering through gate C .o u la no.  on to tn-
   pitch, it was not thought necessary to aiert officers to monitor them. The possioihty ot overcrowing . p .
   was not considered.




                                                              40
                                    PART III - CONCLUSIONS
                                               CHAPTER 16

                                     BRIEF SUMMARY OF CAUSES

  265. The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the failure, when gate C was
opened, to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.

  266. They were already overfull because no safe maximum capacities had been laid down, no attempt was
made to control entry to individual pens numerically and there was no effective visual monitoring of crowd
density.

   267. When the influx from gate C entered pen 3. the layout of the barriers there afforded less protection
than it should and a barrier collapsed. Again, the lack of vigilant monitoring caused a sluggish reaction and
response when the crush occurred. The smail size and number of gates to the track retarded rescue efforts. So.
in the initial stages, did lack of leadership.

  268. The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. That occurred because, as
both Club and police should have realised, me turnstile area could not easily cope with the large numbers
demanded of it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The Operational Order and police tactics on
the day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival of large numbers should that occur in a short
period. That it might so occur was foreseeable and it did. The presence of an unruly minority who had drunk
too much aggravated the problem. So did the Club's confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.
 — ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- (1993) 96 C r . A pf .R.   C.A.________________________ G o n z a l e s   a n d O th e rs   (McCowan L.J.) 405
   made with higher management o f Caravelle Tours in Bogota. These, after all were                           Mr. Munday, on their behalf, points out, and we accept, that there is no reason
   merely booking clerks.
                                                                                                           to think that any of the four women was an organiser. They were couriers. He uses
      There were other suggestions. For instance, the assistance might have been                           the colourful but accurate expression that they were “expendable cannon fodder.”
   sought of the British Embassy, a customs officer might have been sent to Bogota or                      H e draws attention quite properly to the devastating effect on them of the sen­
   at least some contact should have been made between our Customs and Excise and                          tences, not merely the length of them, but the long years of separation from their
  Customs and Excise in Bogota. At a later stage—and it is unnecessary to go into                          children who cannot afford to visit them. These are all human matters which one
  this in detail the local police went to Caravelle Tours’ offices and obtained a cer­                     readily accepts.
  tain document If they were able to do that about a year later (and hence too long                           As the judge pointed out, as cannon fodder, they are sent out by evil men to do
  after to be really useful) why could it not have been done at an earlier stage’ All                      their dirty work for them. Anyone who, whether for money or for any other reason
  these points seem to us to carry a good deal of force.
                                                                                                           whatsoever, joins in the international trade in cocaine is literally trafficking in the
     Mr. Issard-Davies, for the respondent, says that the judge saw the witness H e is                     misery and degradation and sometimes even the death of people who become
  referring, of course, to the interpreter. That is often a good point, but with respect                   hooked on it. A s he pointed out, anyone who is caught doing that must expect a
  to him, it has no validity in this case. We are in just as good a position as the judge                  severe sentence.
  was, since no one challenged the veracity of the interpreter, If it had been sug­                           Each of these four women was carrying about four kilos of cocaine. The jury was
  gested that she was not telling the truth, the judge would have been in a better pos­                    told that they could either convict them on the basis that they were part of a team
  ition than us to judge whether she was or not. However, there was no challenge as                        and knew it, or that each was only guilty in respect of the amount that she carried in
  to her truthfulness. Therefore, the fact that he saw the witness is neither here nor                     her suitcase. The jury found the former. They found, in other words, that each was
  there.
                                                                                                           contributing to the importation of 16 kilos of cocaine.
     The question for us is whether the interpreter and the Customs and Excise went                          In those circumstances, in our judgment, they did fall to be dealt with in respect
 far enough and took sufficient steps. Mr. Issard-Davies submitted that it was really                      of the importation of 16 kilos of cocaine, a Class A drug, worth about £2.6 million.
 a question of the judge’s discretion. With respect, we do not think that is the right                     They did not plead guilty and therefore there is little or no mitigation. We are
 way of putting it. The judge had to decide, on the material before him whether it                         unable to say that these sentences were out of line with the Aram ah guidelines.
 was not reasonably practicable to secure the attendance of various witnesses Was                          Consequently, we must dismiss their appeals.
 the judge justified on that material in so concluding? That is the real question. It
 was a very important question. It is not a peripheral question in the case because as                                                                           Appeal o f Restrepo allowed.
 we have indicated, it was apparent to all concerned that without this evidence there                                                                                   Conviction quashed.
 was no case against Restrepo.
                                                                                                                                                  Appeals o f Gonzales and Loaiza dismissed.
     The test, we accept from Mr. Wiggs, must be an objective one. In viewing it                                                                         Appeals against sentence dismissed.
 objectively, we conclude that on the material before him, it was not open to the
judge to conclude that it was not reasonably practicable to secure the attendance of                         Solicitors: Solicitor, Customs & Excise.
 the witness. We add, in passing, that it is obviously of importance, if this section is
to be fairly applied, that Customs and Excise, or any other investigating body
should get its tackle in order before it seeks to rely upon it. In this case, we do not
think they did so. Accordingly, in our judgment, the conviction of Restrepo cannot
stand. It is therefore quashed and his appeal is allowed.
    That leads us on to the appeal against conviction by Gonzales. We have already                          R. v. BOW STREET STIPENDIARY MAGISTRATE AND
reviewed the evidence. Mr. Munday, appearing for her, naturally supported the                              ANOTHER, Ex Parte SOUTH COAST SHIPPING CO. LTD.
arguments on behalf of Restrepo because some of the material in the records which                                             AND OTHERS
was employed against Restrepo affected Gonzales also.
    It is necessary for us, having allowed the appeal in respect of Restrepo, to set on                     Q u e e n ’s B e n c h (D iv is io n a l C o u r t ) (Lord Justice Lloyd and Mr.
one side any of the evidence against him which touched her. The short answer in
o ur judgment, is this. Even taking Restrepo out of the story, there was still an over­
                                                                                                                           Justice Waterhouse): April 9,10,13,1992
whelming case against Gonzales. We add this point. The other couriers were not
                                                                                                           Prosecution o f Offences—Institution o f Proceedings—Duties o f Director o f Public
acquitted despite the lack of linkage between them and Restrepo.
                                                                                                           Prosecutions— Private Prosecution—Criminal Proceedings to which Director’s Duty
    We conclude, therefore, that there is nothing unsafe or unsatisfactory about the                       to Take Over Conduct Does Not A pply— Director Deciding Not to Institute Proceed­
conviction of Gonzales and her appeal against conviction is dismissed.
                                                                                                           ings— Whether Director’s Decision Precludes Private Prosecution— Prosecution o f
(Legal argument follow ed regarding sentence)                                                              O ffences A ct 1985 (c. 23), ss.3(2)(b), 6.
  LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN: The appellant, Gonzales, is now aged 41. She has                                     By section 3(2) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act J985;
two children aged118 and six. She has no previous convictions. Medina is now aged
                                                                                                               “ It shall be the Duty of the Director . . . ( b ) to institute and have the conduct
44. She has six children aged between 25 and four. She too has no previous convic-
                                                                                                               of criminal proceedings in any case where it appears to him that—(i) the
                                                                                                               importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate that proceedings
406_________________________________________________ (1993) 96 C r .A pp .R.              Q .B.D.________________R. v. Bow S t r e e t       S t ip e n d ia r y M   a g is t r a t e   407

     should be instituted by him; or (ii) it is otherwise appropriate for proceedings     into the charges, and (3) an order of mandamus requiring the magistrates’ court to
     to be instituted by him . . .                                                        stay the proceedings.
   By section 6:                                                                             The D .P.P. was joined as third party respondent to the application under
     “ (1) Subject to subsection (2) below, nothing in this Part shall preclude any       R .S.C ., O rd. 53, r. 9.
     person from instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any criminal             The facts are set out in the judgment of Lloyd L.J.
     proceedings to which the Director’s duty to take over the conduct of the pro­           The application was argued on April 9 ,1 0 and 13,1992.
     ceedings does not apply. (2) Where criminal proceedings are instituted in cir­         Michael Hill, Q.C. and Michael W ood for the applicants.
     cumstances in which the Director is not under a duty to take over their                Michael Mansfield, Q.C. and Sally Bradley for Mr. Glogg.
     conduct, he may nevertheless do so at any stage.”                                      R. A lun Jones, Q.C. for the Director of Public Prosecutions.
  The Bowbelle, a dredger owned and operated by the applicant shipping com­                 The first respondent, the magistrate, did not appear and was not represented.
pany, ran down a pleasure boat, the Marchioness, on the River Thames, with the
resultant loss of 51 lives. The husband, G , of one of the victims, brought a private        LLOYD L .J.: These proceedings arise out of a collision on the River Thames on
prosecution against the applicants and four of their employees, charging them with        August 20, 1989, when the Bowbelle, a dredger owned and operated by South
manslaughter. An application to stay proceedings came before the chief stipendiary        Coast Shipping Co. Ltd., ran down a pleasure boat, the Marchioness. The Mar­
metropolitan magistrate on the ground (1) that G was not entitled to bring a private      chioness sank and 51 people lost their lives. Among them was Mrs. Ruth Hadden.
prosecution as he had no locus standi', and (2) that the prosecution was an abuse of      On July 17, 1991, her husband, Mr. Ivor Glogg, brought a private prosecution
process of the court. The magistrate ruled that G did have a locus standi to bring a      against the owners of the Bowbelle and four of the company’s employees. I shall
private prosecution for manslaughter against the applicants and that the charges of       refer to them all as “ the defendants.” They are charged with manslaughter. On
manslaughter did not amount to an abuse of process of the court. On an application        November 12, 1991, there was an application to stay the prosecution. It came
for judicial review (i) for an order of certiorari to quash the decisions of the magis­   before Sir David Hopkin, the Chief Stipendiary Magistrate at Bow Street Magis­
trate (ii) an order of prohibition to prevent the magistrates’ court from inquiring       trates’ Court.
into the charges, and (iii) an order of mandamus requiring the magistrates’ court to         There were two grounds for the application. The first was that Mr. Glogg is not
stay the proceedings.                                                                     entitled to bring a private prosecution; he has no locus standi. The second ground
                                                                                          was that the prosecution is an abuse of the process of the court. Sir David Hopkin
  Held, refusing the application, that on the true construction of section 3(2)(b)        decided both points in favour of Mr. Glogg. The defendants now apply for an order
and section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 a person was only pre­           of certiorari to quash his decision. The committal proceedings which were due to
cluded by section 6(1) of that Act from bringing a private prosecution in respect of      start on January 6, 1992, have been adjourned to await the outcome of this appli­
those proceedings set out in section 3(2)(a), (c) and (d) which the Director was          cation.
under a duty to take over, and there was nothing in section 6(1) to preclude the             1 take each of the two points in turn.
bringing of a private prosecution in respect of proceedings under section 3(2)(b).
Thus, the magistrate had come to the right decision.                                      Locus standi
                                                                                             On April 26, 1990, the Director of Public Prosecutions announced that Captain
   Per curiam; The Director may take over proceedings instituted by a private pro­
                                                                                          Henderson, the master of the Bowbelle, would be charged with an offence under
secutor which he may otherwise institute himself; and if he does do so, he may then
                                                                                          section 32 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1988 of failing to keep a proper lookout.
discontinue them under section 23 of the 1985 Act if the evidence is insufficient, or
                                                                                          H e also announced that no other charges would be brought.
if the proceedings would be contrary to the public interest, or to avoid duplication
                                                                                             On October 30, 1990, there was an application to the Divisional Court to chal­
of proceedings, or for any other good reason or, if it is too late to discontinue, he
                                                                                          lenge the D irector’s decision not to bring other charges. That application failed. On
may offer no evidence or the Attorney-General can enter a nolle prosequi.
                                                                                          April 3,1991, Captain Henderson’s trial began. The jury was unable to reach a ver­
      [For ss.3 and 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, see A rchbold (1993)
                                                                                          dict. There was a retrial in July 1991, but the jury again failed to reach a verdict,
paras. 1-285,291].
                                                                                          whereupon Captain Henderson was discharged.
                                                                                             In those circumstances, Mr. Michael Hill, Q.C. for the defendants, submits that
  Application for judicial review.                                                        there is no room for further criminal proceedings arising out of the same casualty. It
  These were applications by South Coast Shipping Co. Ltd., Robert Henry                  might have been different if the Director had brought no proceedings at all. But
Samuel, Peter Malcolm Butcher, Frederick Brian Darwell and George Edward                  here the Director brought proceedings against Captain Henderson and decided not
Greenwood, the respondents, with leave of Popplewell J., given on December 19,            to bring proceedings against these defendants. Parliament cannot have intended to
1991, for judicial review by way of (1) an order for certiorari to quash the decisions    leave it open for a private prosecutor to bring proceedings which the Director has
of the first respondent, Sir David Hopkin, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate at           decided not to bring, especally when the case is one of difficulty and importance.
Bow Street Magistrates’ Court on November 12, 1991, in which he ruled that the               I see the force of Mr. Hill’s argument. Parliament might well have legislated so as
second respondent, Ivor Glogg, had locus standi to bring a private prosecution for        to exclude the private individual’s right to prosecute in those circumstances. But
manslaughter against the respondents, and on November 21, 1992, in which he               the question is whether it has in fact done so. The answer depends on two sections
ruled that the charges of manslaughter did not amount to an abuse of process of the       of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. Section 3 defines the functions of the
court, (2) an order of prohibition to prevent the magistrates' court from inquiring       Director. Section 3(2) provides;
408__________________________________________________(1993) 96 C r . A pp .R.               Q.B.D.        R. v. Bow    S t r e e t S t ip e n d ia r y M   a g is t r a t e   (Lloyd L.J.)   409

      “ It shall be the duty of the Director, subject to any provisions contained in the    behalf of the Director and addressed us in opposition to Mr. Hill's application. We
      Criminal Justice Act 1987— (a) to take over the conduct of all criminal pro­          gave leave for him to be joined under the provisions of R.S.C. Ord. 53, r. 9. We are
      ceedings, other than specified proceedings, instituted on behalf of a police          grateful for Mr. Jones’s attendance. We do not however think it necessary to give
      force (whether by a member of that force or by any other person); (b ) to insti­      separate consideration to his arguments, which echo in every respect those
      tute and have the conduct of criminal proceedings in any case where it appears        advanced by Mr. Mansfield.
      to him that—(i) the importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate             On August 2, 1991, the Director indicated that he did not intend to intervene at
      that proceedings should be instituted by him; or (ii) it is otherwise appropriate     that stage of the proceedings. But it will be open to him to reconsider that decision
      for proceedings to be instituted by him; (c) to take over the conduct of all bind­    if the prosecution goes ahead.
      ing over proceedings instituted on behalf of a police force (whether by a m em­           For the above reasons, which are substantially those given more shortly by Sir
      ber of that force or by any other person); (d) to take over the conduct of all        David Hopkin, I would reject Mr. Hill’s first ground of attack on Sir David’s
      proceedings begun by summons issued under section 3 of the Obscene Publi­             decision.
      cations Act 1959 (forfeiture of obscene articles) . . . ”
   It will be noticed that section 3(2)(a), (c) and (d) each provide for the Director to
                                                                                            Abuse o f process
take over the conduct of certain kinds of proceedings. By contrast, section 3(2)(b)
provides for the Director to institute certain other kinds of proceedings where it
appears to him to be appropriate, having regard to the importance and the diffi­              I now turn to the second ground of application. Under this head, Mr. Hill
culty of the case. The difference in language is not, in my view, accidental. It            advances three main arguments. The first goes to Mr. Glogg's motive. It is said that
becomes of crucial importance when one turns to section 6, which deals with pri­            he is manipulating or misusing the prosecution because what he really wants is a full
vate prosecutions. Section 6 provides:                                                      scale public inquiry. Deprived of the opportunity afforded by a public inquiry, he is
      “ (1) Subject to subsection (2) below, nothing in this Part shall preclude any        now using the prosecution as a platform to ventilate his grievances.
      person from instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any criminal             Mr. Hill’s second argument is that the delay in launching the prosecution has
      proceedings to which the Director's duty to take over the conduct of proceed­         been so prolonged that a fair trial is no longer possible.
      ings does not apply.                                                                    Mr. Hill’s third argument is that the publicity generated by Mr. Glogg’s solicitors
         (2) W here criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which the       has been so great that any jury is likely to be prejudiced against the defendants.
      Director is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may nevertheless do       Again, I will take each of those three points in turn.
      so at any stage."
   The effect of section 6(1) is to preclude a person from bringing a private prosecu­      Manipulation or misuse o f the prosecution process
tion in cases covered by section 3(2)(a), (c) and (d) but not in the residuary
category of cases covered by section 3(2)(b). So far as section 3(2)(b) cases are con­
cerned, there is nothing to preclude a private prosecution.                                    I do not doubt that Mr. Glogg wanted a full scale public inquiry instead of the
   Mr. Hill submits that section 6 must be read subject to an implied limitation so as      limited investigation carried out in private by the Marine Accident Investigation
to preclude more than one prosecution in any one case whether against the same              Bureau under the new procedure introduced by section 33 of the Merchant Ship­
defendant or another defendant. I can see no basis for reading in any such limi­            ping Act 1988 and the Merchant Shipping (Accident Investigation) Regulations
tation, especially when one has regard to section 6(2).                                     1989 (S.I. 1989 No. 1172). Those regulations came into force only a fortnight
   Section 6(2) is clearly intended to cover section 3(2)(b) cases, i.e. cases whe:<: the   before the casualty. No doubt the members of the so-called Marchioness Action
Director has a duty to institute proceedings as distinct from his duty to take over         G roup who have lost relatives in the disaster also wanted a public inquiry. I can
their conduct. Section 6(2) therefore contemplates that the Director may take over          well understand their anxiety, frustration and sense of grievance when a public
the conduct of proceedings instituted by a private prosecutor which he might other­         inquiry was not announced. I should add that Mr. Glogg was not himself a member
wise have instituted himself. Having taken over the conduct of those proceedings,           of the Marchioness Action Group but he is represented by the same firm of soli­
he may then discontinue them under section 23 of the 1985 Act if the evidence is            citors.
insufficient, or if the proceedings would be contrary to the public interest, or to            Does it then follow from Mr. Glogg’s desire for a public inquiry that he had some
avoid duplication, or for any other good reason. If it is too late to discontinue, he       indirect or improper motive in launching the prosecution? I do not think it does. At
may offer no evidence or the Attorney General can enter a nolle prosequi.                   the start, Mr. Glogg’s state of mind may well have been that he wanted both a pub­
   So read, section 3(2) and 6 make a coherent and consistent framework in which            lic inquiry and a prosecution for manslaughter. The fact that a public inquiry has
the right of the private citizen to bring a prosecution is preserved but subject always     been ruled out does not mean that his motive in instituting the prosecution should
to the Director’s right to intervene at any stage. It provides a useful and effective       now be regarded as improper. If there is evidence that a defendant has been guilty
safeguard against “ improper inaction” by the prosecuting authority (I quote from           of an offence, then a desire to see him prosecuted and, if found guilty, punished, is
the Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Cmnd. 8092 (1981)),               not an improper motive, especially where the prosecutor is one of the bereaved.
p. 161, para 7.50 under Sir Cyril Phillips).                                                Even if Mr. Glogg’s motives were mixed, the court should be slow to halt a pros­
   In the course of the hearing, it occurred to us that the Director might himself be       ecution unless the conduct of the prosecution is truly oppressive (see Connelly v.
affected by the result of this application and ought therefore to have been given the       D .P.P. (1964) 48 Cr.A pp.R. 183,207, [1964J A.C. 1254,1301 p e r Lord Morris and
opportunity to be heard. Mr. Alun Jones, Q.C. has appeared this morning on                  D .P.P . v. H iunphrys (1976) 63 Cr.App.R. 95,122, [1977] A.C. 1 ,4 6 per Lord Sal­
410_________________________________________________ (1993) 96 C r. A pp .R.               Q.B.D.         R . v.   Bow   S t r e e t S tip e n d ia ry M a g is tr a te   (Lloyd L.J.)   411

mon). The law was correctly stated on this point by Mann L.J. in Telford Justices,         have these events very much in mind since the day of the casualty. 1 am not per­
e x p . Badhan (1991) 93 Cr.App.R. 171,178, [1991] 2 Q.B. 78,90. Dealing with the          suaded that a fair trial in this case is no longer possible.
power of the justices to prevent an abuse of process, he said:
       “They have no power to refuse to embark on an inquiry because they think            Publicity
       that a prosecution should not have been brought because it is, for example,
       mean-minded, petty or animated by hostility. It is for this reason that the            1 can deal with this question even more shortly without, 1 hope, doing injustice to
       powers of the justices are said to be ‘very strictly confined’ . . . ”              Mr. Hill’s very careful argument on behalf of the defendants. That argument was
   Mr. Hill referred us to Horseferry Road Magistrates' Court, ex p. Stephenson            that there has been so much adverse publicity in the past in this case and there is
[1989] C.O .D . 470, [1989] The Times, January 25. But that was a very different case      likely to be so much further adverse publicity in the future that the jury is bound to
on its facts. There was no evidence at all which could possibly have grounded a            be prejudiced against the defendants. 1 do not agree. Sir David Hopkin was taken
prosecution for blackmail; it was a mere device to embarrass the impending confer­         through the publicity page by page and paragraph by paragraph. What he had to
ence. In the present case it has not been argued that there is no evidence to support      say was this:
the manslaughter charge, although Mr. Hill has made no admission to that effect.                 “ It is quite clear, by anyone’s standard, that this incident was of the greatest
   An alternative line of argument under this head was as follows. In the course of              public interest and concern and it appears to me, reading the publicity as it has
the summer of 1991, the Director was pressing Mr. Glogg’s solicitors to hand over                been put before me, that the reporting was mainly restricted to those matters
any fresh material available to Mr. Glogg so that he could make up his mind                      which were matters of public interest and concern. It is my view that the main
whether or not to take over the conduct of the prosecution. Mr. Glogg’s solicitors               subject of publicity were the Ministry of Transport for their laxity in licensing
declined to hand over the evidence until after the committal. It is said that Mr.                unsuitable vessels and their refusal to mount a public inquiry. Another subject
Glogg’s purpose was to bring to bear on the Director such intense pressure of pub­               was the question of compensation. Yet another was the general question of
licity that he would be unable to take over and discontinue the prosecution.                     corporate liability, which was dealt with in a general way and emphasised the
   1 do not accept that it would necessarily be wrong for a private prosecutor to                difficulties involved. The final target was the Director of Public Prosecutions
attempt to dissuade the Director from taking over the conduct of the prosecution                 when he threatened to intervene in the private prosecution. Then, of course,
by force of publicity. 1 suspect he is made of sterner stuff. But, even if it were               followed his withdrawal from that stance which also attracted publicity. Only
wrong, it does not show that the prosecutor’s purpose here in bringing the prosecu­              on a very few occasions was it even specifically suggested that this company, or
tion was oppressive or improper.                                                                 any of its directors, would be prosecuted for manslaughter.”
   Finally, it is said that, if 1 am right in thinking that Mr. Glogg had a sufficient        That was a view which Sir David Hopkin was entitled to take. It is a view with
locus standi to bring the prosecution, that must be because there is an unforeseen or      which 1 agree, although I do not pretend to have the same familiarity with the pub­
unintended lacuna in the 1985 Act. Mr. Hill contends that it is an abuse of process        licity material as he had.
to take advantage of that lacuna. It is sufficient to say that I do not agree.                Mr. Hill’s case, as it turned out in reply, does not depend on showing that Mr.
                                                                                           Glogg’s solicitors were personally responsible for generating the publicity or that
Delay                                                                                      they were party to a concerted campaign. It is right to say, however, that the
                                                                                           material which Mr. Mansfield put before us this morning gives me the opposite
                                                                                           impression that Mr. Glogg’s solicitors were doing their best to avoid adverse pub­
   Mr. Hill argues that the delay since the date of the casualty, or at least since        licity which might affect the conduct of the present proceedings once the sum­
October 27, 1989, when Mr. Glogg’s solicitors indicated in a letter that they had          monses had been served. W hether that impression be correct or not, 1 am quite
enough evidence in their possession to prove wilful misconduct on the part of the          unable to hold that a fair trial is no longer possible on the ground that a jury, how­
owners of the Bowbelle, was such as to cause serious prejudice to the defendants.          ever carefully directed, is likely to be prejudiced against these defendants, or
   The questions to be asked in these cases, where delay is relied on as an abuse of       because there is even a risk that the jury would be so prejudiced. In my view, Sir
process of the court, are, first, whether the delay on the part of the prosecution is      David Hopkin reached the right view on all the points before him. Mr. Hill has fal­
unjustifiable and, secondly, whether, if so, the prejudice to the defendant is such        len far short of showing that we ought to interfere on Wednesbury grounds (see
that a fair trial can no longer be held. 1 would answer both those questions in favour     Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corp. [1948] 1 K.B. 223).
of Mr. Glogg. It was entirely reasonable for him to wait as he did until after the         1 would therefore dismiss the application.
completion of the second trial of Captain Henderson before serving his summonses
on the defendants on July 31, 1991. There has been little, if any, delay since then.
                                                                                             WATERHOUSE J.: 1 agree and there is nothing that 1 can usefully add.
There are, it is true, cases in which it has been held that what is called “ mere delay”
may suffice. But these cases should be regarded as highly exceptional.
   N or has there been, in my view, any substantial prejudice to the defendants. No                                                                                  Application refused.
specific prejudice is alleged. This is not a case where prejudice should be inferred
since the trial will not depend on eye-witness accounts of fast-moving events. It is        Solicitors; Hill Taylor Dickinson for the defendants. Christian Fisher & Co. for
the mens rea of the company which will be mainly in issue. It is therefore to be           Mr. Glogg. Crown Prosecution Service, Headquarters.
expected that the trial will depend largely on documents. But, in so far as it will
depend on the memory of witnesses, the defendants will have had every reason to
toanswer the contentions advanced for the first time in the case for the
Croy/n.r I would not accede to this request.

                                                                                                                                   A ppeal allowed.

  Solicitors: Solicitor o f Inland Revenue; Sebastian Coleman & Co. for
Wragge & Co., Birmingham.

                                                                                                                                                   C. T. B.




      Q                                                            [h o u s e          o f   l o r d s       ]



 L E G IN A             .           .             .          .          .          .          .          .          .          .                  R e spo n d e n t

                                                                                   AND

 v D       O    M   A       K   O       ...........................................................................................................A p p e l l a n t

 994           May 10. II:                                                                 Lord M ackay o f Clashfern L.C..
               June 30                                                      Lord Keith o f Kinkel, Lord G o f f o f Chievelev,
                                                                                 Lord Browne-W ilkinson and Lord, W o o lf

     rime— H om icide— M anslaughter— Involuntary m anslaughter— Breach
        o f du ty— A ppropriate test— W hether necessary to show gross
        negligence— Whether ju r y to be dire cted as to "recklessness ”
                The defendant, an anaesthetist, was acting as such during an
            | e operation, which involved paralysing the patient, when a tube
       f    ecame disconnected from a ventilator. The patient suffered a
          cardiac arrest and subsequently died. The defendant was convicted
          o f the manslaughter o f the patient by breach o f duty.
                On appeal against conviction the Court o f Appeal (Criminal
          Division)_dismissed the appeal.
                On appeal by the defendant, on the question o f the true legal
          basis o f involuntary manslaughter by breach o f duty:—
                Held, d i s m i s s i n g th e a p p e a l , th a t in c a s e s o f m a n s l a u g h t e r b y
          c r i m in a l n e g l i g e n c e i n v o l v i n g a b r e a c h o f d u t y the o r d i n a r y
          p r in c ip le s o f the la w o f n e g l i g e n c e a p p l i e d to a s c e r t a i n w h e t h e r
          the d e f e n d a n t h a d b e e n in b r e a c h o f a d u ty o f c a r e t o w a r d s t h e
          victim ; t h a t o n th e e s t a b l i s h m e n t o f s u c h b r e a c h o f d u t y th e n e x t
          q u e s t i o n w a s w h e t h e r it c a u s e d th e d e a t h o f th e v i c t i m , a n d i f s o ,
          w h e t h e r it s h o u l d b e c h a r a c t e r i s e d a s g r o s s n e g l i g e n c e a n d
          t h e r e f o r e a crim e; a n d t h a t it w a s e m i n e n t l y a j u r y q u e s t i o n to
          d e c i d e w h e t h e r , h a v i n g re g a r d t o th e risk o f d e a t h i n v o l v e d , th e
          d e f e n d a n t ' s c o n d u c t w a s s o b a d in all th e c i r c u m s t a n c e s a s to
          a m o u n t t o a c r i m i n a l a c t o r o m i s s i o n ( p o s t , p p. 187 b , d - e ,
          189 g - 190 b ).
172
                              Reg. v. A d o m a k o (H .L .(E .))              [1995

                      Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8, C.C.A. and Andrews
                  v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576, H.L.(E.)
                  applied.
                      Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, H.L.(E.)
                  considered.
                      Reg. v. Seymour (Edward) [1983] 2 A.C. 493, H.L.(E.)
                  disapproved.
                      Per curiam. In cases of involuntary manslaughter it is not
                  necessary for the trial judge in directing the jury to refer to the
                  definition of recklessness given in Reg. v. Lawrence although it is
                  perfectly open to him to use the word “reckless" in its ordinary
                  meaning as part of his exposition of the law if he deems it
                  appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case (post,
                  pp. 188h~189a, g-190b).
                      Decision of the Court o f Appeal (Criminal Division)
                  sub nom. Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302 affirmed.

    The following cases are referred to in the opinion of Lord Mackay of
Clashfern L.C.:
    Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576; [1937] 2 All E.R!
         552, H.L.(E.)
    Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen (1985) 82 Cr.App.R. 18. P.C.
    Reg. v.Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510; [1981] 2 W.L.R. 524; [1981]
         1 All E.R. 974, H.L.(E.)
    Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302; [1993] 3 W.L.R. 927; [1993] 4 All E.R. 935,
         C.A.
    Reg. v. Sevmour ( Edward) [1983] 2 A.C. 493; [1983] 3 W.L.R. 349; [1983]
         2 All E.R. 1058, H.L.(E.)
    Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354; [1977] 2 W.L.R. 169; [1977] 2 All E.R. 341,
         C.A.
    Reg. v. West London Coroner, E.x parte Gray [1988] Q.B. 467; [1987] 2 W.L.R.
         1020; [1987] 2 All E.R. 129, D.C.
    Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8, C.C.A.

      The following additional cases were cited in argument:
      Akerele v. The King [1943] A.C. 255; [1943] 1 All E.R. 367. P.C.
      Dabholkar v. The King [1948] A.C. 221, P.C.
      Elliott v. C. [1983] 1 W.L.R. 939; [1983] 2 All E.R. 1005. D.C.
      Reg. v. Ball [1989] Crim.L.R. 730, C.A.
      Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341; [1981] 2 W.L.R. 509; [1981] 1 All E.R. 961,
           C.A.
      Reg. v. Church [1966] 1 Q.B. 59; [1965] 2 W.L.R. 1220; [1965] 2 All E.R. 72,
           C.C.A.
      Reg. v. Governor o f Hollowav Prison, Ex parte Jennings [19S3] 1 A.C. 624;
           [1982] 3 W.L.R. 450; [1982] 3 All E.R. 104, H.L.(E.)
      Reg. v. Lamb [1967] 2 Q.B. 981; [1967] 3 W.L.R. 888; [1967] 2 All E.R. 1282,
           C.A.
      Reg. v. Lowe [1973] Q.B. 702; [1973] 2 W.L.R. 481; [1973] 1 All E.R. 805.
           C.A.
      Reg. v. Nicholls (1874) 13 Cox C.C. 75
      Reg. v. Noakes (1866) 4 F. & F. 920
      Reg. v. Pigg [1983] 1 W.L.R. 6; [1983] 1 All E.R. 56. H.L.(E.)
      Reg. v. Reid [1992] 1 W.L.R. 793; [1992] 3 All E.R. 673, H.L.(E.)
      Reg. v. Satnam S. (1983) 78 Cr.App.R. 149, C.A.
      Reg. v. Stanley (unreported), 10 October 1990, Turner J.
                                                                                              173
         1 A.C.                         Reg. v. Adomako (H .L.(E.))

              Reg. v. Yogusukaran [1990] 1 N.Z.L.R. 399
              Rex v. Long (1830) 4 C. & P. 398
              Rex v. Williamson (1807) 3 C. & P. 635
              Sweet v. Parslev [1970] A.C. 132; [1969] 2 W.L.R. 470; [1969] 1 All E.R. 347,
                   H.L.(E.)

             A p p e a l from the C ourt o f A p p ea l (Criminal D iv isio n ).
             This was an appeal by leave dated 23 N o v e m b e r 1993 o f the H o u se o f
         Lords (Lord Keith o f K inkel, Lord G o f f o f C hieveley and Lord Slynn o f
         Hadley) by the defendant. John Ajare A d o m a k o , from the jud gm en t dated
         20 M ay 1993 o f the C ourt o f A p p eal (Criminal D iv isio n ) (Lord Taylor o f
         Gosforth C.J.. H enry and Blofeld JJ.) dism issing his appeal against his
         conviction o f m anslau gh ter on 26 January 1990 at the Central Criminal
         Court before A lliott J. and a jury.
              The Court o f A ppeal o n 15 June 1993 certified pursuant to section 33(2)
         o f the 'Criminal A p p ea l A c t 1968 that a point o f law w as involved in its
^        decision, namely
               "in cases o f manslaughter by criminal negligence not involving driving but
               involving a breach o f duty is it a sufficient direction to the jury to adopt
               the gross negligence test set out by the Court o f Appeal in the present case
    D          following R e x v. Batem an (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and Andrews v. Director
               o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576 without reference to the test o f
               recklessness as defined in Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510 or
               as adapted to the circumstances o f the case?”
         Leave to appeal was refused.
            The facts are stated in the opin ion o f Lord M a c k a v o f Clashfern L.C.
    E
              L o rd W illiam s o f M o s ty n O.C. and J am es W atson for the defendant.
          The offence o f involuntary m anslaughter sh ou ld have the characteristics
          o f (i) clarity, (ii) certainty, (iii) intellectual coherence and (iv) general
          applicability. I f these criteria are applied to the ju d g m en t o f the Court o f
          Appeal in the present case, the reasoning on w hich it is based is found
    P    wanting and the co n v ictio n can n ot stand. T h e criteria can be summarised
          in the p rop osition that there must be a single test as to w h at constitutes
          involuntary m anslau gh ter and that test shou ld be that o f recklessness.
          There is no logical or jurisprudential difference between cases o f
          involuntary m anslaughter caused by the driving o f m o to r vehicles and
          those caused by any other means.
              The m odern d e v e lo p m e n t o f the law o f involuntary m anslaughter has
    G     created uncertainty as to w hich test sh ou ld be a d op ted and, in particular,
          whether gross negligence sh ou ld remain at all as a substantive test; see the
          editorial note to Reg. v. B a ll [1989] C rim .L .R . 730. T he trial j u d g e directed
          the jury that in m anslau gh ter cases o f this kind the killing m u st be as a
          result o f a grossly negligent act. He em p hasised that a very high degree o f
          negligence w as required before the crime cou ld be established and he
    tt   culled passages from R e x v. Long (1830) 4 C. & P. 398; R e x v. Batem an
          (1925) 19 C r .A p p .R . 8 and R e x v. W illiam son (1807) 3 C. & P. 635
          (without nam ing them) to illustrate the standard to be applied. In the
          Court o f A ppeal it was c on ten d e d on b eh a lf o f the d efen d a n t that the
         judge’s su m m in g up was deficient in that it a d op ted the test o f gross
174
                                Reg. v. Adomako (H .L.(E.))                         11995]

negligence a lone, epitom ised by R e x v. B a tem a n , 19 C r.A p p .R . 8 and
A n d rew s v. D ire c to r o f Public P rosecutions [1937] A .C . 576, 583, and that
it did so w i t h o u t reference to the test o f recklessness prop ou n d ed in Reg.
 v. L a w ren ce (S te p h e n ) [1982] A .C . 510. It follo w s on the decision in
L a w re n c e and subsequent authorities that to convict for involuntary
m a n sla u g h te r there must be recklessness or wilful know led ge o f risk which
m ight bring a b o u t serious injury or death, but nevertheless a conscious
inte ntion to take that risk. Further, “ recklessness” in this context might
im port wilfully shutting o n e ’s mind to the k n o w n risk. The defendant
argued that the manifest differences in approach ad opted by the three trial
jud g es in the three cases under appeal in Reg. v. P rentice [1994] Q.B. 302
illustrated the difficulty and co n fusio n which prosecutors, judges and
juries had experienced in the present type o f case. It was contended
 therefore that there was a need for uniformity o f approach by prosecuting
authorities and judges and that preference o u g h t to be given to the
 L aw ren ce direction as suitably adapted to the circumstances o f each case.
       Th e f o r e g o in g difficulty arises out o f A n d rew s v. D irector o f Public
 P ro secu tion s [1937] A.C . 576 itself, for whilst apparently giving approval
 to R e x v. B a te m a n , 19 C r.A p p .R . 8, where gross negligence was the test,
Lord A t k i n ’s speech (p. 583) also supports the proposition that recklessness
will, in a l m o s t all cases, be the m ost useful underlying criterion.
       A l t h o u g h the gross negligence test was a d o p ted shortly after Andrews
by the Privy C o u n cil in A k erele v. The King [1943] A .C . 255 and Dabholkar
 v. The K in g [1948] A .C . 221, the qualified terms in which that test was
approved in A n d rew s has led recently to the authorities treating recklessness
as the primary element: see Reg. v. Ston e [1977] Q.B. 354. This trend was
ap p ro ved by the Privy Council in K on g Cheuk K w an v. The Oueen (1985)
82 C r . A p p .R . 18, 26, where it was pointed out that Lord Atkin in his
speech in A n d r e w s clearly thought (and the Board agreed with his view)
that it was better to use the word “ reckless” rather than to add to the
word “ n e g lig e n c e ” various possible vituperative epithets.
       In K on g C h eu k K w an the Board, approving the ju d g m en t o f the Court
o f A p p e a l in R e g v. S eym o u r ( E d w a rd ) (1983) 76 C r.A p p .R . 211, 216.
considered “ recklessness” as the uppermost, if not the only test to apply
in the co n tex t o f a case, where manslaughter had been charged, arising
out o f a co llisio n between two hydrofoil boats. That approach was also
a d o p ted by the Div isio n a l Court in Reg. v. W e st London Coroner. Ex
p a r te G ray [1988] Q.B. 467 and by Turner J. in Reg. v. Stanley
(unreported), 10 O ctob er 1990.
       Reg. v. L a w re n c e [1982] A .C . 51 0 was confined to the meaning o f
recklessness for the purposes o f the statutory offence o f “driving
recklessly” u n d er section I o f the R o a d Traffic Act 1972. But the Lawrence
definition o f recklessness has since been held to apply equally to the
c o m m o n law offence: see Reg. v. Governor o f H o llo w a y Prison, Ex parte
Jennings [1983] 1 A .C . 624; Reg. v. S e ym o u r [1983] 2 A.C. 493 , 502 e- h ,
5 0 4 h , 5 0 6 e- g a n d K o n g Cheuk K w an v. The Oueen, 82 C r.A p p .R . 18.
      T o the q u estio n whether involuntary manslaughter requires mens rea,
the an sw er is in the affirmative. A lt h o u g h in A ndrew s v. D irector o f Public
P rosecu tion s [1937] A .C . 576 Lord Atkin did not find connotatio ns o f
mens rea helpful, he did not suggest that there was a distinction in this
                                                                                175
1 A.C.                       Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

respect between the statutory and c o m m o n law offences o f dea th by
dangerous driving. Reg. v. L aw rence [1982] A .C . 510 and Reg. v. R e id
[1992] 1 W .L .R . 793 have held and defined mens rea in the context o f the
statutory m otoring offences to be “ recklessness” in the sense formulated
by Lord D ip lo c k in L aw ren ce, and the effect o f Reg. v. S e y m o u r [1983]
2 A .C . 493 and Reg. v. Governor o f H o llo w a y Prison, E x p a rte Jennings
[1983] 1 A .C . 624 is that m ens rea is also required for c o m m o n law m otor
manslaughter.
     It is difficult to see why m ens rea should be required in m o to r
manslaughter, where recklessness is usually the essential ingredient o f the
offence, but not in other cases o f death by criminal nealisence. In Reg. v.
L a m b [1967] 2 Q.B. 981 and Reg. v. Stone [ 1 9 7 7 f Q.B. 354 it was
em phasised that the mental elem ent was an essential ingredient o f the
offence there charged regardless o f whether the test was gross negligence
or recklessness. Lord Hailsham o f St. Marylebone in Reg. v. L aw rence
[1982] A .C . 510, 5 2 0 d - f approved the need for so m e “ guilty state o f
m i n d ” to constitute the mens rea o f all indictable offences, thus adopting
the approach o f Lord Reid in S w ee t v. P arsley [1970] A .C . 132, 149 g .
     The criteria by which the jury are invited to determine guilt or
 innocence in relation to the offence o f manslaughter should be clear and
u n a m biguous. They should explicitly encourage the jury to focus not upon
 the o u tc o m e o f the defendant's acts or om issions but u p o n the mental
attitude which governed the d efen da n t’s conduct. A test which ad opts
negligence alone as the central measure may be potentially misleading. If
 used by itself the term is capable o f suggesting to the jury that it should
be equated with negligent con d u c t as understood in the context o f the civil
law. The jury may understand by that that no mental elem ent is required
at all. Further, merely attaching the word “gross” does not provide a
mental element. The grossness o f an act o f negligence does not necessarily
depend u p on intent. The margin by which a defendant has departed from
the standard o f reasonable care does not imply a “guilty m i n d ” unless and
until the departure is so great, or gross, that the jury can infer that it must
have been co m m itted with a guilty state o f mind. U ntil that point o f
inference is reached the margin by which the act or o m issio n departs from
the ordinary standard o f reasonable care may not be the product o f guilty
intent. It m ay not even be the product o f intent at all but o f other factors,
for exam ple, inexperience or panic, which are not in themselves always
culpable.
     The foregoing test might enable a relatively minor act o f negligence
resulting in death to escape criminal liability even if it is c o m m itte d by
s o m e o n e w h o se attitude is thoroughly indifferent and b la m ew o rth y . In
contrast, a more striking act o f negligence w ould autom atically invite
criminal prosecution regardless o f the attitude o f the perpetrator.
     If the epithet “gross” is intended to co nvey to the jury a need to
consider both a great degree o f negligence and an ab n orm al attitude on
the part o f the accused then it requires greater elucidation. Left as it is the
phrase “ gross negligence” (a) places undue em phasis upon c o n d u c t rather
than u p o n an assessment o f intent; (b) implies to the jury that they may
infer "a guilty m i n d ” simply from the fact that negligence is o f a
particularly high degree w ithout offering any assistance as to h o w that
%
176
                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                        11995]

“guilty m i n d ” itself can be recognised or defined; and (c) invites the jury          ^
to find guilt even in circumstances where the jury m a y be unsure, or may
n o t even have considered, whether or not the defendant's state o f mind is
to be regarded as criminal.
     A further problem with such a test is that it is inherently difficult for a
jury to ap ply in cases in volving breach o f duty where the breach is
c o m m i t t e d by a skilled person and involves technical issues and
p rofessional judgm ents. In such a situation it is safer for the jury to judge          B
the c o n d u c t o f the accused by reference to the character o f his mental
attitude (about which they can form a direct jud g m en t) rather than by
reference to the degree by which his conduct fell short o f a standard o f
c o m p e t e n c e — a standard which m ay in itself be difficult for the jury to fix
in their m inds and which m a y have to be judged solely through the
indirect perspective o f expert witnesses.                                               q
      If the test is to be simply "gross negligence” it w o u ld be necessary in
particular cases to remind the jury o f the need to take into account the
accused's state o f mind when considering whether he is guilty o f criminal
negligence: see Reg. v. Lamb [1967] 2 Q.B. 981. This is unhelpful unless
the characteristics o f a guilty state o f mind can themselves be defined in a
w a y w h ich assists the jury.
      M ere negligence on the part o f the defendant should not attract                  D
criminal liability for the offence o f manslaughter until the point at which
the jury either conclu de that the defendant's mental attitude was actually
reckless or con clu d e that the negligence was o f such a high degree that a
reckless state o f mind can and must properly be inferred.
      In Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576
Lord A t k in h im se lf did not accept that the epithet "gross" was appropriate.        £
H e effectively rejected it in favour o f "reckless.” His qualification to the
effect that the epithet "reckless” was probably not all embracing cannot
be read as a con cessio n that "gross” is preferable. In practice,
"recklessness” as it is n o w understood is probably all embracing, at.least
as the basis for directing the jury in cases o f manslaughter involving
breach o f a duty o f care. In Andrews Lord Atkin, at p. 584. accepted that
recklessness in the context o f the statutory offence will almost certainly              F
create the c o m m o n law offence, and his example o f circumstances where
it m ight not apply (p. 583) can in fact be regarded as a situation where
the d efendant is reckless.
     In the circumstances o f the present case the jury should have been
directed that they had to be satisfied that (a) the defen dan t owed a duty
o f care to the deceased; (b) the defendant failed in that duty in one or                q
m o re o f the respects alleged: (c) the defendant's failure or failures were
either the cause o f the deceased's death or a substantial cause: (d) at the
time it was. or ought to have been, plain to the defendan t that there was
a risk o f serious harm if he failed in his duty; (e) the defendant's state o f
m ind w a s criminally culpable, that is to say. in general terms, his mental
a ttitude a m o u n t e d to either (i) a co n scio us or deliberate intention to run    ^
a risk w h ich involved o b v io u s risk o f significant injury or death or
(ii) indifference to, or disregard of, such a risk; and (f) in particular, in
the con te xt o f the present case, the failures on the part o f the defendant
(nam ely, to respond to or remedy the disconnection and avert the risk o f
                                                                                 177
1 A .C                       Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

hypoxia) went far b ey o n d a simple matter o f ordinary human error or
thoughtlessness but displayed or implied an attitude o f mind on his part
which a m o un ted to either actual disregard of. or indifference to, that risk
or to the duty itself.
     In judging the seriousness and character o f the failures alleged and the
attitude o f mind possessed by the defendant the jury must take into
account all the evidence which sh o w s how they cam e to arise, including
the defendant's o w n evidence as to how he h im self perceived the situation
at the time, w hat he did, and w h y he did it. Such evid ence may explain or
justify conduct which m ay. at first sight, appear to be governed by a
reckless state o f mind. T h e jury may. for example, conclude, having taken
all such evidence into account, that the d efen d a n t’s con d u c t was intended
not to run the risk but rather to avert or avoid it. If so. the jury may
conclude that the d efendant was not in the circumstances acting recklessly.
On the other hand, the defendant's chosen course o f conduct may be
considered to be so bad and so unjustifiable that a mental attitude o f
 indifference or disregard is an inescapable inference on the part o f the jury
whatever excuse is put forward.
     A proper focus on the accused's state o f mind is o f v ital importance in
 considering a co u n t as serious as involuntary manslaughter. The
 fundamental questio n is: what is the basis o f the offence o f involuntary
 manslaughter? The j u d g m e n t o f the Court o f Appeal [1994] Q.B. 302.
 322 h - 3 2 3 b suggested that such states o f mind may. in appropriate cases,
 be described in at least four ways. The list may provide helpful illustrations
 but they are expressly stated to be non-exhaustive exam ples which do not
 detract from the simple test and therefore d o not resolve the key issue
 which is whether gross negligence o f itself is a sufficient direction. In fact,
 the examples given tend to support the w isd o m o f adopting recklessness
 as the primary criterion.
     Andrews v. D ire c to r o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A .C . 576 is consistent
 with the defendant's primary case in that A n drew s h eld .th at, in cases o f
 motor manslaugh ter “ recklessness" was the most appropriate epithet and
 would almost always suffice. Andrews is also consistent with the
 defendant's case in that it must n ow be read in the light o f the decisions
 in Reg. v. S eym o u r [1983] 2 A.C . 493. Reg. v. Governor o f H o llo w a y Prison.
 Ex parte Jennings [1983] 1 A .C . 624. Reg. v. Law rence [1982] A.C . 510 and
 Reg. v. R eid [1992] 1 W .L .R . 793. by which this H ou se has held that
 (i) the ingredients o f m o t o r manslaughter at c o m m o n law are the same as
 those for the (then existing) statutory offence o f death by dangerous
 driving: and (ii) the ingredients o f the offence at c o m m o n law including
 recklessness arc as defined in Lawrence or as adapted to the circumstances
 o f the case. Further, if the distinction drawn by the Court o f Appeal
 between m oto r m anslau gh ter and other forms o f manslau ghter is upheld.
 Andrews remains con siste nt with the defendant's case in that it related
 solely to the direction to be given in cases o f m o to r manslaughter and is
 not binding upon cases o f manslaughter by criminal negligence not
 involving driving.
     But the H o u s e will be invited- to depart from Andrews if it is held that
 that decision (a) applies to involuntary manslaugh ter outside the realm o f
 driving (b) is in conflict with the effect o f the decision s in Reg. v. Seym our
178
                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E-))                       11995|

[1983] 2 A .C . 493, Reg. v. Governor o f H ollow ay Prison, Ex p a rte Jennings
[1983] 1 A .C . 624, Reg. v. L aw rence [1982] A .C . 510 and Kong Cheuk
K w an v. The Queen, 82 C r .A p p .R . 18, and (c) is authority for the
pro p o sitio n that a direction referring only to “gross negligence” is
sufficient.
      Ann Cur n ow Q.C. and A nthony L eo n a rd for the Crown. The range o f
possible duties, breaches and surrounding circumstances is so varied that
it is not possible to prescribe a standard jury direction appropriate in all
cases. T h e j u d g e should tailor his su m m in g up to the circumstances o f the
particular case: Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302, 3 2 2 h . Th e difficulties
arising from Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510 c o m e from putting
 Lord D i p l o c k ’s definition o f “ recklessness" in that case in a straitjacket.
M an slau gh ter caused by gross negligence is only a way o f describing what
in the past was involuntary manslaughter. For centuries gross negligence
was equivalent to “ recklessness:” see Reg. v. N oa k es (186 6) 4 F. & F. 920
and the notes at pp. 921, 922. [Reference was also made to R e x v.
 W illiam son, 3 C. & P. 635; R e x v. Long, 4 C. & P. 398 and Reg. v. Nicholls
 ( 1 874 ) 13 C o x C.C. 75]. The co n cep t o f recklessness given its ordinary-
historic dictionary definition is primarily relevant to acts o f commission: it
c an n o t e n c o m p a ss all the circumstances envisaged as creating criminal
 responsibility. The concept o f gross negligence is primarily relevant to acts
o f omission.
      R ecklessness as refined by Lord D ip lock in Caldw ell and Lawrence
requires the jury to be directed that they must be sure that the defendant's
co n d u ct caused an o b v io u s and serious risk and that the defendant either
 (i) failed to give any thought to the possibility o f there being any such
risk or (ii) having recognised that there was such a risk, nevertheless went
o n to take it. Neither test is appropriate to so m eo n e in the position o f the
defen dant, w h o f a i le d to act to prevent death. It was his duty, making use
o f his training and skill as an anaesthetist, to react in a dangerous
situation. The risk w as k n ow n , it was always present and he was there to
m inim ise that risk. A n anaesthetist ought to recognise when a situation
has arisen which requires him to intervene and his degree o f negligence
has to be ju d g ed by his fa ilu r e to act w h en such a situation arises. The use
o f the phrase "gross inattention" was w holly suited to the role o f the
defen dan t, w h o had the duty as an anaesthetist to m on ito r the patient at
all times during the operation. [Reference was made to the definition o f
“ negligence" in the N e w S h o rter O x fo r d English D iction ary (1993) and o f
“ negligence" and “ recklessly" in the O x fo rd English D iction a ry (1933).]
      T h e present case is o n e o f omission. Lord D iplock's definition o f
“ recklessness" in L aw rence is only really applicable where the accused
creates the danger or is present w hen the danger arises. It is nigh
im possib le to apply Lord D ip lo ck 's definition o f recklessness to cases o f
o m issio n .
      In R e x v. B atem an , 19 C r.A p p .R . 8 a distinction was drawn for the
first time between cases where death is alleged to have been caused by
in d o len ce or carelessness and cases where death is alleged to have been
caused by recklessness. A s to the first category, where a qualified man
ho ld in g h im self out as possessing special skill and knowledge was
consulted by a patient, it is no defence to sh ow that he was diligent in
                                                                                    179
1 A.C.                        Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

attendance if the patient was killed by his gross negligence and
unskilfulness, and where in com peten ce is alleged the unqualified
practitioner c a n n o t claim to be measured by any lower standard than the
qualified person. A s to the se cond category, cases o f alleged recklessness,
juries are likely to distinguish between qualified and unqualified
practitioners. A qualified person w h o undertakes a case beyond his powers
m a y be reckless. Further, a qualified person w h o subjects his patient to a
reckless experiment may be considered to have acted recklessly, and an
unqualified person m ay be reckless in undertaking treatment. "Reck­
lessness" was given its ordinary meaning, not the definition it has obtained
since L aw rence and Caldwell.
      In B atem an it was held that to support an indictment for manslaughter
the p rosecution must prove the matters necessary to establish civil liability
 (save for pecuniary loss) and in addition must satisfy the jury that the
negligence or in co m peten ce o f the accused went b eyond a mere matter
o f c o m p e n s a t i o n and sh ow ed such a disregard for the life and safety o f
others as to a m o u n t to a crime against the state and deserving o f
 punishment. T h e case concerned a medical practitioner co m petent to deal
 with the medical co n d itio n o f the deceased. The direction o f the trial
judge, wrho used epithets such as "gross” , "wicked” and “culpable." was
 approved and the court emphasised the need for the jury to be able to
 distinguish between mistake and error o f jud gm en t (where liability does
 not arise) and carelessness and incompetence. Had the court been
 concerned with o n e o f the situations outlined under the second category.   s-    v

 then "recklessness" w o u ld have more closely described the standard that
 they should have examined. Batem an has not been overruled and has
 frequently been authoritatively referred to with approval, notably in
 A ndrew s r. D ire c to r o f Public P rosecutions [1937] A.C . 576. a decision o f
 this H o u se w h ich has never been disapproved of.
      Th e fo llo w in g con clu sion s may be drawn from Andrews, (a) The H ou se
was on ly co nsid erin g manslaughter from the p o i n t , o f view o f an
 unintentional killing caused by negligence (p. 581). (b) It approved
 Batem an w ithou t finding the co n n o ta tio n s o f mens rea helpful in
distinguishing between degrees o f negligence, (c) Cases o f manslaughter in
driving m o to r cars are but instances o f a general rule applicable to all
charges o f h o m ic id e by negligence, (d) O f all the epithets that can be
applied "reckless” m ost nearly covers the case o f causing death by driving,
but it is not all-embracing, (e) The decision draws a distinction between
the degree o f negligence required to be proved in the case o f
 (i) m anslaughter (requiring a high degree o f negligence as indicated in
 B a tem a n ) and (ii) dangerous driving, in which the degree o f negligence is
not necessarily as high.
      It must be born e in mind that one is here catering for juries w ho must
understand w h at the law is concern ing involuntary manslaughter. In Reg.
 v. R e id [1992] 1 W .L .R . 793 the H o u se held that the ipsissima verba o f the
test laid d o w n in Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C . 510 sh ould not necessarily
be the only statement on the law given to the jury. But at the date o f the
present trial in January 1990 the trial judge deem ed it only safe if
“recklessness” w as to be the test to use the exact language o f that test. In
the circum stances he cannot be criticised for so doing. The defendant
1 8 0

                              Reg. v. A domako (H .L .(E .))                    119951

m ig h t not be caught by the L a u re n c e direction. T h e question then arises:
w o u l d the public be offe nded by a verdict o f “ N o t Guilty" in the
c ir c um stanc e s o f the case? It is extremely difficult, if not now impossible,
to apply the Law ren ce test to a case o f om issio n. Criminal negligence is
m o r e easily com p rehensible than the concept o f recklessness.
      T h e C row n is not seeking to create a crime where the accused is to be
j u d g e d by s o m e objective standard. The test to be applied is one o f gross
 n eglig ence and one takes into account the accused's individual
c ir c um stanc e s in deciding whether the negligence constituted gross
 negl ig ence. T h e objective standard is applied to the negligence alone. This
 is the elem ent in the Caldwell!Law rence test (see [1982] A.C. 341) which
 the jury has to apply. T h ey do not have to go o n to consider whether the
 risk taken by the accused wou ld have been o b v i o u s to the reasonably
 prudent person. Th e harshness o f applying the C aldw ell test [1982] A.C.
 341 in all circum stances is exemplified by E lliott v. C [1983] 1 W.L.R.
 939. A s to the application o f the gross negligence test in other jurisdictions,
 see T h e Law C o m m is s io n . Consu ltation Paper. N o . 135. Civil Law.
 I n volu n tary Manslaughter, paras. 3.4 2-3.46. There may be cases in which
 the term ''reckless" is suited to the circumstances o f the accused: see Reg.
 v. Church [1966] 1 Q.B. 59: Reg. r. L ow e [1973] Q.B. 702: Reg. v. Stone
 [1977] Q.B. 354 and Reg. v. H'est London Coroner. E x p a r te Gray [1988]
 Q .B . 467.
       T here remains the question whether the test o f gross negligence has
 survive d the decisions in Reg. v. Law rence [1982] A.C. 510: Rea.
 C a ld w e ll [1982] A.C. 341: Reg.' v. S eym ou r [1983] 2 A.C . 493: Reg. v.^Reid
 [1992] 1 W .L .R . 793 and Kong Cheuk Kwan i\ The Oueen. 82 Cr.App.R.
 18. It is to be observed that neither C aldw ell nor Lawrence dealt with
 m ansla ugh te r. They were con cern ed with the statutory offences o f arson
a n d reckless driving respectively, defining in each case the appropriate test
w h e n the statute used the wor d "reckless." It is important to distinguish
 Reg. v’. S e y m o u r [1983] 2 A .C . 493. which decided that the ingredients o f
 the tw o offences o f causing death by reckless driving and motor
 m an s la u g h te r were the same. But the observations o f Lord Roskill (p. 506)
that ‘" R e c k l e s s n e s s ’ should to day be given the same meaning in relation
to all offe nces which involve 'recklessness' as o n e o f the elements unless
 Parlia m ent has otherwise ordained." was obiter: see the terms o f the
certified questio n, at p. 505b. Mor eove r, recklessness in the Sexual
O ff e n c e s Act 1976 has a different meaning, requiring a subjective approach:
see Reg. v. Pigg [1983] 1 W.L.R. 6 and Reg. r. Satnam S. (1983) 78
C r .A p p .R . 149. In Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen. 82 Cr.App.R. 18. 25
 Lord Roskill limited what he had said in Seym our to the status o f guidance
to prosecutors in considering which charge to bring.
      G r o s s negligence is a simple concept for the man in the street
to un derstan d. It has general applicability and acceptability. The
 C a ld w ell!L aw ren ce test is not appropriate in cases o f breach o f duty where
a failure is alleged and indeed is unwor kable in o m is sio n cases and not
he lpfu l in c o m m i s s i o n cases. T h e phrase that s hould be used to juries is
"culpable" or ’“gross" negligence in a direction relating to involuntary
m a n s la u g h te r , the grossness being measured by the defendant's reaction
to the situat ion in which he found himself. [Reference was also made to
                                                                                181
1 A.C.                       Reg, v, Adomako (H .L .(E ,))

A kerele v. The King [1943] A.C. 255; D abh olkar i\ The King [1948] A.C.
221: Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302, 323 and Reg. v. Yogcisakaran [1990]
1 N . Z . L . R . 399,]
    L o r d W illiam s o f M o s ty n Q.C. replied.

    T h eir Lordships took time tor consideration.

      30 June. L o r d M a c k a y of C l as h fe rn L.C.    M y Lords, this is an
appeal brought with the leave o f your Lordships' H o u s e granted on
23 N o v e m b e r 1993 from an order o f Her Majesty's Court o f Appeal
(Criminal Division) (Lord Taylor o f Gosforth C.J.. Henry and Blot'eld JJ.)
whereby the appellant’s appeal against conviction for manslaughter was
dismissed.
      Th e conviction arose out o f the conduct o f an eye operation carried
out at the M ayd ay Hospital. C r o y d o n on 4 January 1987. The appellant
was. during the latter part o f that operation, the anaesthetist in charge o f
the patient.
      Th e operation was carried out by two surgeons supported by a team
o f five nurses and a theatre sister. Anaesthesia c o m m e n c e d at about
9.45 a.m . T h e patient was paralysed by injection o f a drug and an
endotracheal tube was inserted to enable the patient to breathe by-
mechan ical means. At the start o f the operation the anaesthetist was
Dr. Said, a registrar. A n operating department assistant was also present
to help him. A t about 10.30 a.m. there was a c h a n g e o v e r o f anaesthetists.
Th e appellant was called to attend and take Dr. Said's place following
which both Dr. Said and his assistant departed to deal with another
operation elsewhere in the hospital. A noth er assistant was called to attend
but did not arrive until later.
      A t approximately 11.05 a.m. a d iscon nection occurred at the
endotracheal tube con nection. Th e supply o f oxyge n to the patient ceased
and this led to cardiac arrest at 11.14 a.m. D u ring this period the appellant
failed to notice or remedy the disconnection.
      Th e appellant first be came aware that s o m e t h in g was amiss when an
alarm so u n d e d on the D i n a m a p machine, wh ich m o n ito r s the patient's
b lood pressure. From the evidence it appears that s o m e 4^ minutes would
have elapsed between the disconnection and the s o u n d i n g o f this alarm.
W hen this alarm sou n d e d the appellant responded in various ways by
c h e c k in g the equipm en t and by administering atro pin e to raise the
patient's pulse. But at no stage before the cardiac arrest did he check
the integrity o f the endotracheal tube connection. T h e disconnection itself
was not discovered until after resuscitation m easures had been
commenced.
      F o r the prosecution it was alleged that the appellant was guilty o f
gross negligence in failing to notice or respond appropriately to obvious
signs that a disconnection had occurred and that the patient had ceased
to breathe. In particular the prosecution alleged that the appellant had
failed to notice at various stages during the period after disconnection and
before the arrest either occurred or became inevitable that the patient's
chest was not moving, the dials on the mechanical ventilating machine
were not operating, the d iscon nection in the endotrach eal tube, that the
182

of0aJshfcni'L.C.               ^ L'S- v- Adomako (H .L .(E .))                   119951
alarm on the ventilator was not switched on and that the patient was
b e c o m i n g progressively blue. Further the prosecution alleged that the
ap pellant had notic ed but failed to understand the correct significance o f
the fact that during this period the patient's pulse had dropped and the
p a tie n t’s b lo o d pressure had dropped.
      T w o expert witnesses gave evidence for the prosecution. Professor
Payne described the standard o f care as "abysmal" while Professor A d am s
stated that in his view a competent anaesthetist should have recognised
the signs o f d iscon nection within 15 seconds and that the appellant's
c o n d u c t a m o u n t e d to "a gross dereliction o f care.''
      On be h alf o f the appellant it was conceded at his trial that he had
been negligent. Th e issue was therefore whether his conduct was criminal.
      T h e expert witness called on behalf o f the appellant at his trial was
Dr. M o n k s . His eviden ce conceded that the appellant ought to have
notic ed the . discon nection. But in his view there were factors which
mitigated this failure. H e considered that another independent problem
either occurred or cou ld have occurred before or at the same time as the
d is co n n e ctio n wh ich distracted the appellant's attention and activities.
T h is problem w ou ld in his view have caused the patient's blood pressure
to drop and m a y either have been a reaction to the drug being used to
paralyse the patient or alternatively may have been caused by an ocular
car diac reflex.
      T h e appellant h im s e lf said in evidence that when the alarm sounded
on the D i n a m a p m ach in e his first thought was that the machine itself was
not w orking properly. Having carried out cheeks on the machine he then
th o u g h t that the patient had suffered an ocular cardiac reflex for which he
administered at ro pin e in two successive doses. Further attempts to
adm in ister at ro pin e by intravenous drip and to check the patient's blood
pressure fo llo w e d until the cardiac arrest occurred. It had never occurred
to him that a d iscon ne ction had taken place. He stated in evidence that
"after things w e n t ’w r on g I think I did panic a bit."
      In relation to the appellant's actions during this period Professor
Pa yne        had c o n c e d e d during cross-examination that "given that
Dr. A d o m a k o misled himself the elforts he made were not unreasonable.”
The period to which this evidence referred was obviously the period after
the alarm had s o u n d e d on the Dinamap machine which was. as I have
said, appar ent ly s o m e 4; minutes alter the disconnection occurred.
      T h e jury con victe d the appellant ot manslaughter by a majority o f
 11 to 1. T h e Court o f Appeal (Criminal Division) dismissed the
appellant's appeal against conviction but certitied that a point of law of
general public im portance was involved in the decision to dismiss the
appeal, namely:
       "in cases o f m an slaughter by criminal negligence not involving driving
       but inv o lv in g a breach o f duty is it a sulticient direction to the jury
       to adopt the gross negligence test set out b\ the Court o f Appeal in
       the present cas e follow ing Rl'X *’• Btiuuian (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. S and
       A n drew s i\ D ire cto r of Public Prose t lit it»is [ 19.i7] A.C. 576. without
       reference to the test ot recklessness as enned in Reg. v. Lawrence
       ( S te p h e n ) [1982] A .C . 5 1 0 or as adapted to the circumstances o f the
                                                                                   183
1 A.C.                       Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                  ,
                                °                                       of CbsKfcrn L.C.

     T h e decision o f the Court o f A p p e al is reported sub nom. Reg. v.
P rentice [1994] Q.B. 302 along with a num ber o f other cases involving
similar qu estio ns o f law. T h e Court o f A p p e a l held that except in cases
o f m o to r manslaughter the ingredients wh ich had to be proved to establish
an offence o f involuntary manslaughter by breach o f duty were the
existence o f the duty, a breach o f the duty which had caused death and
gross negligence which the jury considered to justify a criminal conviction:
 the jury might properly find gross negligence on p r o o f o f indifference to
an o b v io u s risk o f injury to health or o f actual foresight o f the risk
coupled either with a determination nevertheless to run it or with an
intention to avoid it but involving such a high degree o f negligence in the
attempted avoid an c e as the jury considered justified conviction or o f
inattention or failure to advert to a serious risk g o i n g beyond mere
inadvertence in respect o f an ob viou s and important matter which the
defen dant's duty dem anded he shou ld address: and that, in the
circumstances, the appeals o f the two junior doctors and the electrician
wou ld be allowed and the appeal o f the anaesthetist, namely
 Dr. A d o m a k o . would be dismissed. T h e reason that the Court o f Appeal
excepted the cases o f m o to r manslaughter and their formulation o f the
law was the decision o f this H ouse in Reg. r. S eym o u r (E d w a rd ) [1983]
2 A.C . 493 in which it was held that where m ansla ughter was charged and
the circum sta nces were that the victim was killed as a result o f the reckless
driving o f the defendant on a public highway, the trial judge should give
the jury the direction which had been suggested in Reg. v. Lawrence
(Stephen.! [1982] A.C. 510 but that it was appropriate also to point out
that in order to constitute the offence o f m ansla ughter the risk o f death
being caused by the manner o f the defen dant's driving must be very high.
     In o p e n i n g his very cogent argument for the appellant before your
Lordships, cou n se l submitted that the law in this area should have the
characteristics o f clarity, certainty, intellectual coheren ce and general
applicability and acceptability. For these reasons he said the law applying
to involuntary manslaughter generally should involve a universal test and
that test s h ould be the test already applied in this H ouse to motor
m anslaughter. H e criticised the concept o f gross negligence which was the
basis o f the j udgm en t o f the Court o f A p p e al submitting that its
form ulation involved circularity, the jury being told in effect to convict o f
a crime if they thought a crime had been com m itte d and that accordingly
using gross negligence as the conceptual basis for the crime o f involuntary
m ansla ugh te r was unsatisfactory and the court should apply the law laid
d o w n in S e y n to u r [1983] 2 A .C . 493 generally to all cases o f involuntary
m ansla ugh te r o r at least use this as the basis for providing general
applicability and acceptability.
     Like the Cou rt o f A p peal your Lordships were treated to a considerable
review o f authority. I begin with R e x r. B atem an . 19 C r.A pp.R. 8 and
the o p i n i o n o f Lord Hew art C.J.. where he said, at pp. 10-11:
     “ In e x p o u n d in g the law to juries on the trial o f indictments for
     m a n s la u g h te r by negligence, judges have often referred to the
     d istinc tion between civil and criminal liability for death by negligence.
     T h e law o f criminal liability for negligence is convenien tly explained
     in that w a y . If A has caused the death o f B by alleged negligence.
184
o f° Q a s h fc rn \..C .           Reg. v. Adomako (H .L .(E .))                       |1995|
           then, in order to establish civil liability, the plaintiff must prove (in
           a dditio n to pecuniary loss caused by the death) that A owed a duty
           to B to take care, that that duty was not discharged, and that the
           default caused the death o f B. T o convict A o f manslaughter, the
           pr osecution must prove the three things above m entioned and must
           satisfy the jury, in addition, that A's negligence a m o u n ted to a crime.
           In the civil action, i f it is proved that A fell short o f the standard o f
           reasonable care required by law. it matters not h o w far he fell short
           o f that standard. T h e extent o f his liability depends not on the degree
           o f negligence, but on the a m o u n t o f dam age done. In a criminal
           court, on the contrary, the a m o u n t and degree o f negligence are the
           determ in in g question. There must be m en s rea/'

Later he said, at pp. 11-12:
                 “ In explaining to juries the test wh ich they should apply to
           determ in e wh ether the negligence, in the particular case, am ounted or
           did not a m o u n t to a crime, judges have used m an y epithets, such as
           ‘c u lp a b le ,’ 'criminal.’ ‘gross.’ 'wicked,' 'clear,’ 'complete.' But.
           whate ver epithet be used and whether an epithet be used or not. in
           or der to establish criminal liability the facts must be such that, in the
           o p in io n o f the jury, the negligence o f the accused went beyond a mere
           m atter o f c o m p e n s a t i o n between subjects and s h o w e d such disregard
           for the life and safety o f others as to a m o u n t to a crime against the
           state and c o n d u c t deserving punishment."

   After dealing with a number o f authorities Lord Hewart C.J. went on.
at pp. 12-13:
                 “T h e law as laid d o w n in these cases m ay be thus summarised: If
           a person holds him s e lf out as possessing special skill and knowledge
           and he is consulte d, as possessing such skill and kn ow ledge, by or on
           b e h a l f o f a patient, he owes a duty to the patient to use due caution
           in un dertaking the treatment. If he accepts the responsibility and
           und ertak es the treatment and the patient submits to his direction and
           treat ment ac cordingly, he owes a duty to the patient to use diligence,
           care, know le d ge , skill and caution in adm in isterin g the treatment. N o
           contractual relation is necessary, nor is it necessary that the service
           be rendered for reward. It is for the judge to direct the jury what
           standard to apply and for the jury to say wh ether that standard has
           been reached. T h e jury should not exact the highest, or a very high,
           standard, nor s h o u ld they be content with a very low standard. The
           law requires a fair and reasonable standard o f care and competence.
           T h is standard m u s t be reached in all the matters above mentioned.
           If the patie nt’s death has been caused by the defendant's indolence or
           carelessness, it will not avail to s h o w that he had sufficient knowledge:
           nor will it avail to prove that he was diligent in attendance, if the
           patient has been killed by his gross ignorance and unskilfulness. N o
           further o bservation need be m ade with regard to cases where the
           death is alleged to have been caused by i n d o len ce or carelessness. As
           regards cases where incompetcnce is alleged, it is only necessary to
           say that the unqualified practitioner cannot claim to be measured by
                                                                                       185
    1A C                           Reg. v. A domako (H .L .(E .))             »r a"shV/n LX’
           any lower standard than that wh ich is applied to a qualified man. As
           regards cases o f alleged recklessness, juries are likely to distinguish
           between the qualified and the unqualified man. There m ay be
           recklessness in und ertaking the treatment and recklessness in the
           c onduct o f it. It is, no doub t, conceivable that a qualified m an may­
           be held liable for recklessly undertaking a case which he knew, or
           should have k n o w n , to be beyond his powers, or for m aking his
B          patient the subject o f reckless experiment. Such cases are likely to be
           rare. In the case o f the quack, where the treatment has been proved
           to be incom petent and to have caused the patient's death, juries are
           not likely to hesitate in finding liability on the ground that the
           defendant und ertook, and contin ued to treat, a case involving the
           gravest risk to his patient, w hen he knew he was not competent to
C          deal with it. or w ou ld have k n o w n if he had paid any proper regard
           to the life and safety o f his patient."
                "The foregoing observations deal with civil liability. T o support
           an indictment for manslaughter the prosecution must prove the
           matters necessary to establish civil liability (except pecuniary loss),
           and. in addition, must satisfy the jury that the negligence or
           inc ompetence o f the ac cused went beyond a mere matter of
D          c o m p en sa tio n and s howed such disregard for the life and safety of
           others as to a m o u n t to a crime against the state and conduct deserving
           punishment."

         N e x t I turn to A n drew s v. D ire cto r o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C.
    576 which was a case o f manslaughter through the dangerous driving o f a
    m o to r car. In a spe ech with wh ich all the other members o f this House
    w h o sat agreed. Lord Atkin said, at pp. 581-582:
            " o f all crimes man slaugh ter appears to afford most difficulties of
            definition, for it concerns hom ic ide in s o m any and so varying
            conditions. F r om the early days when any ho m icide involved penalty
            the law has gradually evolve d ‘through successive differentiations and
            integrations' until it recognises murder on the one hand, based
            mainly, though not exclusively, on an intention to kill, and
            m anslaughter on the other hand, based mainly, though not exclusively,
            on the absence o f intention to kill but with the presence o f an element
            o f ‘un lawfuln ess’ which is the elusive factor. In the present case it is
            only necessary to consider manslaughter from the point o f view o f an
            unintentional killing caused by negligence, that is, the om issio n o f a
            duty to take care. 1 do not propose to discuss the de velo pment o f
            this branch o f the subject as treated in the successive treatises o f
            C ok e. Hale, Foster and East and in the j udgm en ts o f the courts to be
            found either in directions to juries by individual judges or in the more
            considered p r on ou n ce m e n ts o f the b od y o f judges which preceded the
            formal Court o f Crow n Cas es Reserved. Expressions will be found
            which indicate that to cause death by any lack o f due care will
H
           .am ount to manslaughter: but as manners softened and the law
            be came more h um ane a narrower criterion appeared. After all,
            manslaughter is a felony, and was capital, and men shrank from
            attaching the serious con s e q u e n c e s o f a conviction for felony to
1 8 6

o f >ciashfern\..c.            Reg- v- Adom ako (H .L .(E .))                  119951
        results produced by mere inadvertence. The stricter view became
        apparent in prosecutions o f medical men or men who professed
        m edical or surgical skill for manslaughter by reason o f negligence. A s
        an instance I will cite R ex v. W illiamson (1807) 3 C. & P. 635 where
        a man w h o practised as an accoucheur, ow ing to a mistake in his
        o bservation o f the actual sym p tom s, inflicted on a patient terrible
        injuries from which she died. ‘T o substantiate that charge'— namely,
        m ansla ugh te r— Lord Ellenborough said, ‘the prisoner must have been
        guilty o f criminal misconduct, arising either from the grossest
        ignorance or the m ost criminal inattention.' Th e word ‘criminal’ in
        any attempt to define a crime is perhaps not the most helpful: but it
        is plain that the Lord C h ie f Justice meant to indicate to the jury a
        high degree o f negligence. So at a much later date in Rex v. Batem an,
         19 C r .A p p .R . 8 a charge o f manslaughter was made against a
        qualified medical practitioner in similar circumstances to those o f
         W illiam son's ca s e.”

     Lord A tkin then referred to the j udgm en t o f Lord Hewart C.J. from
w h ic h I have already quoted and went on. at p. 583:
         "H ere again I think with respect that the expressions used are not.
         indeed they were probably not intended to be, a precise definition o f
         the crime. I do not m yself find the c on n otation s o f mens rea helpful
         in distinguishing between degrees o f negligence, nor do the ideas o f
         crime and punishment in themselves carry a jury much further in
         decid in g whether in a particular case the degree o f negligence shown
         is a crime and deserves punishment. But the substance o f the judgment
         is m ost valuable, and in my o p inion is correct. In practice it has
        generally been adopt ed by judges in charging juries in all cases o f
        m ansla ugh te r by negligence, whether in driving vehicles or otherwise.
        T h e principle to be observed is that cases o f manslaughter in driving
         m o to r cars are but instances o f a general rule applicable to all charges
        o f h o m ic ide by negligence. Simple lack o f care such as will constitute
        civil liability is not enough: for purposes o f the criminal law there are
        degr ees o f negligence: and a very high degree o f negligence is required
        to be proved before the felony is established. Probably o f all the
        epithets that can be applied ’reckless' m ost nearly covers the case. It
        is difficult to visualise a case o f death caused by reckless driving in
        the c o n n o t a tio n o f that term in ordinary speech which would not
        justify a conviction for manslaughter: but it is probably not all-
        em b racing. for ’reckless" suggests an indifference to risk whereas the
        accused m a y have appreciated the risk and intended to avoid it and
        yet s h o w n such a high degree o f negligence in the means adopted to
        a v o id the risk as w o u ld justify a conviction. If the principle o f
        B atem an 's case. 19 C r .A p p .R . S is observed it will appear that the
        law o f manslaughter has not changed by the introduction o f m otor
        vehicles o n the road. D eath caused by their negligent driving, though
        unh appily much m ore frequent, is to be treated in law as death caused
        by any other form o f negligence: and juries should be directed
        accordingly."
                                                                                 187
1 A.C.                       Reg. v. Adomuko (H.L.(E.))                of aashr',aiLcy
     In my o p i n i o n the law as stated in these two authorities is satisfactory
as providin g a proper basis for describing the crime o f involuntary
m anslaughter. Since the decision in A n drew s was a decision o f your
Lordships’ H o u s e , it remains the m o s t authoritative statement o f the
present law w h ic h I have been able to find and although its relationship
to Reg. v. S e y m o u r [1983] 2 A.C. 493 is a matter to which I shall have to
return, it is a decision which has not been departed from. On this basis
in my o p i n i o n the ordinary principles o f the law o f negligence apply to
ascertain w h eth e r or not the defen dant has been in breach o f a duty o f
care tow ards the victim w h o has died. If such breach o f duty is established
the next q u e s t io n is whether that breach o f duty caused the death o f the
victim. If s o , the jury must go on to consid er whether that breach o f duty
s h ould be characterised as gross negligence and therefore as a crime. This
will d e p e n d o n the seriousness o f the breach o f duty committed by the
defendant in all the circumstances in wh ich the defendant was placed
when it occurred. The jury will have to consider whether the extent to
which the d e fen dant's conduct departed from the proper standard o f care
incum bent u p o n him. involving as it must have d o n e a risk o f death to
the patient, w as such that it shou ld be ju d ge d criminal.
     It is true that to a certain extent this involves an element o f circularity,
 but in this branch o f the law I d o not believe that is fatal to its being
correct as a test o f how far c onduct must depart from accepted standards
to be characterised as criminal. This is necessarily a question o f degree
and an atte m pt to specify that degree m ore closely is I think likely to
achieve only a spurious precision. The essence o f the matter which is
supremely a jury question is wh ether having regard to the risk o f death
 involved, the c on d u c t o f the defen dant was so bad in all the circumstances
as to a m o u n t in their judgm en t to a criminal act or omission.
     M y Lords, the view which I have stated o f the correct basis in law for
the crime o f in volu nta ry man slaugh ter accords I consid er with the criteria
stated by c o u n s e l althou gh I have not reached the degree o f precision in
definition w h ic h he required, but in my op in io n it has been reached so far
as practicable and with a result which leaves the matter properly stated
 for a jury's determ in ation .
     M y Lords, in my view the law as stated in Reg. r. Seym ou r [1983]
 2 A .C . 493 s h o u ld no longer apply since the underlying statutory
 provisions o n w h ic h it rested have n o w been repealed by the R oad Traffic
 Act 1991. It m a y be that cases o f involuntary m o to r manslaughter will as
 a result b e c o m e rare but I con sid er it unsatisfactory that there should be
 any e x c e p ti o n to the generality o f the statement which I have made, since
such e x c e p tio n , in my view, gives rise to unnecessary complexity. For
 exam ple in K o n g Cheuk Kwun r. The Oueen (1985) 82 C r.A pp.R . 18 it
 w ou ld give rise to unnecessary differences between the law applicable to
 those navigating vessels and the l o o k o u t s on the vessels.
      I c o n s id e r it perfectly appropriate that the w ord “ reckless" should be
 used in ca s es o f involuntary m anslaughter, but as Lord Atkin put it "in
 the ordin ar y c o n n o t a ti o n o f that word." Examples in which this was
 don e, to m y m in d, with com p le te accuracy are Reg. w Stone [1977] Q.B.
 354 and Reg. r. W est London Coroner. Ex p a r te G ray [1988] Q.B. 467.
188
o m a“      yL.c.                 Reg.   V.   Adom ako (H .L .(E .))                  119951
     In m y o p in io n it is quite unnecessary in the context o f gross negligence
to give the detailed directions with regard to the m ean in g o f the word
“ reck less” as sociated with Reg. v. Law rence [1982] A .C . 510. The decision
o f the Court o f Appeal (Criminal D ivision) in the other cases with which
they were concern ed at the same time as they heard the appeal in this case
indicates that the circumstances in which involuntary manslaughter has to
be c o n sid ered m ay m ake the s om e w h at elaborate and rather rigid
directions inappropriate. I entirely agree with the view that the
circum stances to which a charge o f involuntary manslaughter m ay apply
are so various that it is unwise to attempt to categorise or detail specimen
directions. F o r my part I wou ld not wish to g o beyond the description o f
the basis in law which I have already given.
     In m y view the su m m in g up o f the judge in the present case was a
m o d e l o f clarity in analysis o f the facts and in setting out the law in a
m anner which was readily comprehensible by the jury. The sum ming up
was criticised in respect o f the inclusion o f the following passage:
         “O f course you will understand it is not for every hum ble man o f the
         profession to have all that great skill o f the great men in Harley
         Street but. on the other hand, they are not allowed to practise
         m ed ic in e in this country unless they have acquired a certain am ount
         o f skill. T h ey are boun d to s h o w a reasonable a m o u n t o f skill
         accord in g to the circumstances o f the case, and y o u have to judge
         them on the basis that they are skilled men. but not necessarily so
         skilled as m ore skilful men in the profession, and you can only
         c onvict them criminally if, in your judgm en t, they fall below the
         standard o f skill which is the least qualification which any doctor
         s h o u l d have. Y o u should only convict a doctor o f causing a death
         by negligence if y o u think he did s om e th in g which no reasonably
         skilled d o c t o r should have done."

      T h e criticism was particularly o f the latter part o f this quotation in
that it was o p e n to the meaning that if the defendant did what no
reason ably skilled doctor should have d o n e it was open to the jury to
c o n v ic t him o f causing death by negligence. Strictly speaking this passage
is c o n c e rn ed with the statement o f a necessary condition for a conviction
by preve nting a conviction unless that con d ition is satisfied. It is incorrect
to treat it as stating a sufficient c ondition for conviction. In any event 1
c onsid er that this passage in the context was m akin g the point forcefully
that the de fendant in this case was not to be judged by the standard o f
more skilled doctors but by the standard o f a reasonably comp etent
doctor. T here were m a n y other passages in the s u m m in g up which
e m p h asise d the need for a high degree o f negligence if the jury were to
c onvict and read in that context I consider that the su m m in g up cannot
be faulted.
      F o r these reasons I am o f the o p inion that this appeal should be
dismissed and that the certified question s h ould be answered by saying:
         “ In cases o f manslaughter by criminal negligence involving a breach
         o f duty, it is a sufficient direction to the jury to adopt the gross
         n eglig ence test set out by the Court o f Appeal in the present case
         fo ll o w i n g R e x r. B atem an, 19 C r .A p p .R . 8 and A ndrew s r. D irector
|                                                                                          189
        1 A.C.                       Reg. v. Adomako   (H .L .(E .))           of   c&w™
I ^          o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C . 576 and that it is not necessary to
j            refer to the definition o f recklessness in Reg. »\ Law rence [1982] A.C.
1            510, although it is perfectly open to the trial j u d g e to use the word
j            ‘reckless’ in its ordinary mea nin g as part o f his exposition o f the law
             if he deems it appropriate in the circumstances o f the particular case.”

              We have been referred to the C onsu ltation Paper by the Law
    B    C o m m is s io n on Criminal Law. Involuntary M ansla u ghte r (1994) (Law
         C om . N o . 135). and w e have also been referred to a number o f standard
         textbooks. I have also had the opportunity o f considering the note on
         Reg. v. P rentice by Sir John Sm ith [1994] Crim.L .R. 292 since the hearing
         was comple ted . While I have not referred to these in detail 1 have derived
         considerable help in se ekin g to formulate my view as a result o f studying
,   q   them.
j             I have reached the sam e c onclu sion on the basic law to be applied in
!        this case as did the Court o f Appeal. Personally I w o u ld not wish to state
         the law m ore elaborately than I have done. In particular I think it is
         difficult to take expressions used in particular cases out o f the context o f
         the cases in which they were used and enunciate them as if applying
         generally. This can I think lead to ambiguity and perhaps unnecessary
         c omplexity. The task o f trial judges in setting out for the jury the issues
         o f fact and the relevant law in cases o f this class is a difficult and
         d e m a n d in g one. 1 believe that the supreme test that s hould be satisfied in
         such directions is that they are comprehensible to an ordinary member o f
         the public w h o is called to sit on a jury and w h o has no particular prior
         acquaintance with the law. T o m ake it obligatory on trial judges to give
    E   directions in law wh ich are so elaborate that the ordinary mem ber o f the
         jury will have great difficulty in following them, and even greater difficulty
         in retaining them in his m e m o r y for the purpose o f application in the jury
         room , is no service to the cause o f justice. Th e experienced counsel who
         assisted y o u r Lordships in this appeal indicated that as a practical matter
         there was a danger in over elabora tion o f definition o f the word “reckless."
    F   While therefore I have said in my view it is perfectly open to a trial judge
         to use the word “ reckless" i f it appears appropriate in the circumstances
         o f a particular case as indicating the extent to which a defendant's conduct
         must deviate from that o f a proper standard o f care, I do not think it
         right to require that this s h o u ld be done and certainly not right that it
         should incorporate the full detail required in Lawrence.
    G
            L o r d KiiiTH o f K i n k h l . M y Lords, for the reasons given in the
         speech o f m y noble and learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, which 1 have
         read in draft and with which I agree. I. too, w o u ld dismiss the appeal and
         answer the certified q uestio n as he has proposed.

    H
             L o r d G okk oi ; Cim-vftH-Y. M y Lords, for the reasons given in the
         speech o f my noble and learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, which 1 have
         read in draft and with w h ic h I agree. I, too, w o u ld dismiss the appeal and
         answer the certified q u e s t io n as he has proposed.
190
                                            Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                                                 |1995j
      Lord                          M y Lords, for the reasons given in the
                B row n e-W ilk in son .                                                                                          ^
speech o f m y noble and learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, which I have
read in draft and with which I agree, I, too, w o u l d dismiss the appeal and
an sw er the certified question as he has proposed .

      Lord           M y Lords, I have had the advantage o f reading in
                 W oolf.
draft the speech o f my noble and learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, and
with w hich I agree. I, too, w o u ld dismiss the appeal and answer the                                                           ®
certified question as he has proposed.

                                                                                       Appeal dismissed.
                                                                                       No order as to costs.

   Solicitors:              Bindman            &       Partners;              Crown        Prosecution             Service        q
Headquarters.

                                                                                                           J. A. G.



                                                                                                                                  D




                                                   [pr iv y c o u n c i l ]                                                       E

R E D S E A I N S U R A N C E CO. L T D . .                               .        .        .        .       A p p ellan t
                                                            AND
B O U Y G U E S S.A. a n d O t h e r s .................................................................. R e s p o n d e n t s

                   [ap peal from t h e c o u r t o f a p p ea l o f h o n g kong]                                                 F

1994      Jan. 24, 25. 26:                                                           Lord K eith o f Kinkel.
          July 18                                                    Lord S lyn n o f H ad le y. Lord W oolf,
                                                                 Lord Lloyd o f Berwick and Lord N o l a n

                   C on flict o f L a w s — T o rt — C h oice o f l a w — Insurance p o lic y covering
                         building p r o je c t a b r o a d Insurer's c o u n te rc la im --In su rer seeking to
                                                             —                                                                    G
                         r e ly on d irect cau se o f a c tio n p e r m is s ib le under le x loci delicti but
                         n o t b y le x f o r i — W h e th er le x loci d e lic ti e x c lu s iv e ly applicable to
                         insurer 's claim

                                T h e plaintiffs b r o u g h t an a c tio n in H o n g K o n g against the
                          d e f e n d a n t , an insu r an c e c o m p a n y i n c o r p o r a t e d in H o n g K ong
                          but with its head office in Saud i A r a b ia , claim in g to be
                          i n de m n if ie d u nd er an insurance p olic y issued by the defen dant                               H
                          for los.s and e x p e n s e incurred in relation to a bu ildin g project in
                          S au d i A rabia. By its c o u n t e r c l a im a g a in s t P .C .G .. a consortium
                          w h ic h c o m p r i s e d 10 o f the plaintiffs, the d e f e n d a n t alleged that
                          P.C'.G. had su p p lie d faulty precast c o n c r e t e prime building units
                             STANLEY IVA N SM ITH                                 387

decided first was decided second and point B which should have been decided
second was decided first; these considerations nevertheless hold good. For those
reasons it seems to us the submissions o f Mr. Blom-Cooper do not succeed and,
accordingly, this application is dismissed.
  W e grant leave to appeal, treating the hearing as the appeal. T he appeal is
dismissed.
                                                             A pp eal dismissed.

   July 6. The Court refused leave to appeal to the H ouse o f Lords; but certified
under section 33 (2) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 that the following points of
law o f general public importance were involved in the decision, i.e. “ (a) whether
things said by a prisoner in custody on a charge o f murder to a psychiatrist


•
    paring a report for the court o f trial are admissible when neither insanity nor
    linished responsibility is in issue; and (b) whether, when the defendant alleges
    that he committed the act constituting an indictable offence while he was asleep,
any issue is thereby raised before the jury upon which expert psychiatric testimony
can be admitted.”

  October 11. The Appeal Committee refused the appellant’s petition for leave to
appeal to the House o f Lords.

  Solicitors: Registrar o f Criminal Appeals for the appellant. Director o f Public
Prosecutions for the Crown.




                                      B EFO RE


0        THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE, LORD JUSTICE SHAW
                  a n d M r . JUSTICE M cNEILL




                        PHILIP THOMAS DYTHAM

                                July 9, 18, 1979

Misconduct of Officer of Justice— Ingredients of Offence— Culpability of Such
    Degree that Conduct 1m p u g red Calculated to Injure Public Interest so as
    to Call for Condemnation and Punishment— Question of Fact fo r Jury.

       For the offence o f misconduct of an officer o f justice to be established it
    must be proved that the conduct in question, though not restricted to
    corruption or dishonesty, must be o f such a degree as to be calculated to
    injure the public interest so as to call for condemnation and punishment.
388                                  CO U RT OF APPEAL

      Whether such a situation is revealed by the evidence is a matter for the
      jury to decide.
          W y a t t (1705) 1 Salk. 380 and ruling o f Widgery J. in L l e w e l l y n ' - J o n e s
      a n d L o u g h e r (1966) 51 Cr.App.R. 4, 6, 7. applied.
         The appellant, a police constable in uniform, witnessed one S being
      ejected by a bouncer from a club early one morning. A fight ensued in which
      S was involved with three others and he was kicked to death. The appellant
      in no way intervened but went off. He was charged with misconduct of an
      officer of justice in that being present and a witness to a criminal offence,
      namely, a violent assault upon S by three others, he deliberately failed to
      carry out his duty as a police constable by wilfully omitting to take any
      steps to preserve the Q u een ’s Peace or to protect S or to arrest or otherwise
      bring to justice his assailants.
         It was contended at his trial that the indictment as charged disclosed
      no offence known to the law. The trial judge overruled that submission
      and the jury were directed that the crucial question for their consideration
      was whether the appellant had seen the attack upon the victim, S. If he had,
      they, the jury, could find him guilty o f the offence charged. The jury con­
      victed. On appeal, it not being suggested that the appellant could not have
      summoned or sought assistance to help the victim or arrest his assailants.
         Held, dismissing the appeal, that the judge’s ruling was correct for the
      allegation made against the appellant was not o f mere non-feasance but o f
      deliberate failure and wilful neglect to do his duty as an officer o f justice, and
      on the facts the jury had com e to the right decision.
          [For misconduct o f an officer o f justice, see A r c h b o l d (40th ed.), para.
      3491.]

   Appeal against conviction.
   On October 10, 1978, at Liverpool Crown Court (Cantley J.) the appellant on
arraignment on an indictment charging misconduct o f an officer of justice pleaded
not guilty, and the trial was adjourned. On November 7, 1978, at Liverpool
Crown Court (Neill J.), counsel for the appellant raised a demurrer to the
indictment. After hearing legal argument the trial judge gave the following
judgment:
   N e i l l J.: In this case the defendant, Philip Thomas Dytham, is charged in
the indidctment which contains a statement o f offence as follows, “ Misconduct o f
an officer of justice contrary to common law.” When the matter was called on
for hearing before me this morning Mr. Wright, who appears for the defendant,
entered a plea of demurrer. The demurrer is in proper form in writing and is in
these terms. “ Philip Thom as Dytham says that the Court ought not to take
cognisance of the indictment against him because it does not charge an offence
known to the law.” W hen the matter was opened to me my attention was
very properly drawn by Mr. Wright to the well-known dictum o f Lord Parker
C.J. in R. v. I n n e r L o n d o n Q u a r t e r S e s s i o n s , E x p arte M e t r o p o l i t a n
P o l i c e C o m r . (1969) 54 Cr.App.R. 49, 35; [1970] 2 Q.B. 80, 85 where he said:
 “ I would add that I hope that now demurrer in criminal cases will be allowed to
die naturally.” Mr. Wright told me, however, that he thought that on the facts
o f this case demurrer was a more suitable form o f procedure than a motion to
 quash the indictment.
                             PH ILIP THOMAS DYTHAM                                      389

    As the matter developed Mr. Wright said he had no particular worry as to
whether I dealt with it on demurrer or as a motion to quash the indictment,
but it is formally before the Court as a demurrer. But I do not think as it
comes before me in that way I can do anything else other than determine the
demurrer, though I have not seen anything in the case that leads me to think
that exactly the same arguments could not have been put before me on a
motion to quash the indictment. Although I deal with it as a plea o f demurrer,
I do not want in any way to be seen to be encouraging the use o f demurrer
in circumstances of this kind.
     I come now to deal with the merits. Mr. Wright developed his argument
under two main headings. H e said that whatever the position may have been
in the eighteenth century, at the present time the offence alleged in the indictment
is not one of which the Court will take cognisance o f and is not known to the law;
any o f the old authorities in these matters have been superseded by the provisions
of t^yP olice Act, and in particular the Police A ct 1964. His second argument was
 th a t^ ^ c o n d u c t by a police constable, if it exists at all, is o f a wider genus o f
misconduct by public officials. H e said that in all the cases since the eighteenth
 :entury it has been an essential element that there should be some improper
 conduct or dishonest motive. I was referred, therefore, to the terms of the
  ndictment. I have already recited the statement o f the offence. The particulars
 Df the offence allege that on March 18, 1977, the accused misconducted himself
 whilst acting as an officer of justice in that he, being present and witness to a
 :riminal offence, apparently a violent assault upon one Peter Malcolm Stubbs
 oy three others, deliberately failed to carry out his duty as a police constable by
  ■vilfully omitting to take any steps to preserve the Queen’s Peace or to protect
   he person, Peter Malcolm Stubbs, or to arrest or otherwise bring to justice Peter
  Vlalcolm Stubbs’s assailants.
     It is central to Mr. Wright’s submissions and not I think in any way disputed
  ;y Mr. Russell on behalf o f the Crown— that those particulars o f the offence
  instituted a failure to do something and not the doing o f something improperly.
     Mr. Wright developed his argument by referring me to the position in the
  hirteenth century and o f the way in which the control o f police duties in local
   ommunities was supervised by the justices in eyre, in the course o f his submissions
  ie referred me to passages in Pollock and Maitland.
     He turned to more recent history and referred me to the enactments o f hue
   n d ^ ^ which imposed obligations on the hundreds and also on constables with
  egai^ffo the pursuit o f criminals. H e drew attention to the fact that C r o u t h e r ’s
   ase (1599) Cro.Eliz. 654, was a case which involved a breach of one o f these
  tatutes o f hue and cry and that the duty imposed on the constable was a duty
   nder statute.
    He then came to deal with the important decision o f W i a t (1705) 11 Mod.Rep.
  3, 88 E.R. 880, a case decided in 1705. That was a case where the allegation
  lainst the accused involved a police constable and the allegation was that he
  ad failed to return a levy, which was a penalty.
    In the course of his address this afternoon, Mr. Wright referred me to
   nother report of this case sub nom. W y a t (or W y a t t ) other than the one I
   as referred to initially. The first reference being to the report in 1 Salkeld's
   eports 380. The further report is a fuller report and is in Fortescue’s Reports,
   : p. 127.
390                              CO U R T O F APPEAL

    In his submissions Mr. Wright pointed out that although in the course of the
judgment reference was made to the duties o f a police constable at common law
and o f the fact that the failure to return a warrant to levy a penalty was a
 failure at com m on law, the matter was governed by an Act of Parliament which
 related to deer-stealing and it was in connection with that offence that the justices
had instructed him to return the warrant. But the main submission which
 Mr. Wright put forward was this: whatever the position may have been in the
eighteenth century, the duties and the penalties which existed at that time have
been superseded by the provisions o f the Police Acts and in particular by the
provisions o f the Police Act 1964. H e referred me to section 1 o f the Police Act.
to section 18 and in particular section 33. I was also referred to Schedule 2 to
that Act.
    It seems to me that there is the clear authority o f the decision of Wyat
{supra) that a neglect by a police constable to carry out duties imposed on him
at com m on law is an offence at common law. I am satisfied on the material
that has been put before me and on the way the matter has been presented by
Mr. Russell on behalf o f the Crown, that there did exist, in the eighteenth century
at any rate, an offence o f failure to comply with or to carry out the duties of
a constable and that was an indictable offence. I turn therefore, to what I have
described as the main submission by Mr. Wright. I have considered the terms
o f the Police A ct 1964, and in particular the terms o f Schedule 2 to that Act.
which are set out in the form o f declaration which a police constable is required
to make pursuant to section 18 o f the Act. It is in these terms, “ I do solemnly
and sincerely declare and affirm that I will well and truly serve Our Sovereign
t.ady the Queen in the office o f constable without favour or affection, malice or
ill will; and that I will to the best o f my power cause the peace to be kept and
preserved, and prevent all offences against the persons and properties of Her
Majesty’s subjects; and that while I continue to hold the said office I will to
the best o f my skill and knowledge discharge all the duties thereof faithfully
according to law.”
   It is true that in section 33 (2) (h) there is a provision whereby the Secretary of
State is empowered to make provision with respect to the duties which are or
are not to be enforced by members o f the police force, but I have not been referred
to any regulations which in any way can be taken to supplant the duties which
are enshrined or, as Mr. Wright described it, encapsulated in the formal declara­
tion in Schedule 2. I am satisfied that the wording in Schedule 2 is in fact a
statement o f the duties o f a police constable at common law, and I can see
nothing in the Police A ct which supplants those common law duties, nor any­
thing in it which provides that the common law duties o f a police constable have
been affected or abrogated by anything laid down by statute. M r. Wright urged
upon me, in an attractive argument, if I may say so, that a police officer when
he is enlisted into the police force is encouraged to join, or may be e n c o u r a g e d
to join, by the fact that he would be amenable to a discipline code. Mr. Wright
referred to the advantages and privileges which a police officer can enjoy by
virtue o f the protections in regard to discipline matters which he has under the
 1965 Regulations. However, notwithstanding this argument, and the attractive
 way in which it was presented, I can see nothing which would entitle m e to say
that merely because a discipline code is provided by regulations made under
 statute that the common law duties o f a police constable are in any way taken
                                    PH ILIP THOM AS DYTHAM                                                    391

away, nor can 1 see that the power o f the courts to deal with a breach o f that
common law duty by way of indictment is affected or excluded.
  Mr. Russell on behalf of the Crown, referred me to the case o f H a l l [1891]
J Q.B. 747; 17 Cox C.C. 278. It seems clear from that decision of Charles J.
that an indictment will only be excluded where a statute defines the duties imposed
on the individual, and makes it an offence to be in breach o f any of these
duties and, in express terms, provides a penalty for breach o f each or any o f those
duties. In other words one has to find in the statute a complete code dealing
both with the duty and the breach, and the penalties prescribed. There is nothing
in the Police Act, as I see it, which brings the matter within that principle, and
therefore on the first argument put forward by Mr. Wright, I ami not satisfied
that the old law has been changed by the Police Act 1964, in the way he suggested.
   M r . W r i g h t’s se c o n d a r g u m e n t w as to th e effect t h a t if o n e e x a m in e s th e
cases d ealin g w ith th e m i s c o n d u c t o f p u b lic officials s in c e t h e e a rly p a r t o f th e
eighteenth c e n tu ry , th e y all h a v e o n e c o m m o n e le m e n t, n a m e ly the r e q u ire m e n t
th a t th e p e rs o n c h a rg e d w ith th e o ffen ce sh o u ld h a v e b e e n g u ilty o f som e im -
p n ^ ^ r o r c o r r u p t o r d ish o n e st m o tiv e . H e r e f e r r e d m e in th e course o f his
             a r g u m e n t t o cases d e c id e d a t v a rio u s p e rio d s b e g i n n in g w ith the case o f
W i l l i a m s a n d D a v i s (1762) 3 B u rr. 1317. I m e a n n o d is re s p e c t to his a r g u m e n t
if I d o n o t g o t h r o u g h th e cases in d etail. It is p e r f e c tl y t r u e th a t these cases
do in fact h a v e th is c o m m o n th e m e , t h a t th e re w a s s o m e c o r r u p t m o tiv e on th e
p a rt o f th e accu sed . T h e cases in v o lv e d n o t o n ly a ju s tic e o f th e peace, b u t also
a cco u n ta n ts in th e case o f B e m b r i d g e (1783) 3 D o u g . K .B . 327, a n d in the m o s t
recent case in w h ich this m a tte r c a m e to b e d e c id e d , in th e case o f L l e w e l l y n -
J o n e s (1966) 51 Cr.App.R. 4; [1968] 1 Q.B. 429, a c o u n t y c o u r t registrar.
     In my judgment, however, the fallacy in Mr. Wright’s argument on this
 second point is this, that these cases to which he referred me are only part
 of a larger class. In my judgment a public officer, and an officer o f justice
 occupying a position o f a police constable can be amenable to the criminal law
 in circumstances where there is no element o f corruption or dishonesty.
     In the course o f the argument before Widgery J., as he then was, in L l e w e l l y n -
 J o n e s (1966) 51 Cr.App.R. 4, 6, reference was made by Mr. Sebag Shaw to
 article 145, in Stephen’s Digest of Criminal L a w (9th ed.), p. 112. I see nothing
either in the observations made in the course o f the argument or in the judgment o f
 Widgery J. that throws any doubt on the existence of that separate category of
neglect o f an official duty by a police constable. It is true that in the other cases
which were referred to there was this element o f corruption and dishonesty, but
I S ^kiothing in that decision or anything that was said in the Court of Appeal
           case which throws doubt in general on the statement which was referred
to and was cited from article 145. In addition to that there is the authority of
two leading textbooks in this branch o f law: see A rch b o ld (40th ed.), paragraph
3491, and Russell on Crime (12th ed.), p. 366.
    I have come to the conclusion that notwithstanding the arguments put forward
by Mr. Wright, this indictment does disclose an offence known to the Law, and
I so rule.
    The trial then proceeded and on November 9 the appellant was convicted.
He was fined £150, payable in four months, or three m onths’ imprisonment in
default, and he was ordered to pay £50 towards tiie legal aid costs o f his defence.
    The following facts are taken from the judgment.
    The appellant was a police constable in Lancashire. On March 17, 1977, at
392                                    C O U R T OF APPEAL

about 1 o ’clock in the morning he was on duty in uniform and was standing by
a hot dog stall in D uke Street, St. Helens. A Mr. Wincke was within the stall
and a Mr. Sothera was by it. S om e 30 yards away was the entrance to Cindy’s
Club. A man named Stubbs was ejected from the club by a bouncer. A fight
ensued in which a number o f men joined. There arose cries and screams and
other indications o f great violence. Mr. Stubbs became the object of a murderous
assault. He was beaten and kicked to death in the gutter outside the club. All
this was audible and visible to the three men at the hot dog stall. At no stage
did the appellant make any m ove to intervene or any attempt to quell the disturb­
ance or to stop the attack on the victim. When the hubbub had died down he
adjusted his helmet and drove away. According to the other two at the hot dog
stall, he said that he was due off and was going off.
   His ground of appeal was that the indictment disclosed no offence known to
the law. The appeal was argued on July 9, 1979, when the following cases were
cited in argument in addition to those referred to in the judgment: B u r r o n
(1820) 3 B. & Aid. 432; D a v i e (1781) 2 Burr. 371; E x p a r t e F e n t i m a n (1834) 3
A. & E. 127; H a l l [1891] 1 Q.B. 747 and W i l l i a m s a n d D a v i s (1767) 3 Burr.
1317 and C r o u t h e r ’s case (1599) Cro.Eliz. 654.
   G . H . W r i g h t , Q .C . and D . G . M a d d i s o n * for the appellant. T. P. R u s s e l l, Q.C.
and H . H . A n d r e w * for the Crown.
                                                                                 C u r . a dv . vu lt.

   July 18. T h e L o r d C h i e f J u s t i c e : The judgment I am about to read is the
judgment o f the Court prepared by Shaw L.J.
    [T h e learned Lord Chief Justice stated the facts and continued: ]
   The appellant’s conduct was brought to the notice of the police authority. As
a result he appeared on October 10, 1978, at the Crown Court at Liverpool to
answer an indictment which was in these terms: “ The charge against you is one
o f misconduct of an officer o f justice in that you . . . misconducted yourself whilst
acting as an officer o f justice in that you being present and a witness to a criminal
offence namely a violent assault upon one . . . Stubbs by three others deliberately
failed to carry out your duty as a police constable by wiifully omitting to take any
steps to preserve the Queen’s Peace or to protect the person o f the said . . .
Stubbs or to arrest or otherwise bring to justice (his) assailants.”
    On arraignment the appellant pleaded not guilty and the trial was adjourned
 to November 7. On that day before the jury was empanelled counsel for the
 appellant, or defendant, o f course, as he was then, took an objection to the
indictment by way o f demurrer. T he burden o f that objection was that the indict­
ment as laid disclosed no offence known to the law. Neill J. ruled against
 the objection and the trial proceeded. The defence on the facts was that the
 appellant had observed nothing more than that a man was turned out of the club.
 It was common ground that in that situation his duty would not have required
 him to take any action. T h e jury were directed that the crucial question for their
 consideration was whether the defendant had seen the attack on the victim. If he
 had they could find him guilty of the offence charged in the indictment. The jury
 did return a verdict o f guilty. H ence this appeal which is confined to the matters
 o f law raised by the demurrer pleaded at the court o f trial.
     A t the outset o f his submissions in this Court counsel for the appellant con­

      * (Counsel did not appear below).
                                    PHILIP T H O M A S D YTHAM                                                  393

   ceded two matters. The first was that a police constable is a public officer. The
   second was that there does exist at com m on law an offence of misconduct in a
   public office.
      From that point the argument was within narrow limits though it ran deep
   into constitutional and jurisprudential history. The effect o f it was that not every
   failure to discharge a duty which devolved on a person as the holder of a public
   office gave rise to the common law offence of misconduct in that office. A s
   counsel for the appellant put it, non-feasance was not enough. There must be
   a malfeasance or at least a misfeasance involving an element of corruption.
   In support o f this contention a number o f cases were cited from eighteenth and
   nineteenth century reports. It is the fact that in nearly all o f them the miscon­
   duct asserted involved some corrupt taint; but this appears to have been an
   accident of circumstance and not a necessary incident o f the offence. Misconduct
   in a public office is more vividly exhibited where dishonesty is revealed as part
   j ^ h e dereliction o f duty. Indeed in som e cases the conduct impugned cannot be
  ^ l^ v n to have been misconduct unless it was done with a corrupt or oblique
    motive. This was the position for example in B e m b r i d g e (1783) 3 Doug. 327;
   and also in the modern case o f L l e w e l l y n - J o n e s and L o u g h e r (1966) 51
    Cr.App.R. 4. There the registrar o f a county court was charged in a count
    which alleged that he had made an order in relation to funds under his control
    “ in the expectation that he would gain personal advantage from the making of
    such order.”
       On a motion to quash the count as disclosing no offence known to the law I,
   as trial judge in the course of my ruling, made the following pronouncement.
   It is to be found in (1967) 51 Cr.App.R. at p. 6 and reads as follows: “ The
   authorities to which I have been referred 1 show that there is a variety o f ways
   in which the holder o f a public office may be indicted under this principle for
   misconduct or misbehaviour. It is clear that a culpable failure to exercise a
   public duty may, because the duty is a public one, lay the defaulter open to
   indictment for criminal offences, whereas, had he been working for a private
   employer, his default would have been no more than a civil liability. Even so,
   it is not easy to lay down with precision the exact limits of the kind of mis­
   conduct or misbehaviour which can result in an indictment under this rule. I
  have formed a clear view, but stated in hypothetical terms, that if the registrar
  of a county court when exercising his power to order payment out of court o f
■       iey held on behalf of a beneficiary were to m ake an order in expectation
  of some personal benefit which he hoped to obtain and in circumstances where,
  had it not been for the personal benefit, he would not have made the order, that
  would be an example of misconduct in a public duty sufficient to come within
  this rule. The reason why I feel that that would com e within the rule is because
  in that hypothetical case a public officer would be distorting the course of justice
  to meet his own personal needs and, in my opinion, it would be sufficient to justify
  a conviction if it could be shown that he had made such an order with intent
  to obtain personal benefit for himself and in circumstances in which there were

   1 i.e. B em bridge (1783) 3 D oug. 327; H u d s o n (1956) 40 C r .A p p .R . 55; [1956] 2           Q .B . 252;
M arshall    (1855) 4 E . & B. 475; S h a w v . D .P .P . (1961) 45 C r .A p p .R . 113; [1962]         A .C . 220;
Russell on C rim e (I2th ed.), C h a p . 24, p p . 361 e t s e q .: A r c h b o ld 's Crim inal         Pleading,
Evidence a n d Practice (35th ed.), p a ra . 3334; S te p h e n 's D ig e s t o f the Crim inal L a w   (9th ed.),
p. 112, arts. 142-145.
394                             C O U R T OF APPEAL

 no grounds for supposing that he would not have made the order but for his
personal interest and expectation. On the other hand, I have reached an equally
 clear view that it is not enough to bring a county court registrar within the
principle merely to show that, when making an order which was within his powers
 and which he could m ake for perfectly proper motives, he knew that by a side
 wind, as it were, he was going to gain som e personal benefit. The mere fact
that he knows of his personal interest is, in my view, a very good ground for
his declining to exercise jurisdiction and for his arranging for someone else
such as the judge, to make an order for him. Everyone in judicial office knows
 how unwise it is to deal with a case in which personal interests are raised, but I
would not be prepared to say that it would be misconduct for this purpose for a
registrar to make a decision which did affect his personal interests, merely because
he knew that his interests were so involved, if the decision was made honestly and
in a genuine belief that it was a proper exercise o f his jurisdiction so far as the
beneficiaries and other persons concerned came into it. “ When one looks at the
terms o f count 1 as it n ow stands, it seems to me that it alleges no more than
knowledge on the part o f the defendant that his personal interest was involved.
For the reasons I have given, it is not enough to disclose an offence known to
the law and, if the matter rested there, that count and others to which similar
considerations apply would have to be quashed. On the other hand, it is not
difficult to amend count 1 so as to introduce the vital element to which I have
already referred and I am satisfied that such an amendment can be made without
injustice in the circumstances of this case.”
   So also in W yatt a case tried in 1705 and reported in (inter alia) (1705) 1
Salk. 380, it was held that “ where an officer ” (in that case a constable) “ neglects
a duty incumbent on him either by common law or statute, he is for his fault
indictable.” Counsel for the appellant contended that this was too wide a statement
of principle since it omitted any reference to corruption or fraud; but in Stephens
Digest o f th e Criminal L a w (9th ed.), art. 145 are to be found these words:
“ Every public officer com m its a misdemeanour who wilfully neglects to perform
any duty which he is bound either by com m on law or by statute to perform
provided that the discharge o f such duty is not attended with greater danger
than a man o f ordinary firmness and activity may be expected to encounter.”
   In support of this proposition W yatt {supra) is cited as well as B em br id ge
(1783) 3 Doug. 327 a judgment o f Lord Mansfield. The neglect must be wilful and
not merely inadvertent; and it must be culpable in the sense that it is without
reasonable excuse or justification.
   In the present case it was not suggested that the appellant could not have
summoned or sought assistance to help the victim or to arrest his assailants.
The charge as framed left this answer open to him. N ot surprisingly he did not
seek to avail himself o f it, for the facts spoke strongly against any such answer.
The allegation made was not o f mere non-feasance but of deliberate failure and
wilful neglect.
   This involves an elem ent o f culpability which is not restricted to corruption
or dishonesty but which must be o f such a degree that the misconduct impugned
is calculated to injure the public interest so as to call for condemnation and
punishment. Whether such a situation is revealed by the evidence is a matter
that a jury has to decide. It puts no heavier burden upon them than when in
more familiar contexts they are called upon to consider whether driving is
dangerous or a publication is obscene or a place o f public resort is a disorderly
                            PH IL IP TH OM A S D YTH A M                                 395

house. See Q uinn and B l o o m (1961) 45 Cr.App.R. 279, 286; [1962] 2 Q .B . 245.
The learned judge’s ruling was correct. The appeal is dismissed.
  Application for leave to appeal to H ouse of Lords adjourned.
  July 24. The Court of Appeal refused leave to appeal to the House o f Lords.

                                                                     A ppeal dismissed.

  Solicitors: Mace & Jones, Huyton, for the appellant. Director of Public
Prosecutions for the Crown.




                                         B E FO R E


L O R D J U S T IC E G E O F F R E Y L A N E , M r. J U S T IC E S W A N W IC K a n d
                           M r. J U S T I C E E A S T H A M




                              D A V ID JA M E S K O H N

                                  J u n e 2 7 , 2 8 , 1979

Theft— Employee Using C om p an y’s Cheques For Own Use When Bank Accounts
    Respectively Were in Credit, Overdrawn But Within the A greed Lim it and
    Overdrawn A b o v e the A greed Lim it— Whether Cheques Choses in A ction —
    Whether Appropriation— Whether Theft o f M on eys in Question— Theft A ct
    1968 (c. 60), ss. 1 (1), 4 (1), 6 (1) (2).
Theft—-Cheques— Employee Filling in C o m p a n y’s Cheques For Own Purposes—
    Whether Assuming Rights o f O wner— Whether T heft— Theft A c t 1968 (c. 60),
^ ^ s . 1 (1), 3 (6).

       By section 1 (1) of the Theft A ct 1968: “ A person is guilty o f theft if he
    dishonestly appropriates property belonging to another with the intention o f
   permanently depriving the other o f it; and ‘ t h ie f ’ and ‘ s t e a l’ shall be co n ­
    strued accordingly.”
       By section 3 (1): “ A ny assumption by a person o f the rights o f an owner
   amounts to an appropriation, and this includes, where he has com e by the
   property (innocently or not) without stealing it, any later assumption o f a right
   to it by keeping or dealing with it as owner.”
      By section 4 (]): “ ‘ P roperty’ includes money and all other property . . .
   including things in action and other intangible property.”
      By section 6: “ (1) A person appropriating property belonging to another
   without meaning the other permanently to lose the thing itself is nevertheless
   to be regarded as having the intention o f permanently depriving the other of
   it if his intention is to treat the thing as his own to dispose o f regardless
   of the other’s rights; and a borrowing or lending o f it may amount to so
                         QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                [1801]




                         [CROW N CASES R E SER V ED .]
                           T H E Q U E E N v. VREONES.
C rim in a l L a w — Indictable Misdemeanour— A ttem pt to pervert f.h<i Course of
            Justice— Preparing False Evidence to be used in A rbitration .
   T h e defendant was tried and convicted upon a count of an indictment
alleging, in substance, th a t by the terms of a contract for the purchase of a
cargo of w heat, to be shipped by th e sellers from a port in th e Black Sea to the
buyer a t th e port of Bristol, it was provided th a t any dispute arising under the
contract should be referred to two arbitrators, whose award should be final and
conclusive, and might, upon th e application of either contracting party, be
made a rule of Court in E n g la n d ; th a t the defendant was appointed by the
sellers to tak e samples of the cargo upon the arrival of the ship at Bristol; that
such samples were then taken, and placed in bags sealed with the seals of the
buyer and seller of the cargo, in accordance with the custom of merchants at
th e port, and for the purpose of being used as evidence before the arbitrators in
case a n y arbitration was had under th e c o n tract; th a t the defendant afterwards,
intending to deceive the arbitrators to be appointed under the contract, and
w rongfully to make it appear to them th a t the bulk of the cargo was of better
quality th an i t really was, so as to pervert the due course of law and justice,
unlaw fully an d designedly removed the contents of the sealed bags and altered
their character, and returned to th e bags a q uantity of wheat in a different con­
dition, and altered in character and value, with intent thereby to pass the same
off as true and genuine samples of th e bulk of the cargo, and that afterwards
th e defendant forwarded the samples so altered to th e London Corn Trade
Association, w ith intent th a t th e same should be used as evidence before such
arbitrators, and thereby to injure and prejudice the buyer, and to pervert the
due course of law and ju s tic e :—
   H eld, th a t th e count stated an indictable misdemeanour at common law.

   C a s e stated by Denman, J .} for the opinion of the Court for
the Consideration of Crown Cases Keserved.
   A t the Bristol Autumn Assizes, 1S90, the defendant, Anasta-
sios Vreones, and his wife, Blanche Vreones, were tried before
Denman, J., upon an indictment containing four counts. The
defendant was found guilty upon each count, and his wife was
acquitted.
   The first count of the indictment alleged that, before the com­
mencement of the offence thereinafter mentioned, one Sidman
Thomas Stephens, on behalf of himself and others, trading under
the name, style, and firm of Wait & James, at Bristol, had entered
into a contract with certain persons carrying on business under
 IQ- B.             QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                      361
  the name, style, and firm of D. S. Sevastopulo & Co., for the           1891
  purchase of a cargo of wheat then shipped, or about to be            T he
  shipped, on board a vessel called the Whinjield, from Novorris-           v.
                                                                        Y beones.
  sisk in the Black Sea to the port of Bristol, which said contract
  t ^j^ n tained a provision that, in the event of a dispute arising
  out ot such contract, the same should be referred to two arbitra­
  tors, whose award should be conclusive and binding upon all
  disputing parties, and might, upon application of either con­
  tracting party, be made a rule of any of the divisions of Her
  Majesty’s High Court of Justice in England ; that the said ship
  Whinjield duly arrived at the said port of Bristol on March 15,
  1890, with the said cargo of wheat, and it then became and was
  the custom of merchants using the said port to take from the
  said cargo samples of the wheat as composing the bulk of the
 same cargo, and, for the purpose of using the said samples in the
 event of a dispute between the buyer and the seller thereof as
 evidence as to the quality of the bulk of the said cargo in any
 arbitration which might be taken under the terms of the said
 contract, to seal such samples with the seals of the buyer and
 seller of such cargo, and forward the same so sealed and secured
 to the offices of the London Corn Trade Association, in 2, Lime
 Street Square, in the city of London ; and, upon any such arbi­
 tration as aforesaid, the said samples so sealed and secured as
 afo’       became and were evidence to be used before the arbi-
 trato^Kppointed to decide the question in dispute between the
 buyer and seller of such cargo; that at the time of the commis­
 sion of the offence thereinafter mentioned, one Anastasios Vreones
 was a superintendent appointed by the said D. S. Sevastopulo
 & Co. to take samples of the said cargo, in accordance with the
 custom in this count before mentioned, and on March 17. 1S90,
and on divers other days between that day and the day of the
taking of this inquisition, did so take such samples, to which
samples the seals of the buyer and seller were duly affixed, in
accordance with the said custom, and the said sealed samples
then became and were evidence to be used in accordance with
the terms of such contract upon any such arbitration as aforesaid ;
and that the said Anastasios Yreones and Blanche Yreones. having
m their possession divers, to wit, ninety bags, each containing
;2                                               QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                              [1391]

     is o i       s a m p l e s o f t h e s a id c a r g o so t a k e n fr o m t h e s a id s h i p           Whmfielcl
^      Que-— a s a fo r e s a id , a n d d u l y s e a l e d a s a fo r e s a id , a fter w a rd s, t o w it, o n
       *•     ‘   t h e s a id 1 7 t h d a y o f M a r c h , i n t h e y e a r a fo r e s a id , a n d o n d iv e r s
TSE0NES'          oth er days a n d tim e s b e tw e e n th a t d a y and th e d a y o f th e ta k in g
                  o f t h i s i n q u i s i t i o n , c o n t r i v i n g a n d i n t e n d i n g t o d e c e i v e t h e sa id
                  a r b itr a to r s s o t o b e a p p o i n t e d as a fo r e s a id , a n d w r o n g f u l l y t o
                  m a k e i t a p p e a r t o t h e s a i d a r b itr a to r s, a n d t o c a u s e a n d in d u c e
                  s u c h a r b itr a to r s t o b e l i e v e , t h a t t h e b u l k o f t h e s a i d c a r g o w as o f
                  b e t t e r q u a l i t y t h a n i t i n f a c t w as, a n d b y f r a u d u l e n t a n d d e c e i t f u l
                  m e a n s to c a u s e a n d i n d u c e s u c h a r b itr a to r s to g i v e t h e i r aw ard
                   i n fa v o u r o f t h e s a id D . S . S e v a s t o p u l o & C o., so as t o p e r v e r t
                   t h e d u e c o u r s e o f la w a n d j u s t i c e , u n l a w f u l l y , k n o w i n g l y , a n d
                   d e s ig n e d ly d id ta k e        and      r e m o v e fr o m t h e s a id n i n e t y s e a le d
                   sa m p le b a g s th e c o n te n ts th ereo f, an d u n la w fu lly , k n o w in g ly ,
                   a n d d e s i g n e d l y d i d a lt e r t h e        c h a r a c te r   of su ch con ten ts, and
                   r e t u r n to s u c h s a m p l e b a g s a q u a n t i t y o f w h e a t i n a d iffe r e n t
                   c o n d it io n , a n d a lt e r e d i n c h a r a c t e r a n d v a l u e , w it h i n t e n t t h e r e b y
                   t o p a s s t h e s a m e o ff a s t r u e a n d g e n u i n e s a m p l e s o f t h e b u lk o f
                    th e sa id c a r g o ;       a n d , h a v i n g so a lt e r e d t h e         c h a r a c te r o f su c h
                    s a m p l e s , d i d fo rw a rd t h e s a m e to t h e s a i d L o n d o n C o rn T ra d e
                    A s s o c i a t i o n i n s u c h a lt e r e d c o n d it io n , w i t h t h e i n t e n t t h a t th e
                    s a m e s h o u l d b e u s e d b e fo r e s u c h a r b itr a to r s as a fo r e s a id a s su c h
                    e v i d e n c e a s a fo r e s a id , a n d t h e r e b y t o in j u r e a n d p r e ju d ic e th e
                    s a id S i d m a n T h o m a s S t e p h e n s a n d o th e r s , a n d b y t h e m e a n s
                    a fo r e s a id t o p e r v e r t t h e d u e c o u r se o f la w a n d j u s t i c e , a g a in s t
                    th e p e a c e o f our L a d y th e Q u ee n , h er crow n a n d d ig n ity .
                        T h e o t h e r t h r e e c o u n t s c h a r g e d t h e d e f e n d a n t s w it h u n la w ­
                    f u l l y u t t e r i n g t h e s a m p l e s as        fa ls e t o k e n s , w h e r e b y S t e p h e n s
                     a n d o th e r s w e r e d e f r a u d e d a n d d e p r iv e d o f t h e i r j u s t r i g h t s , a n d
                     w ith u n la w fu lly u tt e r in g th e m              as fa ls e t o k e n s , w it h i n t e n t to
                     d e fr a u d S t e p h e n s a n d o th e r s , a n d t h e a r b i t r a t o r s ; b u t. as n o
                     j u d g m e n t w a s g i v e n u p o n t h e s e c o n d , t h ir d , a n d fo u r t h c o u n ts,
                     i t is u n n e c e s s a r y t o s e t t h e m o u t.
                         T h e f o l l o w i n g f a c t s w e r e p r o v e d a t t h e tr ia l, a n d s t a t e d i n t h e

                     c a s e :—
                          O n D e c e m b e r 11, 18 8 9 , on e S tep h e n s, a corn m erch an t at
                     B r isto l, e n te r e d      i n t o a c o n t r a c t w i t h o n e S e v a s t o p u l o for th e
                     p u r c h a s e o f a c a r g o o f w h e a t , t o a r r iv e b y S S .        Whinfield,        c o n sist-
                                                                         QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                                       363
                                          1 Q. 13.

                                          i n g i n p a r t o f “ A z i n a w h e a t a b o u t a s p e r s a m p l e N o . 1 0 ,” a n d i n _ _ 1S91
                                                                                                                                                  _ _ _
    sh ip    Whinjield,
                                          p a r t o f “ A z i n a w h e a t a b o u t a s p e r s a m p l e ‘ R u g b y , ’ b o t h s a m p le s              T he Q ueer
rards, t o w it, o n                                                                                                                                              V.
                                          o l d c ro p s e a l e d a n d i n o u r p o s s e s s io n .”            A b o u t h a lf th e cargo                V reones.
d, a n d o n d iv e r s
                                          w as to c o n sist o f each q u a lity .                 T h e s a m p l e s refer re d t o i n t h e
ay of th e ta k in g
d e c e i v e t h e s a id
                                          c o n tra ct w ere c a lle d th e         “ stand ard           s a m p le s .
                                              T h e c o n tra ct co n ta in e d th e fo llo w in g c la u s e s :
i     w r o n g fu lly to
                                              “ .D if f e r e n c e i n q u a l i t y s h a l l n o t e n t i t l e t h e b u y e r t o r e je c t
tu se a n d i n d u c e
                                           e x c e p t u n d e r t h e aw ard o f a r b itr a to r s, or t h e c o m m i t t e e o f a p p e a l,                            U'
;aid c a r g o w a s o f                                                                                                                                                     <i
                                           as th e case m a y be.                A l l d is p u t e s a r i s in g o u t o f t h i s c o n tr a c t ,
mt and d eceitfu l
g i v e t h e i r aw a rd
so as to p ervert
                                           w h e t h e r b e t w e e n t h e p a r tie s h e r e t o , o r b e t w e e n o n e o f t h e m a n d
                                           t h e t r u s t e e i n b a n k r u p t c y o f t h e o th e r , s h a l l b e r e fe r r e d a c c o r d ­
                                                                                                                                                                             i
    k n o w in g ly , and
                                           i n g t o t h e r u le e n d o r s e d .
                                           s t i p u l a t i o n a r u le o f C o u r t.
                                                                                           P o w e r t o e i t h e r p a r t y t o m a k e th is
                                                                                             N e i t h e r p a r ty , n o r a n y o n e c l a i m i n g
                                                                                                                                                                             I
d n i n e t y s e a le d
                                           u n d e r t h e m , t o b r i n g a n y a c t i o n u n t i l d is p u t e s e t t l e d b y a r b itr a ­
ill) ^ p .o w in g ly ,
                                           t i o n , a n d i t is e x p r e s s l y a g r e e d t h a t t h e o b t a i n i n g a n a w a rd fr o m
ih c o n t e n t s , a n d
                                            e i t h e r t r i b u n a l, a s t h e c a s e m a y b e , s h a l l b e a c o n d i t i o n p r e c e d e n t
a t i n a d if f e r e n t
                                            to th e r ig h t o f e ith e r c o n tr a c tin g p a rty to su e th e o th e r in resp ect
fch i n t e n t t h e r e b y
                                            o f a n y c l a i m a r i s in g o u t o f t h i s c o n tr a c t.
as o f t h e b u l k o f
                                                B y r u le 9 , e n d o r s e d o n t h e c o n t r a c t : “ W h e n b u y e r r e q u ir e s
h aracter o f su ch
.d o n C o r n T r a d e                    a r b it r a t i o n o n   q u a lity            c o n d itio n    upon        s a m p l e s p r e v i o u s ly

s in t e n t th a t th e                    d r a w n a n d s e a l e d , h e s h a l l m a k e h i s c l a im a n d n o m i n a t e h is a r b i­
    a fo r e s a id a s s u c h             t r a t o r w i t h i n fo u r t e e n c l e a r d a y s o f t h e fin a l d is c h a r g e o f t h e
n d p reju d ice th e                       sh ip m e n t.”
id b y t h e m e a n s                          E u l e 1 0 p r o v i d e d t h a t “ a l l d is p u t e s      a r isin g   ou t o f th is co n tra ct

      ju s t ic e , a g a in s t             s h a l l b e f r o m t i m e t o t i m e r e fe r r e d t o tw o a r b itr a to rs, o n e t o b e

d d ig n ity ,                               c h o s e n b y e a c h p a r t y i n d if f e r e n c e , t h e t w o a r b itr a to r s h a v i n g

a n t s w it h u n la w -                    p o w e r t o c a l l i n a t h i r d i n ca se t h e y s h a l l d e e m ' i t n e c e s s a r y .”

/h e r e b y S te p h e n s                  T h e r u l e s f u r t h e r p r o v i d e d fo r t h e a p p o i n t m e n t o f a r b itr a to r s in

ir ju s t rig h ts, an d                     t h e c a s e s o f t h e n e g l e c t or r e f u s a l o f o n e p a r t y t o a p p o i n t a n

is, w j ^ k i n t e n t to                   a r b it r a to r , o r o f t h e d e a t h , r e f u s a l t o a c t , or in c a p a c i t y o f a n y o n e

ttor. W u t , a s n o                        or m o r e o f t h e a r b itr a to r s , a n d i n o t h e r c o n t i n g e n c i e s .         A r ig h t

,nd f o u r t h c o u n ts ,                 o f a p p e a l w as g iv e n t o a c o m m itte e o f a p p ea l a p p o in te d u n d er
                                             t h e r u l e s o f t h e L o n d o n C o r n T r a d e A s s o c i a t io n , a n d v a r io u s c o n ­

an d sta te d in th e                        d i t i o n s h a d t o b e p e r fo r m e d b y t h e p a r t i e s t o t h e c o n t r a c t i n
                                             o r d e r t o o b t a i n a n a r b it r a t io n , o r t o a p p e a l t o t h e c o m m i t t e e o f

corn m erch a n t at                         a p p e a l fr o m t h e d e c i s i o n o f t h e a r b itr a to r s.
v a s t o p u l o fo r t h e                     T h e s t a n d a r d s a m p l e s w e r e i n t h i s c a se a s u s u a l s e a l e d b y t h e

Whinjield,          c o n s is t -           s e l le r s ’ b r o k e r i n t h e p r e s e n c e o f t h e b u y e r ’s b r o k e r , a n d k e p t b y •
                                     ■h
                                                    QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                          [1891]
364
      189 i     h im ; and on th a t b e in g                   d o n e , t h e m o n e y p r o v id e d for b y t h e


^               C° r ! ^ a r r i v e d                        on M arch 15, 18 9 0 , w hen, in accordance
        V.
    V reones.   w it h t h e u s u a l p r a c t i c e , a s u p e r i n t e n d e n t ( i n t h i s c a s e t h e d e e n -
                a n t A . Y r e o n e s ) w a s a p p o i n t e d b y t h e s e l le r , a n d o n e B r o c k m a n ,
                t h e ’ b u y e r ’s    u n d e r - f o r e m a n , b y t h e b u y e r , to t a k e s a m p l e s o f t h e
                   W         a s i t c a m e u p fr o m t h e h o l d s .        I t is u n n e c e s s a r y t o d e s c n b e
                 t i le m o d e in w h i c h t h e s e s a m p l e s a r e t a k e n ; b u t t h e y a w a k e n
                 for t h e p u r p o s e o f b e i n g u s e d a s e v i d e n c e m c a s e a n y a r b itr a tio n
                 s h o u l d t a k e p l a c e a s to t h e q u a l i t y o f t h e c a r g o , a n d a r e c a l le d

                 t h e “ a r b it r a tio n s a m p l e s .”
                      I n t h e p r e s e n t c a s e n i n e t y o f t h e s e s a m p l e s w er e t a k e n         fo rty -
                 fiv e o f e a c h k i n d o f w h e a t - a n d , i n t h e o r d in a r y c o u r s e               sea ed
                  b y t h e d e f e n d a n t , a s s u p e r i n t e n d e n t o f t h e s e l le r         a n d b y th e
                  u n d er-fo rem a n              o f t h e b u y e r in t h e u su a l    w a y    a n d a t t h e sa m e
                  t i m e t h e b u y e r ’s u n d e r - f o r e m a n , B r o c k m a n , t o o k s a m p l e s for t h e
                  b u y e r ’s u s e fr o m t h e s a m e b u l k s a m p l e fr o m w h i c h t h e sa m p le s

                   in t h e s e n i n e t y b a g s w e r e t a k e n .
                      T h e frau d a l l e g e d i n t h e i n d i c t m e n t c o n s i s t e d in t h e fr a u d u le
                   t a m p e r i n g w it h t h e s e a r b it r a t io n s a m p l e s a fte r t h e y w e r e s e a le d
                   b T b o t h p a r tie s .            I t w a s p r o v e d a t t h e tr ia l t h a t t h e w h o le ot
                    t h e s e n i n e t y a r b it r a t i o n s a m p l e s w e r e t a k e n t o t h e h o u s e in w h ic h
                    th e     V r e o n e s l o d g e d b e fo r e b e i n g s e n t t o L o n d o n t o b e k e p                 y
                    t h e L o n d o n C o r n T r a d e A s s o c i a t i o n i n o rd er t o b e u s e d i
                    d e n c e in c a s e o f a d i s p u t e a r i s i n g w h i c h s h o u l d b e referre


                    arbI t r^ s ° p r o v e d t h a t t h e p r is o n e r A n a s t a s i o s Y r e o n e s , s o m e t im e s
                     w k e n h is w ife w a s p r e s e n t , s o m e t i m e s w h e n a lo n e , s o m e t im e s
                     t h r o u g h h i s w if e , w h o m t h e j u r y a c q u i t t e d as n o t b e i n g aw are
                     a n y    in te n tio n to d efra u d , ta m p e r e d w ith th e s e arb—                           a m p le s
                     b y p u llin g dow n a p o rtio n o f t h e to p s o f th e b a g s th r o u e
                     s t r iii^ o n t h e s i d e o p p o s i t e t o t h e s e a l, t h e n c l e a n i n g t h e    co n ten t,

                      r           °    ,a - ioc rv p      a n d sm a ll w h e a t b y siftin g , p ic k in g , an d u sin 0
                       f la n n e i° to w h i c h t h e c o c k l e s a d h e r e d , a n d i n r e p l a c i n g t h e w h e a t
                              i          rl   !n   t h e b a ^ s w it h o u t b r e a k i n g t h e s e a ls , s o as t o pro
                       d u c e T v e r y m u c h b e t t e r s a m p l e t h a n t h e s t a n d a r d s a m p le s , a n
                       t h a n a n y o f t h e o t h e r s a m p l e s t a k e n fr o m t h e b u l k .           T h e m ot
                       s u g g e s t e d for t h i s c o n d n e t w a s t h a t i n c a s e o f a n y d i s p u t e a r ,s ,n 0
                              QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                                     365
IQ - B.
a s to t h e q u a l i t y o f t h e c a r g o t h e p u r c h a s e r m i g h t b e d e f e a t e d               1891
b y t h e p r o d u c t i o n o f t h e s a m p l e s b e fo r e a n y a r b it r a to r s w h o                 T he Queen
m ig h t b e a p p o i n t e d .                                                                                 Y beones.

   N o a r b itr a to rs w e r e i n f a c t a p p o i n t e d , n o r d id t h e p u r c h a s e r
ta k e a n y s t e p s in t h a t d ir e c t io n , t h e r e a so n a s s i g n e d b e i n g t h a t
th e a r b itr a tio n s a m p l e s as a lt e r e d h a v i n g b e e n f o u n d o n c o m ­
parison s u p e r io r t o t h e s t a n d a r d s a m p l e , a n d t o a l l t h e s a m p l e s
fair! v t a k e n b y e i t h e r or b o th p a r t i e s , i t w o u l d h a v e b e e n h o p e le s s
to p r o c e e d t o a r b itr a tio n .
            e v i d e n c e s h e w e d t h a t t h e r e w a s n o s u b s t a n t i a l d if fe r e n c e
b ^ R n t h e c a r g o a n d t h e s t a n d a r d s a m p l e so fa r a s t h e w h e a t
 No. 10 was c o n c e r n e d ; b u t as r eg ard s th e “ E u g b y ” w h e a t it
 was p r o v e d t h a t t h e r e w a s a n i n f e r io r i t y w h i c h w o u l d a m o u n t
 to 112Z. in v a l u e i n t h a t p o r t i o n o f t h e c a r g o a s c o m p a r e d w it h
 t h e sta n d a r d     s a m p le s .       The    a r b it r a t io n     sa m p les,   as   a lt e r e d ,
 sh ew ed w h e a t o f a v e r y s u p e r io r q u a l i t y t o e i t h e r t h e b u l k or
 th e sta n d a r d s a m p l e s o f t h i s p o r tio n o f t h e c a r g o , a n d a ls o , b u t
 n o t t o t h e s a m e e x t e n t , as r e g a r d s t h e w h e a t o f q u a l i t y N o . 1 0 .
     A t t h e e n d o f t h e c a s e fo r t h e p r o s e c u t io n i t w a s u r g e d b y t h e
 c o u n sel for A n a s t a s i o s t h a t t h e i n d i c t m e n t o u g h t t o b e q u a s h e d
 upon t h e g r o u n d t h a t i t c o n t a i n e d n o c h a r g e fo r w h i c h a n i n d i c t ­
 m e n t for m i s d e m e a n o u r c o u ld b e s u p p o r t e d .
     D e n m a n , J . , l e f t t h e c a s e t o t h e j u r y , a n d , u p o n t h e i r f i n d in g
 a   v e r d ic t o f g u i l t y     a g a in s t   A n a sta sio s        Y reon es,     bound        th e
 d e fe n d a n t o v e r t o c o m e u p fo r j u d g m e n t w h e n c a l l e d u p o n .
     T h e d e f e n d a n t ’s c o u n s e l m o v e d in a r r e st o f j u d g m e n t i n c a se
 th a t a |h o u ld b e n e c e s s a r y .
     Wife    q u e s t i o n s fo r t h e o p i n i o n o f t h e C o u r t w e r e , w it h r e s p e c t
 to t h e first c o u n t , w h e t h e r i t c o n t a i n e d a s t a t e m e n t o f a n i n d i c t ­
 ab le m is d e m e a n o u r , a n d w h e t h e r t h e r e w a s e v i d e n c e i n s u p p o r t
 of it.


     C. W. Matheivs,              for t h e d e f e n d a n t .        T h e first c o u n t o f t h e
  in d i c t m e n t s t a t e s n o c r i m in a l o ffe n c e .          T h e re is n o averm en t
  th a t t h e e v i d e n c e w a s e v e r t e n d e r e d o r u s e d i n a n y p r o c e e d i n g ;
  nor t h a t a n y l e g a l p r o c e e d i n g w a s e v e r in e x i s t e n c e i n w h ic h i t
  co u ld b e u s e d ; n o r t h a t a n y C o u r t or l e g a l o ffic e r w a s i n e x i s t ­
  e n ce b e fo r e w h o m i t           c o u ld   be     u sed .         The    averm en ts       sh ew
366                                                   QDEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                               [1891]

      1891          n o t h i n g m o r e t h a n an i n t e n t i o n b y t h e d e f e n d a n t to d e c e i v e in
T he Q ueen         fu t u r e p r o c e e d i n g s , i f t h e y s h o u l d e v e r b e h a d .         T h e r e is n o act
       v.
                    s t a t e d w h i c h i s s u f f i c i e n t l y p r o x i m a t e to t h e o ff e n c e to m a k e w hat
 Y i ; e o n 'E3.
                    t h e d e f e n d a n t d id c r i m i n a l .        T h e d e f e n d a n t h a s d o n e n o m ore
                    th a n p u t h i m s e l f in a p o s i t i o n t o c o m m i t a frau d                         upon       th e
                    c o n t i n g e n c y o c c u r r i n g o f a r e f e r e n c e to a r b itr a tio n as p r o v id e d
                    b y th e con tract.               U n d e r t h e r u le s e n d o r s e d u p o n t h e con tr a c t
                    w ith r e s p e c t t o a r b it r a tio n , v a r io u s s t e p s m u s t b e ta k e n b y th e
                    p a r t i e s i n o r d e r t h a t t h e r i g h t to r e fe r m a y o ccu r, a n d various
                    t h i n g s c o u l d b e d o n e b y e i t h e r p a r t y w h i c h w o u ld p r e v e n t th e
                    a r b it r a t i o n   b e in g    heard.        In     a ll     th e     cases        of      in d ic tm e n t s
                    c h a r g i n g t h e m a n u f a c t u r e o r p r e fe r r in g o f fa ls e e v i d e n c e , th e
                    e v i d e n c e h a s , in fa ct, b e e n u s e d b e fo r e a p r o p e r ly c o n stitu te d
                    C o u r t.      I t is c o n c e d e d t h a t , i f t h e t a m p e r i n g w ith t h e sam ples
                    h a d b e e n d o n e b y tw o or m o r e p e r s o n s , a n i n d i c t m e n t a g a in s t
                    t h e m fo r c o n s p i r a c y w o u ld l i e ; b u t t h e n t h e c r im in a l o ffen ce is
                    t h e a g r e e m e n t to b r i n g a b o u t a n u n la w f u l r e s u lt b y u n la w fu l
                    m eans.           S o i n i n d i c t m e n t s fo r s u b o r n a t io n o f p erju ry , it is th e
                    a c t o f s u b o r n i n g t h e o t h e r p e r s o n w h i c h is              c r im in a l.       Bex     v.
                    Crossley         ( 1 ) is n o t a g a i n s t m y c o n t e n t i o n , b e c a u s e a fa lse oath
                     w a s i n f a c t t a k e n , t h o u g h t h e a ff id a v it w as n e v e r u sed .                      The
                     o f f e n c e w a s in       t a k i n g t h e f a l s e o a th .        Bex     v.    Heath          (2 ) was
                     d ec id e d o n        t h e sam e p r in c ip le .           T h e e v id e n c e         g iv e n   at    th e
                     tr ia l w a s n o t s u f f ic i e n t t o s u p p o r t t h e first             c o u n t o f th e          in ­
                     d ic tm e n t.
                         Poole, Q.C., ( Bernard Coleridge,                     w i t h h i m ) , fo r t h e C row n, was
                     not heard.


                         L o k d C o l e e i d g e , C .J .         T h e first c o u n t o f t h e in d ic t m e n t in
                     su b stan ce          charges      th e    d efen d a n t       w it h   th e    m is d e m e a n o u r o f
                     a t t e m p t i n g , b y t h e m a n u f a c t u r e o f fa ls e e v i d e n c e , t o m is le a d a
                    j u d i c i a l t r i b u n a l w h i c h m i g h t c o m e in t o e x i s t e n c e .            I f t h e act
                     i t s e l f o f t h e d e f e n d a n t w a s c o m p l e t e d , I c a n n o t d o u b t th a t to
                     m a n u f a c t u r e f a l s e e v i d e n c e fo r t h e        pu rpose        o f m i s le a d i n g          a
                    j u d i c i a l t r i b u n a l is a m i s d e m e a n o u r .      H e r e , in p o in t o f fa c t, no
                     tr i b u n a l w a s m i s l e d , b e c a u s e t h e p i e c e o f e v i d e n c e was n o t u sed ;


                               (1) 7 T. E. 315.                                               (2) Russ. & By. 184.
L q B.                          QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                                   367

b u t I a m o f o p in i o n t h a t t h a t f a c t m a k e s n o d i f f e r e n c e ; i t is                    1891
n o n e t h e l e s s a m i s d e m e a n o u r a l t h o u g h t h e e v i d e n c e w a s n o t the Qtoen
u sed .       A ll th a t t h e d efen d a n t c o u ld do to c o m m it th e                      o ff e n c e   vkeones.

h e d id .       T h e r e w as a c o n t r a c t for t h e s a l e o f a c a r g o o f w h e a t, Lord
a n d i t p r o v id e d a m o d e o f s e t t l i n g b y a r b it r a t io n p o s s i b l e d is -               CJ-
p u te s w h ic h         m ig h t    arise.       The      p a r tic u la r p ie c e o f e v id e n c e ,
 n a m e ly , t h e s a m p l e s o f w h e a t p l a c e d i n s e a l e d b a g s , w o u ld b e ,
i f n o t a b s o l u t e l y c o n c l u s iv e , o f t h e g r e a t e s t p o s s i b l e w e i g h t in
 d e t e r m in i n g a n y d is p u t e a s t o t h e          q u a l i t y o f t h e w h e a t s o ld .
 '         c o nt r a c t p r o v id e d t h a t d if f e r e n c e     in    q u a l i t y s h o u ld      not
 ^ J f t l e t h e b u y e r t o r e je c t e x c e p t u n d e r t h e aw ard o f a r b itra to rs,
 or t h e c o m m i t t e e o f a p p e a l, as             th e ca se m ig h t b e ; th a t a ll
 d is p u te s a r i s in g o u t o f t h e c o n t r a c t s h o u l d b e r e fe r r e d t o a r b i­
     tr a tio n , a n d    th a t w here        th e    buyer         r e q u ir e d   a r b it r a tio n    on
     q u a lit y or c o n d i t i o n u p o n s a m p l e s p r e v i o u s l y d r a w n a n d s e a le d ,
     h e sh o u ld m a k e h is c l a im          a n d n o m i n a t e h i s a r b it r a to r w it h i n
 fo u rteen d a y s o f t h e fin a l d is c h a r g e o f t h e s h i p m e n t .             I n accord­
 a n c e w ith t h a t s t i p u l a t i o n s a m p l e s w e r e o b t a i n e d , a c c o r d i n g to
 th e u sa g e , o n b e h a l f b o th o f b u y e r a n d s e l l e r , a n d p la c e d in s e a le d
     b ags, t o b e s e n t t o L o n d o n for t h e p u r p o s e o f b e i n g u s e d b y t h e
     tr ib u n a l a p p o in t e d , i f t h e c a s e w e n t t o a r b it r a t io n , u n d e r t h e
     co n tra ct.     I t w as c o n c e d e d b y c o u n s e l for t h e d e f e n d a n t , a n d it
     is fo u n d in t h e c a se , t h a t a ll t h a t t h e            d e f e n d a n t c o u l d d o to
     ta m p e r w ith t h o s e s a m p le s a n d c o r r u p t t h e e v i d e n c e u p o n w h ic h
     t h e tr ib u n a l w as t o a c t h e d id .        H e in te r ie r e d w ith t h e p erfec­
     tio n o f t h e s a m p le s as s a m p le s , b y m a k i n g t h e m s h e w a h ig h e r
         il i t y or c o n d it io n o f g r a i n ; a n d h a v i n g d o n e t h i s i n a m o s t


 «       ver a n d fr a u d u le n t m a n n e r , w i t h o u t b r e a k i n g t h e s e a l s o f th e
         b a cs. t h e s a m p l e s w ere t r a n s m it t e d t o t h e C o rn I r a d e A s s o c i a ­
     tio n in L o n d o n , t o b e k e p t t h e r e , a n d u s e d           a s e v i d e n c e in t h e
     a r b itr a tio n , in c a se a n a r b it r a tio n w a s h e l d .         T h e y w e r e n o t in
     fact so u sed ; b u t I am o f o p in i o n               t h a t t h e d e f e n d a n t w as n o n e
     th e le ss g u i l t y o f a p u n is h a b le o f f e n c e .     I th in k th a t an a ttem p t
     to p e r v e r t t h e co u rse o f j u s t i c e is i n i t s e l i a p u n i s h a b l e m i s d e ­
     m ea n o u r ; a n d t h o u g h I s h o u l d m y s e l f h a v e t h o u g h t s o o n t h e
     g ro u n d s o f s e n s e an d r e a so n , t h e r e is a ls o p l e n t y of a u t h o r i t y to
     shew th a t i t is a m is d e m e a n o u r i n             p o i n t o f la w .        T h e r e is, o f
     course, n o c a se in w h ic h t h e fa c t s a r e e x a c t l y l i k e t h e s e ; b u t in
                                                                                                            N
                                                          QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                 [1891]
368
      1891            Beg.     v.    Crossley       ( 1 ) t h e p r in c i p l e w h ic h a p p li e s h e r e was c l e a r l y
"the Q c e I 7 la i d          down.            The       d efen d a n t     in    th a t case          w as       charged         w ith
        v■            m a k i n g a f a l s e a ffid a v it.         L a w r e n c e , J ., p o i n t e d o u t t h a t i t w o u ld
   V ltE O H E S .               °                                                               I.       1    1   .1         J   -----------
                      be     absurd         to m a k e          th e g u ilt o f th e        d efen d a n t depend u pon
 L o rd C oleridge,
        C .J .        t h e s u b s e q u e n t u s e o f t h e fa ls e a ffid a v it, t h e d e f e n d a n t b e i n g
                      e q u a l l y g u i l t y o f p e r ju r y t h o u g h          n o u s e h a d b e e n afterw ard s
                      m a d e o f it .         I a g r e e t h a t t h i s c a se is n o t e x a c t l y t h e sa m e .                  In
                      Reg.      v.   Crossley       ( 1 ) , w h e n t h e fa ls e a ff id a v it h a d b e e n m a d e , t h e
                      d e f e n d a n t n o d o u b t h a d c o m p l e t e d t h e a c t w h ic h c o n s t it u t e d
                       t h e o ff e n c e .      E x a c t l y t h e sa m e p r in c i p le a p p li e s h ere, b e c a u se
                       t h e o f f e n c e o f t h e d e f e n d a n t w as c o m p l e t e d , so far as h i s a ct
                       c o u ld c o m p l e t e it , w h e n h e s e n t t o L o n d o n t h e sa m p le s w h ic h
                       m i g h t or m i g h t n o t b e u s e d in t h e a r b itr a tio n .                            I am , t h e r e ­
                       fore, o f o p i n i o n t h a t t h e first c o u n t o f t h e i n d i c t m e n t c o n ta in s a
                       p e r f e c t l y g o o d s t a t e m e n t o f a n o ffe n c e a t la w , a n d t h a t t h e r e was
                        a m p le e v id e n c e to su p p ort th e ch arge.                           I t is n o t n e c e s s a r y to
                        g i v e a n y o p i n i o n u p o n t h e q u e s t i o n s w h ic h are sa id to a r ise u p on
                        th e o th er co u n ts o f th e in d ic tm e n t.                    I a m o f o p in io n , for th e
                        rea so n g        w h ich     I    have      g iv e n ,   th a t th e         c o n v ic tio n      s h o u ld b*

                        a ffir m e d .

                              P o llo c k , B.            I h a v e c o m e to t h e s a m e c o n c lu s io n .             T h is is an
                         i n d i c t m e n t fo r a fr a u d or c h e a t a t c o m m o n la w .                   I f it had beea
                           c h a r g e d a s a c h e a t a g a i n s t a p r iv a t e in d i v i d u a l , I s h o u ld h a v e
                           fe lt b o u n d to          g iv e    e f f e c t to t h e a r g u m e n t o f t h e d e f e n d a n t s
                           co u n se l.       I n c a s e s w h e r e a c h e a t or fra u d a g a i n s t p r iv a te in d i­
                           v i d u a l s is c h a r g e d , t h e tw o c o n d it io n s — ( 1 ) t h a t t h e a c t h a s                 e en
                           c o m p l e t e d , a n d ( 2 ) , t h a t t h e r e h a s b e e n in j u r y t o t h e in d iv id u a
                           — a re c o n d i t i o n s p r e c e d e n t to t h e o ff e n c e .               B u t th is is n o t th e
                           c a s e o f a p r i v a t e fraud.            I t is an o ff e n c e w h i c h c o m e s w it h i n th e
                            d e s c r i p t i o n i n E a s t ’s P l e a s o f t h e C r o w n , c . 1 8 , s. 4 :                      ere is
                            a ls o a n o t h e r h e a d o f p u b l i c c h e a t s i n d i c t a b l e a t              com m on         law,
                            w h i c h a r e l e v e l l e d a g a i n s t t h e p u b li c j u s t i c e o f th e k in g d o m ,
                            s u c h a s t h e d o i n g o f j u d i c i a l a c ts w it h o u t a u t h o r i t y in t h e n am e
                            o f an o th er ” ; an d               th e   a u th o r   goes      o n to s a y : “ T h e r e is a
                            p r e c e d e n t o f a n i n d i c t m e n t a g a i n s t a m a r r ie d w o m a n for p r e ­
                            t e n d i n g t o b e a w id o w , a n d a s s u c h e x e c u t i n g a b a il b o n d to th e

                                                                           (1 ) 7 T . B. 315.
                           QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION.                                                                      369
 B.

riff for o n e a r r e s t e d o n a b a i l a b l e w r it.              T h is p erh a p s w as               1S91

isid ered a s a fr a u d u p o n a p u b l i c o fficer in t h e c o u r s e o f                            T h s Q ueen
                                                                                                                   V.
t ic e .”     I a m q u i t e c le a r t h a t t h e c o n d i t i o n p r e c e d e n t t h a t             V beones.

>re m u s t b e in j u r y t o t h e i n d i v i d u a l d o e s n o t a p p l y i n t h e                   P o llo c k , B.

■sen t case.            I t a p p l i e s in   c a s e s o f c h e a t i n g or       d e fr a u d in g
v a te i n d i v id u a l s , b e c a u s e o t h e r w is e a m e r e n a k e d l i e m i g h t
i s t i t u t e a n o ff e n c e .   B u t v e r y d if f e r e n t c o n s i d e r a t i o n s a p p l y
t h e c la ss o f c a s e s i n w h i c h t h e p r e s e n t is i n c l u d e d .        T h e real
e n c e h e r e is t h e d o i n g o f s o m e a c t w h i c h h a s a t e n d e n c y a n d
in t e n d e d to p e r v e r t t h e a d m i n is t r a t io n o f p u b li c j u s t i c e .     The
es^    0 /ki,    w h e th er th e s e n d in g o f th e s e a d u lte r a te d s a m p le s ,
tich l y p r e v io u s a r r a n g e m e n t w e r e t o b e s e n t t o t h e a s s o c ia -
>n in L on d on t o b e u s e d b y t h e a r b it r a to r s , i s s u c h a n a c t a s I
iYe d e sc r ib e d .     I t h i n k t h a t i t w as.    I t h i n k t h a t t h e a r b it r a to r s
e to b e c o n s id e r e d a s a t r i b u n a l a d m i n i s t e r i n g p u b l i c j u s t i c e ,
ic h a tr ib u n a l is o n e s p e c i a l l y s a n c t i o n e d b y C o u r ts o f la w , a n d
s d e c isio n s a re e n fo r c e d a n d c a r r ie d o u t b y t h e C o u r ts o f la w .
a m o f o p in io n t h a t b y t a m p e r i n g w i t h t h e e v i d e n c e w h i c h w as
 b e la id b e fo re t h a t t r i b u n a l t h e d e f e n d a n t w as i n t e r f e r i n g w i t h
e c o u rse o f j u s t i c e .      I a g r e e w ith m y L o r d th a t h is a c t was
in p le te d .

S te p h e n , J.         I a m o f o p in io n th a t t h e c o n v ic tio n s h o u ld b e
firm ed on t h e g r o u n d s s t a t e d b y t h e L o r d C h i e f J u s t i c e .

 C h a r le s, J.         I a m o f t h e s a m e o p in i o n .

 L a w r a n c e , J.         I e n tir e ly a g ree.
                                                                      Conviction affirmed,

 S o lic it o r for t h e C r o w n :     The Solicitor to the Treasury.
 S o lic it o r for d e f e n d a n t :   W illiam Webb.
                                                                                           W. A.
332                             COURT OF APPEAL                                                        PAULINE            SELVAGE, DENNIS JOHN MORGAN                          333

an offence in itself. If reinforcement for this view were necessary it is to be                                                   BEFORE
found in section 1 (2), which in effect provides that an offence under section 1 (1)
shall have been committed although the coin m ade o r counterfeited has not been            LORD JUSTICE WATKINS, M r. JUSTICE KENNETH JONES                                 and
finished or perfected. This subsection contem plates a situation in which the                             M r . JUSTICE TUDOR EVANS
counterfeited coin m ay not be in a fit state to be uttered with any confident
prospect of passing it off as genuine. Thus the intent so to pass it off is clearly
not an ingredient of the offence of counterfeiting per se.
   Counsel for the appellants placed some reliance on the phrase " falsely makes ”                                   PAULINE A N N SELVAGE
in subsection (1). He submitted that " f a ls e l y ” imported a fraudulent intent. This                             DENNIS JOHN MORGAN
does not appear to this Court to be a valid argument. It may be that those words
were necessary to cover the situation where an employee at the Mint goes beyond                                          June 26, July 30, 1981
his authority to mint coins of the Realm.
   A further argum ent was that, so far as the protection of the purity of the             Perverting the Course o f Justice— Conspiracy to Pervert Course o f Justice— D efen­
currency was concerned (in contradistinction to actually putting counterfeit coin              dant Clerical Assistant at Driver and Vehicle Licence Centre M aking Un­
into circulation), it was section 8 o f the Act of 1936 that made provision in that            successful A tte m p t with C o-D efendant's A cquiescence to Elim inate Endorse­
reg ard ; so that it was superfluous to look to section 1, which dealt with a more             m ents on Co-D efendant's Driving Licence to Enable L a tter to Obtain a Clean
advanced activity, namely, a prospective uttering with intent to defraud.                      Licence For E m ploym ent in M otor Trade— N o Proceedings in Being or Con­
   This is a misconception of the object and design of section 8. W hat is there               tem plated o r in Progress— W hether Perverting Course o f Public Justice.
enacted is that selling or having in possession articles in the form of “ any medal,
cast, c o i n . . . made wholly or partially of m e t a l . . whi ch have some element            On a charge o f perverting the course o f public justice it m ust be shown
of resemblance to current coin shall be an offence. U nder this section an offence             th a t a course o f justice has been em barked upon in the sense that proceed­
is committed even though the article cannot be said to counterfeit current coin                ings of some kind are in being or are imm inent or that investigations which
inasmuch as there is only one or some rem ote factor o r factors of resemblance.               could o r might bring proceedings about are in progress.
Section 8 extends the net cast by section 1 ; it does not displace it. Furtherm ore,              T he appellant S, a friend o f the appellant M, w orked as a clerical assistant
section 8 affords to a person charged under it a possible defence o f lawful                   at the D river and Vehicle Licence Centre (DV LC) and used her position
authority or excuse. No such defence is available to a charge under section 1.                 as such in an unsuccessful a ttem pt to eliminate, with M ’s acquiescence,
   Reliance was also placed on the decision of the House o f Lords in Selby v.                 endorsements from M ’s driving licence, when it had still a period to run. They
D.P.P. [1972] A.C. 515. T hat case was however concerned with the construction                 were both charged with conspiring together to pervert the course of justice
and operation of section 5 of the Coinage Offences Act 1936. T he question which               by agreeing to the unlawful removal of the endorsements from M ’s licence.
there fell to be decided was w hether the offence of uttering counterfeit coin                 S was also charged with attem pting to com m it two similar offences. At their
involved not only knowledge o f its character but also an intent to pass it off as             trial at the end of the prosecution case defence counsel subm itted th a t the
 genuine. T he opinion of the majority was that such an intent was a necessary                 acts done by the appellants, especially S, were not capable of am ounting to an
 ingredient of the offence defined by section 5. T he objective of that section was            attem pt to pervert the course of justice and thus the agreem ent to do those
 to discourage not the making of counterfeit coin but its circulation. Section 1               acts was not an unlawful conspiracy; th a t there was no offence in respect of
seeks to strike at the mischief at source and condemns the first stage in                      which a prosecution was to be brought and that there m ust be a course upon
despoiling the currency o f the Realm.                                                         which justice had em barked before any a ttem pt could be made to pervert or
   For those reasons we dismissed the appeals against conviction.                              obstruct it. T he judge was inform ed that if he ruled in the appellant’s favour
   [The C ourt then went on to consider the appeals against sentence and varied                it was intended th a t they should m ake a statem ent from the dock for the
 them as follows: H eron, two and a half years imprisonment, Storey two years                  express purpose of trying to persuade the jury that neither of them intended
imprisonment and T hom as and Santi both to 15 m onths’ imprisonment.]                         a t any time to pervert the course of justice. T he trial judge rejected those
                                                                                               submissions ruling that the offences contained in the indictment could be
                                             Appeals against conviction dismissed.             com m itted even though justice had not been em barked on any particular
                                                                Sentences varied.              course ; that the records kept by the Secretary of State for the Environment
                                                                                               a t the D V L C form ed part of the administration of ju stic e ; that an unsuccess­
  The Court certified under section 33 (2) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 that a
                                                                                                ful attem pt to erase endorsements from the records of the D V L C was an act
point of law of general public importance was involved in the decision, i.e.
                                                                                               tending to pervert the course of justice so that no issue remained to the jury
“ W hether or not the offence of counterfeiting under section 1 (1) (a) of the
                                                                                               on that p o in t; and that the intent necessary to comm it the offence of
Coinage Offences Act 1936 is an absolute offence which requires no element of
                                                                                               attem pting to pervert the course of justice was an intent to do an act having
dishonest intent.” Leave to appeal to H ouse of Lords refused.
                                                                                                that tendency regardless of w hether a defendant intended to pervert the
   Solicitor: D irector of Public Prosecutions, for the Crown.                                  course of justice so that no issue remained for the jury on his o r her state
334                               COURT OF APPEAL                                                                               SELVAGE AND MORGAN                                       335

      of mind. After that ruling. S and M, on (lie advice of counsel, both changed                   Gareth Williams, Q.C. and D. R oderick Evans (assigned by the Registrar of
      their pleas to one of guilty and were convictcd. On appeal, inter alia, that                 Criminal Appeals) for the appellants. Thom as Clanville Jones fo r the Crown.
      the admitted facts did not constitute the offences charged in the indictment
      if only for (he reason that there was no evidence of any intention to                                                                                            Cur. adv. vult.
      pervert the course of justice.
         Held, that in order to secure a conviction against the appellants, the pro­                    July 30. W a t k i n s L.J. read the following judgment of the court. T he D epart­
      secution had to prove that each of them intended, by S’s act or acts, that                    m ent of the E nvironm ent m aintains at M orriston in Swansea the D river and
      the administration o f justice should be interfered with, i.e. that it should be              Vehicle Licensing Centre (DVLC). At this place records are kept of endorsements
      perverted, which was obviously a question for the jury; and as it was not                     ordered by courts throughout England and Wales to be placed on drivers’ licences
      left to the jury, as appeared from the judge’s ruling, and as the mere act of                 of convictions by drivers of road traffic offences. These records are fed into a
      altering the records kept at the D V L C o f endorsements on licences could                   com puter and thereafter retained within its memory. T he D V L C is informed of
      not by itself be said to be a perversion o f the course of justice, a term with               an order of endorsement by a magistrates’ court upon a form known as D.20.
      which the administration of justice was for present purposes synonymous, it                   In addition to recording the inform ation upon it, staff at the D V L C endorse the
      was impossible to say that a course of justice bad been em barked upon when                   driver’s licence with a record of the relevant convictions a n d return it to him.
      S acted as she did and, as no jury could have found otherwise on the facts,                      T he m inim um period that an endorsement remains on a licence, save in excep­
      they should have been directed at the end of the prosecution case to acquit                   tional circumstances, is fo u r years. Certain offences, including that o f driving
      the a p p ellan ts; the appeals would, accordingly, be allowed.                               with an excess of alcohol in the blood, involving disqualification from driving
         Dictum of Pollock B . in V r e o n e s [1891] 1 Q . B . 360, 369 applied. Dicta            m ust remain endorsed on a licence for 11 years.
      of L ord M acD erm ott C.J. in B a i l e y [1956] N.I. 15, 23, 26, considered.                   W hen a person is entitled to and wishes to have endorsements removed from
         [For perverting the course of public justice, see A rch b o ld (40th ed.),                his licence he applies therefor to the DVLC. T he application passes through a
      paras. 3473, 3544.]                                                                           well practised procedure in the course of which the validity of the application is
                                                                                                    verified by, among oth er things, furth er use o f form D.20. If the application is
  Appeals against conviction.                                                                       found to be valid the endorsement is removed and a record o f its removal fed
   On September 9, 1980, at the Crown C ourt at Swansea (Judge Bruce Griffiths,                     into the computer.
Q.C.) the appellants pleaded guilty to conspiracy to pervert the course o f justice                    If at any time an inquiry is m ade about whether o r no an endorsement has
(count 1). Selvage also pleaded guilty to attem pting to pervert the course of                      been removed an internal form called DQ1 is used to cause a print-out to be
justice (counts 2 a n d 3). Selvage was sentenced to concurrent terms of three                      taken from the computer. This will contain a comprehensive record o f endorsed
m onths’ imprisonment suspended for one year a n d M organ was also sentenced                      convictions o f a driver with an indication o f w hether any, and if so which,
to three m onths’ imprisonment suspended for one year. Both appellants had                         endorsements have been removed. This information is recorded on a form known
originally pleaded not guilty to the aforesaid offences but those pleas had been                   as D Q which is sent to the inquirer.
withdrawn following an unsuccessful submission on behalf of the defence of no                          These procedures are well known at the D V L C to most, if not all, of the
case to answer at the end of the prosecution case. T he facts appear in the                         large staff employed there and especially to those who take part in them , who
judgment.                                                                                           included at relevant times a young clerical assistant named Mrs. Pauline Ann
   The appellants appealed on the following grounds: T he learned judge was                        Selvage of Gorseinon.
wrong in ruling: (1) T h at the offences contained in the indictment can be com ­                      On October 3, 1979, an executive officer, Mr. Phillip Jones, had cause to
m itted even though justice has not embarked on any particular course. (2) T hat                   exam ine five form s D.20 upon which it appeared that Dennis John Morgan, of
the records kept by the Secretary of State for the Evironm ent at the Drivers                      Birchgrove, Swansea, R ichard David M urphy, of Gorseinon, and Alan N orm an
Vehicle Licensing Centre, Swansea, form ed part of the administration of justice.                  Acott, o f Gorseinon were applying for the removal o f endorsements from their
(3) T h at an unsuccessful attem pt to erase endorsements from the records at the                  driving licences; M organ three, M urphy and Acott one each.
Drivers Vehicle Licensing Centre at Swansea was a n act tending to pervert the                         Every one of these applications was irregular in that there was nothing to
course of justice, so that no issue remained fo r the jury on this point. (4) T hat                indicate that the applicant had given his consent to the application to be m ade
the intent necessary to commit the offence of attem pting to pervert the course of                 and every one of them referred to a conviction less than four years old, except
justice was an intent to do an act having that tendency regardless of whether the                  in the case of A cott who was entitled to the removal o f the endorsement on his
defendants intended to pervert the course o f justice so that no issue remained                    licence anyway.
for the jury on that point.                                                                           Mr. Jones became suspicious and made some departm ental inquiries, the result
   T he appeal was argued on June 26, 1981, when the following cases were cited                    of which caused him to suspect Mrs. Selvage o f having subm itted the five forms
in argum ent in addition to those referred to in the judgm ent: A n d r e w s (1972)               D.20, seeing that M organ lived n e ar where Mrs. Selvage used to live, M urphy
57 Cr.App.R. 254 ; [1973] Q . B . 4 2 2 ; B r i t t o n [1973] R.T.R. 502 ; K e l l e t t (1975)   lived within half a mile o f h e r present hom e and Acott was her next door
61 C r.App.R. 240; [1976] Q . B . 372; P a n a y i o t o u a n d A n t o n i a d e s (1973) 57     neighbour.
Cr.App.R. 762; [1973] 1 W .L.R. 1032 and R o w e l l (1977) 65 Cr.App.R. 174.                          He anticipated, rightly as things turned out, that if his suspicions were well
336                            COURT OF APPEAL                                                       PAULINE ANN SELVAGE, DENNIS JOHN MORGAN                               337
 founded forms DO I would soon be introduced into the procedure by whoever,              offence concerning road traffic or for any oth er kind of offence. T here were no
 if it was a m cm her of the staff, had subm itted the D.20s. Within a couple of         proceedings of any kind in being and none were contem plated in respect of either
weeks two D Q ls appeared. He took photostatic copies of them and reported his           of them.
suspicions to a superior officer.                                                           Unquestionably, Mrs. Selvage and M organ committed offences contrary to
   The police were informed. They interviewed Mrs. Selvage who, after a brief            section 101 (6) of the R oad Traffic Act 1972 which provides: “ (6) I f a person
attempt to evade responsibility, adm itted that she had used her positoin at the         whose licence has been ordered to be endorsed with any particulars a n d who has
D L V C to wrongfully submit the D.20s on behalf of M organ and M urphy and to           not previously become entitled u n d e r subsection (7) below to have a licence
a lesser extent of culpability, Acott.                                                   issued to him free from those particulars applies for or obtains a licence with­
    In a written confession she stated that when M organ, who is a m otor fitter,        out giving particulars of the order, he shall be guilty of an offence and any licence
was working upon her husband’s van she heard him say that he would have to               so obtained shall be of no effect.” T he m axim um penalty for this offence, or
do some work upon his own car o r otherwise get a nother endorsement. He knew            for an attem pt to commit it, is nowadays £100.
that she worked at the D V L C and she offered to get hold of the necessary forms           Neither o f them was, however, prosecuted for this offence. T he prosecuting
for cleaning his driving licence. Morgan produced his driving licence to her from        authority decided to lay m ore serious charges than that. So it cam e about that
which she took such details as she required. T hus informed she set the m achinery       the appellants Mrs. Selvage a n d M organ were charged with conspiring together
in motion at the D V L C to have the endorsements removed from it. As for                to pervert the course of justice by agreeing that the said Pauline Ann Selvage
M urphy she cam e to know him when she used to assist her husband to load                would unlawfully arrange to rem ove endorsements from the driving licence of
Murphy's bread van. In general conversation she learnt that he had endorsements          the said Dennis John M organ and Mrs. Selvage alone was charged with a tte m p t­
upon his driving licence. T hereupon she told him that she was in a position to get      ing to pervert the course o f justice in relation to he r unsuccessful a ttem pt to
those endorsements removed. W hen she saw his driving licence she observed that         have M org a n ’s endorsements eliminated from his driving licence and also with
one of them included a disqualification from driving and that he had suffered            a like charge in respect o f w hat she attem pted to do in relation to M urphy’s
a nother endorsement after that. So she told him that whilst she could not have         licence.
the disqualification cleaned off she would be able to eliminate the last of his             Mrs. Selvage and M organ were committed for trial at the Crown C ourt at
endorsements. She thought that the reason why M urphy welcomed her offer was            Swansea where, on Septem ber 9, 1980, before his H o n o u r Judge Griffiths and a
because he wanted a clean licence in order to hire a van.                               jury, they were found guilty of all charges. T hereupon Mrs. Selvage was sen­
   A little later on she happened to be talking to A cott when the subject of his       tenced to three m onths’ imprisonm ent suspended for one year, a n d M organ was
driving licence arose. She offered to have his licence cleaned. A c o tt accepted the   also sentenced to three m onths’ imprisonm ent suspended for one year.
offer, although he could then have m ade a perfectly proper application for this           They now appeal to this C o u rt against their convictions upon grounds involving
purpose himself. Having described how she set about the attem pt to eliminate           points o f law.
the endorsements from the licences m entioned, she concluded: “ I regret w hat I
                                                                                           T he points fall within the fram ew ork of submissions m ade to the learned judge
have done, there was no incentive in it for me, in fact, no one gained anything
                                                                                        a t the conclusion o f the case for the prosecution. H e ruled against them in so
in the end. I did it really because they were friends a n d I am very sorry."
                                                                                        conclusive a m anner as to leave Mrs. Selvage and M organ with no alternative
   M organ was immediately co-operative with the police when questioned, and in         but to accept the proper advice of their learned counsel, which was that they
a written confession he confirmed what had happened between himself and Mrs.            change their pleas of not guilty to guilty and permit themselves to be convicted
Selvage. He thought that it would be a good idea to have his endorsements               by the jury on their own confessions.
removed, although he knew th at they had quite a period to ru n and he was not             D uring the course of submissions, counsel fo r the appellants inform ed the
entitled to have them removed at that time, He concluded by stating: “ I realise        judge that if he were to rule in his favour it was intended that the appellants
now that I was foolish and I am very sorry. I would like to say that I did not          should m ake statem ents from the dock for the express purpose of trying to per­
pay A nn anything to do this a n d did not intend to pay her anything. It was           suade the jury that neither of them had at any tim e any intention to pervert the
something done between friends.”                                                        course of justice. It was anticipated th a t Mrs. Selvage supported, so far as the
   At the material time M organ had four endorsements on his driving licence            m atter affected him, by M organ, would say that her sole intention was to enable
resulting from convictions in April 1977, June 1978, and August 1978, for exceed­       M organ the better able to obtain w ork as a m otor fitter in the event o f his
ing the speed limit and for having defective tyres and tyres of different types of      becoming redundant, by causing endorsements to be eliminated from his driving
structure fitted to the same axle.                                                      licence, a n d in the case o f M urphy she was solely concerned to ensure, so far
   M urphy was convicted of a breathalyser offence in 1968 and disqualified from        as was possible by he r acts, that she would be of some assistance to him in hiring
driving. His last conviction was in June 1976 for driving without due care and          a van.
attention. It seems to have been thought by Mrs. Selvage that if she eliminated            In rejecting the submissions of defence counsel, the judge ruled that, having
his last endorsement M urphy would be able to apply himself for removal of the          regard to the evidence already heard and to what was likely to be said from the
endorsement of the order of disqualification. T here has never been a n y suggestion    dock by Mrs. Selvage and M urphy and to the law o f conspiracy, to the law of
that either M organ or M urphy thought they were likely when they permitted             an attem pt to do a criminal act, and to his understanding o f the law of the
Mrs. Selvage to act unlawfully on their behalf to be prosecuted for any further         perversion o f the course o f justice, they had no defence to any of the counts in
  338                                                                                                                  SELVAGE AN D MORGAN                                     339
                                 COURT OF APPEAL

  the indictment. In sum m ary form his detailed rulings were as follows: (1) T hat        that result to ensue. This question too is not fo r the court but for the jury to
 the ofTenccs contained in the indictments can be comm itted even though justice           answer.
 has not embarked on any particular c o u rs e ; (2) T h at the records kept by the           Learned counsel for the prosecution submits to the contrary that (1) it is not
 Secretary of State for the Environm ent at the D V L C form part of the adm inistra­      necessary to constitute the offence of perverting the course o f justice that pro­
 tion of justice ; (3) T hat an unsuccessful attem pt to erase endorsements from the       ceedings were in being o r were pending o r that conduct that might result in
 records at the D V L C was an act tending to pervert the course of justice so that       criminal proceedings had been committed, (2) the records kept at the D V L C and
 no issue remained for the jury on this p o i n t ; (4) T h at the intent necessary to     drivers’ licences form p a rt of the administration of justice, i.e. the course of
 commit the offence of attem pting to pervert the course of justice was an intent          justice having regard to their significant evidential value to the police and to the
 to do an act having that tendency regardless of whether a defendant intended             courts without which in proper form the work of the police and o f the courts
 to pervert the course o f justice so that no issue remained for the jury on his or       could not at any future time be done properly if at all, and (3) a n intention to
 her state of mind.                                                                       pervert the course of justice is not a n ingredient of the offence. T he prosecution
   In this connection he observed, inter alia: “ It is an inconvenience, to p u t it      needs to do no m ore than (a) satisfy the court that the acts complained of had a
no higher, which is to be borne as part of the penalty. In my judgment, when an           tendency to pervert the course o f justice and (b) satisfy the jury that the defendant
endorsement is placed on by the order o f the court, it must rem ain on that              intentionally committed those acts. W hat Mrs. Selvage attem pted to do, had she
licence. In part o f course, and in very large part, it is for the purposes of section    been successful, would have frustrated the orders o f m agistrates’ courts. Thus
93 of R oad Traffic Act 1972, as I indicated in my ruling at the close of the             such activity, by itself, must am ount to a perversion o f the course o f justice.
prosecution case. T h at is, however, not its full effect. It is also—if I may use           H e goes on to say that this kind o f activity if widespread could have sinister
the term — in the nature of a brand upon the licence and it is part o f the penalty       implications which could not possibly be suitably punished by the trivial m axi­
which the driver has to bear. T he removal of it by a wrongful act, as was admitted       m um fine for offending against the provisions o f section 101 (6) of the Road
to be effected in this case, would, in my judgment, be a defeating of the due             Traffic Act 1972. On the other hand, counsel for the appellants asserts that
course or the ends of justice, the defeat being the frustration of the order of the       whatever the wider implications m ay be of the acts complained of, if they am ount
court.                                                                                    to no m ore than a contravention o f the provisions o f section 101 (6) o r a con­
   “ T h at being so, if the m otivation were as it is intended to adm it and to per­    spiracy to do that, then prosecuting authorities have no right to strain the law by
suade the jury to find it was, still the offences would have been comm itted. T h e      attem pting to give a wider horizon to the law o f perverting the course of justice
prosecution sought to persuade me that, in those circumstances, I should direct           than ii has up to now been observed to be circumscribed by.
the jury to convict. While it is purely a m atter o f personal preference, I myself          It is almost trite to say that there is no doubt at the present time that to
take no pleasure in telling a jury to convict. W ithout any pressure at all, I           pervert or to attem pt to pervert the course of justice is to commit an offence at
trust, I mentioned that to Mr. Roderick Evans who says that, by m aking the              com m on law and that to conspire so to pervert is to commit an offence under
ruling as I do, it would clearly not be open to him to address the jury as he had        section 1 of the Criminal Law A ct 1977.
intended. T h at being so, he has taken the course of advising his clients to plead          T h e phrase “ to pervert the course of justice ” is also variously referred to as
guilty.”                                                                                 obstructing the course of justice, obstructing or interfering with the administra­
  T he grounds o f appeal, broadly stated, are that all of these rulings were            tion o f justice and defeating the due course and the ends of justice—see the Law
erroneous.                                                                               Commission’s R eport (No. 96) on Offences relating to the interference with the
    Counsel for the appellants subm its that (1) No offence was revealed in the          Course o f Justice. In this Report it is also stated that “ Increasing use of this
 indictment. T h e adm itted facts, although plainly revealing offences comm itted       offence has been paralleled by increasing uncertainty as to its am bit.” If that be
 under section 101 (6) and a conspiracy to commit those offences do not constitute       a justifiable com m ent then in o u r view the present case surely serves to reinforce
 the offences charged in the indictment if only for the reason that there was no         it.
 evidence of an intention in the appellants to pervert the course of justice. T he           This uncertainty, to some extent a t least, must be resolved if the issues raised
 acts admittedly done by the appellants were by themselves not capablc of                in this appeal are to be adequately and justly dealt with. In this endeavour we
a m ounting to an attempt to pervert the course of justice. So the agreement to          begin with what the Law Commission helpfully describe in its report as conduct
 do those acts was not an unlawful conspiracy. (2) It cannot be said that the            and circumstances which lie with certainty within the boundaries o f the offence—
course of justice has been perverted unless it be established that there was at the      see pp. 44 and 45, where a list o f reported cases is set out beginning with V r e o n e s
relevant time a course upon which justice had embarked. It is fallacious to               [1891] 1 Q.B. 360 and ending with F e r g u s o n (1979) 68 C r.A pp.R . 275; [1979]
regard records kept at the D V L C and driving licences as p a rt o f the adm inistra­   2 W .L.R. 144.
tion of justice and that an unlawful interference with them inevitably am ounts              They deal with conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal,
to a perversion of the course of justice. (3) On the supposition that a course of        whether or not they have yet been instituted but which are within the contem pla­
justice has been embarked upon (a) the question of whether or no an act                  tion of the wrong-doer whose conduct was designed to affect the outcom e of
actually perverted that course is not for the court but for the jury to answer and       them. T h at conduct includes giving false information to the police with the
(b) for a conviction to be made of the offence of perverting the course of justice       object o f am ong other things putting the police on a false trail, obstructing the
it is essential to prove that a defendant so charged by his proven acts intended         police in their inquiries into crime, the destruction of or other interferences with
                                                                                                            PAULINE A N W rc L V A G E , DENNIS JOHN MORGAN                            341
340                              COURT OF APPEAL
                                                                                               the law of conspiracy nor with the law of a ttem pt as were some of the cases
evidence and bringing wrongful influence to bear upon witnesses o r potential                  earlier referred to. A lthough both conspiracy and a ttem pt are alleged in the
witnesses.                                                                                     indictment the issues before us all arise o u t of the substantive offence, the main
    To this we would add the fabricating of evidence by an offender of a false                 one of which we take to be w hether in any circumstances the alteration of
allegation of assault by police officers 0 11 himself and inciting others to give false        records at the D V L C could be said to constitute an act to pervert the course
evidence in relation to certain charges preferred against him— see M a c h i n (1980)
                                                                                               of justice.
71 Cr.App.R. 166; [1980] 1 W .L.R. 763.                                                           It has to be borne in mind that in the present case there was not the slightest
    It is obvious from these cases that this offence which affects the adm inistration         suggestion that criminal proceedings were pending o r imm inent or being investi­
of justice is not confined to m atters directly concerning crim inal proceedings               gated or that any actual proceedings were within the contem plation of the
already in being. It impinges upon the process of investigating crime suspected by             appellants Mrs. Selvage or M organ o r anyone else at any relevant time. In no
the police of having been comm itted o r falsely alleged to have been com m itted              decided case known to this C ourt did such a situation as this obtain. In all ot
by a person desirous of unlawfully bringing criminal proceedings about o r of                  them there was, to say the least, within the contem plation of the convicted
causing police officers to em bark upon the process o f investigating false                    person some kind of proceeding in a court or judicial tribunal likely upon the
accusations to the detrim ent of their oth er duties.                                          happening of a foreseeable event to arise if it was not already in being. In
    T he scope of the offence was comm ented upon by L ord M cD erm ott C.J. in                V r e o n e s [1891] 1 Q.B. 360 the charge was that of attem pting by the m anufacture
B a i l e y [1956] N.I. 15, 26 as follows; “ But the administration of public justice,         of false evidence to mislead a judicial tribunal. Vreones was found guilty of
particularly in the criminal sphere cannot well be confined to the processes of                having tam pered with a test sample of w heat previously drawn and sealed for
adjudication. In point of principle we think it com prehends functions that nowa­              the use of an arbitra to r in resolving any dispute which might arise as to t e
days belong, in practice, almost exclusively, to the police, such as the investigation         quality of wheat sold. L ord Coleridge a t pp. 366 and 367 stated: “ Here, ir1 point
of offences and the arrest of suspected p e rso n s; and we see no good reason for             of fact, no tribunal was misled, because the piece of evidence was not u s e d : but
 regarding these preliminaries as beyond the scope of the category we are now                   I am of opinion that that fact m akes no difference ; it is none the less a mis­
considering." In B a i l e y ’s case (supra) the indictment described the ofi'ence              dem eanour although the evidence was not used. All that the defendant could do
charged as “ Effecting a public mischief ” but the C ourt of Criminal Appeal held               to comm it the offence he did. T here was a contract for the sale of a cargo of
th at whilst attem pting to pervert the course of justice would have been a closer              wheat and it provided a m ode of settling by arbitration possible disputes which
and more pointed description of the offence actually comm itted, th at did not                  m ight’ arise. T h e particular piece of evidence, namely, the samples of wheat
vitiate the indictment.                                                                         placed in sealed bags, would be, if not absolutely conclusive of the greatest
    Bailey had m ade a false confession to the police implicating two other men                 possible weight in determining any disputes as to the quality o f the wheat sold.
 and himself in a m urder which had undoubtedly been committed. This caused                        T he facts of that case are, in ou r view, as close to if not on the very boundary
 officers of the Royal Ulster Constabulary to spend a considerable time investi­                itself o f the offence of perverting the course of justice. Nevertheless, 11 ser' ,es 0
gating Bailey’s false allegations. Therefore, whilst criminal proceedings were not              provide one of the vital tests of principles which helps to determ ine w hether or
 in being in respect of the m urder proper investigations into it were being con­               not a charge of perverting the course of justice is properly laid. This we take to
 ducted. With these the false accusations of Bailey were a serious interference.                be that a course of justice must have been embarked upon in the sense that
  It must have been the hope and expectation of the police that their other                      proceedings of some kind a re in being or are imm inent o r investigations which
 inquiries would be successful and result in criminal proceedings being brought                  could o r might bring proceedings about are in progress in order that the act
 against one or more persons for the murder.                                                     complained about can be said to be one which has a tendency to pervert the
     In the course o f his judgm ent in B a i l e y ’s case (supra). L ord M cD erm ott C.J.    course of justice.
 m ade other observations which we think form a wise and cautionary accom­                        It must follow therefore that the m ere act of altering the records kept at the
 panim ent to the quotation already made from it. A t p. 23 he said, of the func­               D V L C of endorsements on licences cannot by itself be said to be a perversion of
 tion of the courts to apply established principles to changing conditions: “ As                the course of justice, a term with which the administration o f justice is for
 Sir James Fitzjames Stephen said in S t e p h e n s o n (1884) 13 Q . B . D . 331, ‘ In one    present purposes synonymous.
  sense we do create new offences, that is to say, that as a court we can and do                   It m ay very well be that, so it seems to us, the word administration led the
 define the law from time to time and apply it to the varying circumstances                     prosecution and the learned judge himself into considering wholly irrelevant
 which arise.’ But that cautious a n d necessary process is one thing and using a               material for the purpose o f seeking a definition of this offence. Examples of this
 proposition( as was done in M a n l e y (1932) 24 Cr.App.R. 25 ; [1933 J 1 K . B . 529)        a re references by him to “ a brand upon the licence,” “ the removal of which
  which reaches well beyond the settled law as a net to m ake amenable all who                  would frustrate the order of the court,” and so forth. Such observations as that
  fall within it is quite another."                                                             could possibly be apposite in relation to an offence un d e r section 101 (6) of the
     In our judgment, unless the principles governing the offence of perverting the             Road Traffic A ct 1972 but they do not, we think, assist properly to resolve any
  course of justice which emerge from the reported cases are well recognised and                of the issues here.
  properly applied there is a danger of bringing into existence a hitherto unrecog­               T he records at the D V L C are admissible in evidence in certain c ir c u m s ta n c e s -
  nised and unwarranted extension of the ambit of this offence. In considering this             see section 27 (1) of the Vehicle and Driving Licences A ct 1969. section 101 (I)
  in the light of the circumstances of the present case we are not concerned with
342                             COURT OF APPEAL                                                                       SELVAGE AND MORGAN                                    343
of the Road Traffic A ct 1972 and o f the Vehicle and Driving Licences Record              commission by him of another road traffic offence in th e future. Since these
(Evidence) Regulations 1970 (S.I. 1970 No. 1997). T hey can and do have, there­           would have been vital findings of fact only the ju ry could have m ade them. It
fore, an im portant role to play in the administration o f justice when that term         would have been the duty of the judge in such a circum stance to direct the jury
is applied to court proceedings or the investigation of offences. So it is of the          that upon making those findings, if they did, it would be open to them to pro­
utmost importance that the rccords are not only preserved but are maintained              ceed further to find th at a course of justice had been em barked upon which the
in an accurate state. This observation applies equally, o f course, lo driving
                                                                                          act of Mrs. Selvage could have had a tendency to pervert but that it was for them
liccnccs, som e o f the contents of which are bu t in a sense copies of or extensions     to say whether such a course had thus been embarked upon and whether the act
of these records.
                                                                                          of Mrs. Selvage did in fact have a tendency to pervert it.
   However, im portant though they arc, an interference with them by itself
                                                                                              Consequently, in ou r opinion, and on the supposition only that a course of
cannot possibly be said to be an act which perverts the course of justice.                justice could arise in the m anner described, the judge would have been in error
Furtherm ore, in our judgment, a conspiracy to do such an act cannot be held              in, as in effect he did, withdrawing the m atter from the jury with the result that
to be unlawful.                                                                           the convictions of Mrs. Selvage and M organ would have to be quashed for that
   Accordingly, upon the admitted facts of the present case we find it impossible         reason.
to say that a course of justice had been embarked upon when Mrs. Selvage acted                Finally, I turn to the question of whether or not an intent to pervert the
as she did, and in ou r opinion no jury properly directed could have found o th e r­      course of justice is an essential ingredient of the offence failure to establish
wise. If that be right, as we firmly believe it to be, it must follow that the jury       which must lead to acquittal. W e find the prosecution’s submission upon this
trying the appellants Mrs. Selvage and M organ should have been directed a t the          issue totally unacceptable. I t cannot be right to say that the only intent which
close of the prosecution’s case to acquit them both upon the whole indictment             has to be proved is the intent to do the act— in the present case to alter the
since there was no course of justice in being, nor was one likely to arise within         records and so on at the D V L C which may or m ay not be held to have a tendency
o r without their contem plation, which either o f them could have perverted or           to pervert. T h e entire weight of authority is against it.
conspired to pervert.                                                                         In V r e o n e s ’s case [1891] 1 Q.B. 360, 369 Pollock said: “ T he real offence
   Although enough has now been said to dispose effectively of this appeal in the         here is the doing of some act which has a tendency and is intended to pervert
appellants’ favour, in deference to the able submissions m ade to us upon other           the adm inistration of public justice. T he question is, whether the sending o f these
im portant factors and because it m ay be of assistance in the conduct o f trials         adulterated samples, which by previous arrangem ent were to be sent to the
for a similar offence in the future, we provide o u r conclusions about them.             association in L ondon to be used by the arbitrators, is such an act as 1 have
   In her written confession Mrs. Selvage recalled having heard M organ saying            described. I think that it was. I think that the arbitrators are to be considered
that he would have to do some work upon his own car o r risk another endorse­             as a tribunal administering public justice. Such a tribunal is one specially sanc­
ment. It is possible to infer from this statem ent th at she tried to alter the records   tioned by courts o f law, a n d its decisions are enforced and carried out by the
and to obtain a clean licence fo r the sole reason that in the event of his com ­         courts of law. I am o f opinion that by tam pering with the evidence which was
mitting another road traffic offence a court would sentence him for it whilst             to be laid before that tribunal the defendant was interfering with the course of
being in ignorance o f his previous offences. In that circumstance a miscarriage          justice. 1 agree with my L ord that his act was completed.”
of justice unlawfully procured might very well occur. Does the m ere fact that                The correctness of the sentence: “ T he real offence here is the doing of some
it was in that state of mind she acted unlawfully introduce the concept of a              act which has a tendency and is intended to pervert the administration of public
course of justice having thereby been em barked upon?                                     justice ” has never been doubted since it was first uttered. Confirmation for it is
   We think not. So acting against the possibility o f the commission some time           to be found in m any o f the cases earlier referred to in this judgment. In the
in the future of a traffic Offence is obviously one of the contingencies section          latest of them, namely M a c h i n (1980) 71 Cr.App.R. 166; [1980] 1 W .L.R. 763,
 101 (6) was designed to penalise, but it would be wholly unreal in ou r view to          it was said that the gist of the offence is conduct which m ay lead and is intended
regard the reason for acting in that way as bringing into existence a course of           to lead to a miscarriage of justice.
justice. It did not inspire any investigation by police officers into the commission          In order, therefore, to secure a conviction against Mrs. Selvage and against
of offences o r the initiation of criminal proceedings. T h at state of mind cannot       M organ, the prosecution in our opinion had to prove that each of them intended,
remotely be regarded as analogous to the state of mind of Vreones when he tam ­           by Mrs. Selvage’s act or acts, that the doing of justice should be interfered with,
pered with the test sample of wheat which he knew was to be the touchstone by             i.e. th at it should be perverted. This is classically and obviously a jury question.
which disputes likely to arise in a special comm ercial situation would be decided.       I t was not left to the jury in the present case for reasons already explained. This
    If this conclusion be erroneous and the reasons why Mrs. Selvage could, as            would have been, were it incum bent upon us to consider it, another reason why
 previously suggested be inferred to have acted, be deemed to be capable of               we should have been driven to quash their convictions. Quash them we must for
setting in motion a course of justice the jury in the present case would have had         the reason that no course o f justice had been em barked upon a t any relevant
to decide whether (a) that was the reason why she acted as she did in contrast to         time. Alternatively, if this be an erroneous view, we would quash them for the
what was known she was to tell them from the dock if the trial had proceeded              other reasons explained.
differently, and (b) if so the only safe inference from that was that she was seek­                                                                         A ppeals allowed.
 ing unlawfully to protect Morgan from proper punishm ent upon the possible                                                                             Convictions quashed.
Chronology o f case

15th April 1989       The day o f the disaster

17thApril 1989        Lord Justice Taylor appointed to conduct enquiry. Evidence taken in
                      May and June.

4th August 1989       Publication o f Taylor interim report.

15thDecember 1989     Implicit admission by solicitors on behalf o f Chief Constable o f South
                      Yorkshire Police o f negligence

18th April 1990       “Mini” inquests held

6thAugust 1990        Two leading counsel apparently advised DPP not to prosecute
                      (Opinions not available).

19thNovember 1990 Inquests resume before a jury.

29thMarch 1991        Jury returns accidental death by majority o f 9 to 2.

11thJuly 1991         Police Complaints Authority direct disciplinary proceedings against
                      Duckenfield and Murray for neglect of duty.

November 1991         Duckenfield retired from police on grounds o f ill-health. Disciplinary
                      proceedings abandoned thereafter against both men.

April 1992            Hillsborough families request Attorney-General to apply for fresh
                      inquests.

August 1992           Attorney-General declines to apply.

April 1993            Six bereaved families were granted leave to move for Judicial Review
                      o f inquest verdicts.

5thNovember 1993      Application for judicial review dismissed.

5thDecember 1996      Granada Television broadcast “Hillsborough” and presented new
                      evidence.

30thJune 1997         Secretary o f State for the Home Department appointed Lord Justice
                      Stuart-Smith to conduct a “scrutiny” into the fresh evidence.

February 1998         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reported.                 ^
                                                                          (ntjr&f
1085                                                       18 FEBRUARY 1998                          Hillsborough                          1086


                          Hillsborough                                       The main causes of the disaster have long been clear.
                                                                          They were identified by Lord Taylor in his interim report
                                                                          in August 1989. Lord Justice Taylor did not attribute all
3.31 pm                                                                   the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph
   The Secretary of State for the Home Department                         278 of his report he made it clear that
(Mr. Jack Straw): With permission, Madam Speaker,                         “the main reason for the disaster w as the failure of police control” .
I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough
stadium disaster.                                                         Both Lord Taylor, and now Lord Justice                 Stuart-Smith,
                                                                          have been damning in their condemnation                of the senior
  Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so
                                                                          officer in charge that afternoon, the                   then Chief
many people. The families and friends of the 96 Liverpool
                                                                          Superintendent Duckenfield. Lord Justice                Stuart-Smith
fans who died at Hillsborough have suffered
immeasurably. The whole nation has been profoundly                        refers in his report to
disturbed by what occurred that day. Although almost                      “ Mr. Duckenfield’s disgraceful lie”
nine years have now passed, many of the families and
others felt very strongly indeed that new evidence was                    about one of the gates at Hillsborough—
available that would cast new light on the events. As                     “Gate C being forced open by fans” .
Home Secretary, I was determined to do all that I could
to establish whether that was indeed the case.                               The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the
                                                                          main share of responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield
   On coming into office in May last year, I gave that                    Wednesday football club and the local authority were also
question intense and urgent consideration, and on 30 June,                criticised by Lord Taylor.
I announced to the House that the Attorney-General and
I had decided to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,                         With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that,
a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, to conduct                  over time, some new information may become available,
an independent scrutiny of the matter. His terms of                       but that does not necessarily mean that the outcome of
reference were                                                            any previous inquiries would have been different. What is
                                                                          crucial is not just whether the information is new, but
  “To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster
at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not
                                                                          whether it is of such significance—to use the phrase in
available;                                                                the terms of reference—as to justify a new inquiry.
(a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or                      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail
 (b) to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General       all the evidence put before him. That included all the
 for the purpose o f discharging their respective statutory                relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
 responsibilities; or                                                      inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at all the
 (c) to the C hief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                                                                           information presented to him, by individuals and official
 police disciplinary matters;                                              bodies, including those representing the families of those
                                                                           who died and others who have acted in support of them.
 and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
 available is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the
                                                                           He has produced a thorough and comprehensive report
 Secretary o f State for the Hom e Departm ent of a further public         and goes into immense detail to analyse and reach
 inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any    conclusions on each of the submissions made to him.
 evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant
 to their respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other        Let me briefly summarise what Lord Justice
 action which should be taken in the public interest.”                     Stuart-Smith says on the key allegations relating to video
                                                                           evidence and the cut-off time of 3.15 pm for the inquest,
   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report,                 and allegations of interference with witnesses. I refer first
 which I am publishing today. It is available in the Vote                  to the video evidence. Two sets of allegations were made
 Office. His scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and             to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about video evidence. They
 detailed examinations of the evidence in this case. The                   were, first, that video tapes were stolen from the club’s
 public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor                        control room to conceal material evidence from the earlier
 considered fully the causes of the disaster and made
                                                                           inquiries. There is no dispute that the theft of two tapes
 wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and
                                                                           took place. The tapes were pictures from the club’s closed
 safety at sports events. Those have had a profound and
                                                                           circuit television cameras, not from police cameras.
 positive effect on both crowd safety at football grounds
                                                                           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that, in any event, the
 and on the policing of football matches.
                                                                           tapes would have shown nothing significant. Moreover,
   The deaths that occurred were also the subject of                       he is satisfied that all the police tapes were made available
 inquests conducted by the coroner for the Western district                in their entirety to Lord Taylor’s inquiry and to the
 of South Yorkshire in two parts in 1990 and 1991. Those                   coroner.
 inquests involved more than 80 days of public hearings.
 A further investigation was conducted by the West                            The second allegation relating to video tapes, with
 Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints                      which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals at considerable
 Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds                    length, was made principally by Mr. Roger Houldsworth,
 for criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the police.              a video technician at Sheffield Wednesday football club.
 That investigation involved taking more than 5,000                        It was that the police had blamed their failure to see
 statements. At a later stage, in November 1993, a judicial                overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 being
 review of the coroner’s proceedings upheld the inquest                    defective, when it was not; that evidence of the video
 verdict of accidental death and the conduct of those                      tapes taken by camera 5 was deliberately suppressed and
 proceedings. We have now had this further detailed                        concealed; and that two police officers gave deliberately
 scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice of Appeal.                              false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.

       553 CD122-PAG2/1
1087                     Hillsborough              18 FEBRUARY 1998                        Hillsborough                         1088


[Mr. Jack Straw]                                                authorities that could cause them to reconsider the
                                                                decisions that they have already taken. He also concludes
   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the police did           that none of the evidence that he was asked to consider
not try to blame their failure to spot overcrowding on          added anything significant to the evidence that was
the terraces on faulty CCTV equipment. He says that             available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.
the police controllers had a good view over the terraces          I, the Attorney-General and the Director of Public
from the control box, and did not pretend otherwise.            Prosecutions have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
He also concluded that                                          report very carefully. We have no reason to doubt his
“the importance of Mr. Houldsw orth’s   evidence   has   been   conclusions. That will, I know, be deeply disappointing
exaggerated out o f all proportion” ,                           for the families of those who died at Hillsborough and for
and that Mr. Houldsworth’s existence and evidence were          many who have campaigned on their behalf.
known to the Taylor inquiry and to the coroner.                   I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that the allegation         Hillsborough feel betrayed by those responsible for
that the police hid video tape evidence of the terraces         policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state
is “unfounded”.                                                 of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the
   There are allegations about the conduct of the               changes that resulted from the Taylor inquiry will mean
inquest, and in particular about the cut-off time of            that such a disaster will never happen again.
3.15 pm. One of the issues that has unquestionably                However, there is another sense in which the system
caused most distress to those bereaved at Hillsborough          has failed the Hillsborough families. As Lord Justice
was the decision of the coroner to rule that all those          Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report:
who had died had received the injuries that caused their
                                                                   “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
deaths by 3.15 pm. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that          personally been held to account either in a criminal court,
the coroner did not say that all those who died did so          disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of losing their job” .
before 3.15 pm, or that all those who became
unconscious subsequently died. It was only in relation           That highlights some of the serious shortcomings in the
to how or by what means the deceased came to their              police disciplinary system. Earlier this year, the Select
deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Lord Justice          Committee on Home Affairs produced a report that made
Stuart-Smith says that the cut-off time did not limit the       major recommendations for change. I shall respond fully
inquiry undertaken by the inquest, and that he does not         to that report soon, but what happened after Hillsborough
consider the inquest to have been flawed. The Taylor            is a prime example of why we must improve the current
inquiry considered in detail the response of the                arrangements.
emergency services after 3.15 pm as well as before,               Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on whether
and concluded that no valid criticism could be made             coroners’ proceedings are appropriate at all in respect of
of them.                                                        a major disaster that has already been the subject of a
   The main allegations concerning interference with            public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of
witnesses were that specific witnesses had had pressure         a Home Office working group on disasters and
put on them by the West Midlands police, and that the           inquests—published in March 1997—that the role of the
South Yorkshire police had collected evidence from              coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.
their own officers in an unacceptable manner.                      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report emphasises the
   On the first allegation, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith           exceptional difficulty of the coroner’s task in conducting
concludes that there was no improper attempt to alter           the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I think,
the evidence of those witnesses. On the second, he              unnecessary burden on the families involved, given that
records that a number of the initial statements made            the Taylor report had covered substantially the same
by South Yorkshire police officers were subsequently            ground. Certainly, I am sure that Hillsborough proved that
amended on the advice of solicitors to the force before         the inquest system in its present form is an unsuitable
being submitted to the Taylor inquiry. He says that in          means of dealing with disasters of that kind. I think it
a very few cases, which are referred to in appendix 7           would be far better—above all, for the bereaved
of the report, what was excluded was either factual or          families—if there were one fully comprehensive inquiry
comment in which factual matters were implicit. He              into the causes of death and the wider circumstances.
says that                                                          When I instigated the scrutiny, I said I would do my
“it would have been preferable”                                 best to ensure that the evidence considered by
for those matters not to have been excluded, but he is          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most of the
satisfied that Lord Taylor’s inquiry was not in any way         main material that he has considered is contained in
inhibited or impeded by what happened.                          appendices to his report. Much of the other evidence that
                                                                he has considered is already in the public domain,
   The report also deals comprehensively in appendix            consisting of transcripts of public hearings or material
10 with the 10 questions posed by the Granada Television        considered by the Taylor inquiry. As I told the shadow
programme in December 1996.                                     Home Secretary, I am arranging for the other material
   Taking those and all other considerations into account,      considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in
the overall conclusion that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith           the Library of the House, save where there are overriding
reaches is that there is no basis for a further public          reasons for doing otherwise. Let me make it clear that the
inquiry. He also finds no basis for a renewed application       material that will be published will include all the original
to quash the verdict of the inquest, and he concludes that      statements made by South Yorkshire police officers,
there is no material that should be put before the Director     together with the amended versions submitted to the
of Public Prosecutions or the police disciplinary               Taylor inquiry.
   554 CD122-PAG2/2
            1089                       Hillsborough                     18 FEBRUARY 1998                       Hillsborough                       1090


              All hon. Members will have profound sympathy                            how it happened in the worst tragedy in British sporting
            with the families and friends of those who died at                        history are now closed as far as the Government are
            Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend what                    concerned?
            they have suffered. In his report, Lord Justice
            Stuart-Smith says:                                                            M r. Straw: I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman
               “I realise that my report and advice will com e as a disappointment
                                                                                      for his opening comments. Of course, the whole House
            to them”—
                                                                                      agrees with the eloquent and compassionate words that he
                                                                                      used to express some understanding of the nightmare that
            the families and friends of those who died—                               the families have faced since that afternoon. He asked four
             “especially since they have had their hopes raised that something        questions, the first of which was whether I am personally
             more could be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my            satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully examined the
           , judgement. I have had to look dispassionately and objectively at         new evidence, or the claimed new evidence that has
             what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light o f the evidence which   emerged. Yes, I am satisfied, and so is my right hon. and
    it
             had previously been considered” .
    >r                                                                                learned Friend the Attorney-General.
    e       My right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General,                        It does not follow that when one establishes an inquiry
    £       the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have had to                     of this kind, one is bound to accept its conclusions, but as
    ill     consider Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same                    the right hon. Gentleman will have seen from the
            light, and we accept its conclusions.                                      summary in chapter 7, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
    m          The entire country is united in sympathy with those                     conducted a most careful examination of the evidence and
             who lost loved ones at Hillsborough. We cannot take                       has reached clear conclusions. It would have been
             the pain from them, but I hope that the families will                     extraordinary if my right hon. and learned Friend the
             recognise that the report represents—as I promised—an                     Attorney-General and I had not followed those
   ias
             independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny of all the                    conclusions in those circumstances.
   irt,
             evidence that was given to the committee.                                    The right hon. Gentleman asked whether I am satisfied
                                                                                       that the families’ complaints about the 3.15 pm cut-off
   he                                                                                  point have been dealt with satisfactorily in the report.
   iCt          Sir Brian Mawhinney (North-West Cambridgeshire):                        I am satisfied about that so far as the report is concerned.
   .de       I thank the Home Secretary for his courtesy in letting me                  Lord Justice Stuart-Smith states on page 41, paragraph
   Hy        have early sight of his statement, and even earlier sight of               12 that in his view the coroner had been “widely
   gh        the report. It is a long report, and, as the right hon.                    misrepresented” about what the 3.15 pm cut-off point was
   jnt       Gentleman will understand, I have not had the opportunity                  meant to mean. He states:
             to read it all, but I have read carefully the chapter that
                                                                                          “It should be noted that the Coroner did not say that all those
             summarises the findings in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
   her                                                                                 who died did so before 3.15, or that the medical evidence was to
             own words. I also thank the right hon. Gentleman for his
   : of                                                                                this effect.”
             willingness to publish all the material, both unamended
   f a                                                                                 The point about the 3.15 pm cut-off was much narrower.
             and amended. I am sure that that was the right thing to do.
     of                                                                                I do not think that that will be accepted by the families.
   and          We, like Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, express great                      The combination, the conjunction, of the coroner’s inquest
    the       sympathy for the relatives of those who died, and the                    before and after the major public inquiry raises concerns
              spectators who were injured. We, too, find it difficult to               about the purpose of such inquests when there is such a
              imagine anything more horrific than the experience of                    major inquiry, about which I commented in my statement.
    the
              those who endured it, and of those who lost their                           The right hon. Gentleman asked whether the families
   ting
              families—including children—in that appalling incident.                  will be disappointed. Inevitably, there was always a risk
  iinl
   ink^
                 I have four questions on the report. First, is the Home               that in accepting, as I did, that there was, prima facie,
 ;ame         Secretary satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully                 sufficient new evidence needing this kind of scrutiny, the
 . that       examined all the so-called new evidence that has emerged,                families’ hopes would be raised and that that could lead
 table        not least from the families, since the Taylor inquiry? Is he             to one of the four possibilities that are mentioned in the
 nk it        personally satisfied that none of it was newly significant?              terms of reference. That was inevitable. I do not in
 aved         Secondly, is he satisfied that the families’ complaints                  the least think that it was wrong to set up the inquiry,
 quiry        about the so-called 3.15 pm cut-off point have been                      and I know that the right hon. Gentleman supported me
              comprehensively addressed by the judge? No doubt the                     in doing so.
              right hon. Gentleman realises that, although his decision                   The families are disappointed. With Madam Speaker’s
  0 my
              to establish this independent scrutiny was broadly                       permission, I saw them at 2.15 pm this afternoon and,
  1 by
  ■f the
              welcomed, it always carried the risk that it would heighten              again with her permission, I gave them copies of the
  ed in
              expectations, particularly those of the families who were                report. They are upset, disappointed and angry about its
              involved. That brings me to my third question. Does he                    conclusions. They are also angry that I have accepted
  e that
              accept that they will be disappointed by the outcome of                   those conclusions. I understand that, but what I ask them
  main,
              the inquiry and that some of them may feel let down?                      to do—and, obviously, what they were not able to do in
 aterial
 ladow           My fourth and final question to the Home Secretary is                  the three quarters of an hour that I had with them—is to
 aterial      this. By agreeing that there is no basis for a further                    read the report carefully and, I hope, in time, to come
 ced in       judicial inquiry; for a reopening of Lord Taylor’s inquiry;               to understand that the establishment of this further
 Tiding       for a renewed application to the divisional court; for                    scrutiny and the way in which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
hat the       the Attorney-General to exercise his powers under the                     conducted it show great respect for their bereavement and
riginal       Coroner’s Act 1988; or for any new material to be put                     continuing concerns.
fficers,      before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police                     Finally, the right hon. Gentleman asked me whether
 to the        C om plaints Authority, is he suggesting to the House and                I believe that, as it were, this matter is now closed.
               the country that matters relating to what happened and                   We are announcing today that there are no grounds for

                   555 CD122-PAG2/3
                                                                                                               -




1091                       Hillsborough                     18 FEBRUARY 1998                    Hillsborough                    1092

[Mr. Straw]                                                              followed by a comprehensive inquiry, which, in practice,
                                                                         would include the purposes of subsequent main inquests
reopening a further full public inquiry of the sort that was             under a senior judicial figure, and a final, formal inquest,
conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, the coroner’s inquest,                 which would simply receive the main inquiry’s report.
disciplinary matters against the police or certain other                 In our judgment, that would be a far more satisfactory
matters. Those are our decisions and they will have to                   way of dealing with these matters, and far less frustrating
stand.                                                                   to the relatives and friends of the bereaved.
   The feelings of the families will live with them for ever,
so the matter is not closed in that sense. All of us who                    M r. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Although the
have lost children in any circumstances have some                        report has not provided the Home Secretary with support
understanding of the way in which people never get over                  for a further general inquiry, does he recognise that this
the deaths of children, even if they die from natural                    outcome will make it even harder to lift the cloud of grief
causes; it is still more terrible if they die from violent               and frustration that hangs over the families and friends of
causes such as this. However, there are other lessons that               those who lost their lives? Bearing in mind Lord Justice
we have to learn. As I have said, those relate to the                    Stuart-Smith’s reference to the “disgraceful lie” of a
purpose of coroners’ inquiries, to the fact that we should               senior police officer, the evidence of material omitted
not put families through the mill twice, as happened in                  from police evidence and Lord Justice Taylor’s assertion
this case, and to the need to change the police                          that the principal cause was a police failure, is it not
disciplinary system.                                                     understandable that the families will be bitterly
                                                                         disappointed that the door seems finally to be closed on
  M r. Eddie O ’H ara (Knowsley, South): One has to live                 any disciplinary action against particular individuals who
on Merseyside to understand the palpable sense of grief,                 should bear some responsibility? Will the right hon.
resentment and anger that still exists in our part of the                Gentleman look again at that aspect of the issue and give
world at what we regard as the continuing injustice as a                 priority to a reform of police disciplinary procedure?
result of the Hillsborough affair.
   My right hon. Friend has rightly pointed out that Lord                   M r. Straw : The right hon. Gentleman asks whether
Justice Stuart-Smith had to consider two questions: was                  it will not now be even harder to lift the clouds of grief
there new evidence; and was it sufficiently strong to be a               over the bereaved families. I cannot speak for them, but
basis for reopening the inquiry? I draw my right hon.                    it would have been far worse had I not set up this further
Friend’s attention to paragraph 14 and related paragraph                 scrutiny. They came forward with serious new allegations
13 on page 41 of the report, which deal with the 3.15 pm                 and it was important that they were examined by someone
cut-off, which is one of the most important sources of                   of the experience and distinction of Lord Justice
anger. Referring to new evidence about whether people                    Stuart-Smith. However, the right hon. Gentleman is
were alive after 3.15 pm, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says:                right—there can be no dispute about it—that the families
                                                                         are bound to be bitterly disappointed by the fact that no
“it is difficult to see the relevance o f further evidence that person
A was alive at 3.15 pm but died subsequently”—
                                                                         one has taken the blame for what happened. Lord Justice
                                                                         Stuart-Smith makes that clear and shares the bitter
referring to whether people might have survived if they                  disappointment of the families, as do I and, I believe, the
had been given better medical treatment. He justifies that               House. As I said in my earlier remarks, that underlines
conclusion by referring to the divisional court, which                   the need for there to be significant changes to the police
rejected such grounds, concluding that such questions                    disciplinary system.
“were not relevant to the inquiry into how — i.e. by what means—
the deceased had come to their deaths.”
                                                                            M r. Andrew Miller (Ellesmere Port and Neston):
If a person had a cardiac arrest in hospital and was not                 My right hon. Friend has mentioned in the context of the
satisfactorily treated, would that be regarded as simply                 report his consideration of the future conduct of inquests.
death by cardiac arrest, or would the consideration of                   Will he extend his review to consider carefully the way
neglect come into it?                                                    in which relatives are treated during inquests? They are
                                                                         treated in a most dispassionate way, which results in much
   M r. Straw: The point that my hon. Friend raises is                   of the grief that is expressed vocally by many of the
often raised in relation to the conduct of inquests. It comes            people, including my constituents, who suffered in this
up when, for example, there have been allegations of                     terrible tragedy.
deaths in custody and in many cases when there has been
a violent or unexpected death. The relatives believe that                   M r. Straw: Yes, I will. We have the helpful report of
part of the purpose of the inquest is to allocate blame for              the disasters and inquests working group, established
what has happened, whereas the purpose of the inquest                    under the previous Administration, which made
is much narrower: to try to identify the cause of death. It              recommendations in March last year. Part of the reason
is in that context that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith makes his              for the frustration—often anger—at inquests, of relatives
remarks. It is important to recognise that all that he says              and others who are bereaved, goes back to a
in paragraph 14 on page 41 follows the decision of the                   misapprehension about their purpose. To some extent, that
divisional court, which followed a thorough judicial                     will be dealt with by the kind of changes that I have
review hearing, not to grant a reopening of the inquest.                 already outlined for inquiries into major disasters.
   Again, my hon. Friend flags up a need for changes in
the way in which investigations are held into major                        Mrs. Louise Ellman (Liverpool, Riverside): My right
disasters such as Hillsborough. I repeat that we believe                 hon. Friend acted promptly and properly in
that, in future, there should be what are called                         commissioning the scrutiny, for which I thank him.
mini-inquests into the immediate causes of death,                        I agree that the bereaved parents will remain upset,
   556 CDI22-PAG2/4
1093                     Hillsborough                 18 FEBRUARY 1998                    Hillsborough                     1094


  disappointed and angry and, in that knowledge, will he           aside, as the families would have wished him to do. It is
  give the matter further consideration? Does he accept that       a matter of huge frustration that no one has been brought
' it is not possible for all of us at this early stage to assess   to justice. That represents severe defects in terms of police
 'the report’s full implications and to read it in detail to       discipline, and I have spoken about the need for that to
  form our judgment? Therefore, will he support calls for          be changed. It is not possible to put the clock back nine
  an opportunity for the House to consider the report              years to do so.
  further, so that we may give a reasoned assessment of the
  report and attempt to deal with the unresolved problems             M r. Robert N. W areing (Liverpool, West Derby):
  and traumas faced by the parents? I support them in not          Does my right hon. Friend accept that there will be deep
  wishing to leave matters simply as they stand.                   unease on Merseyside and elsewhere, and that people will
                                                                   feel that there is no justice in this world? Does he further
   M r. Straw: I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her             accept that because few of us have had the opportunity to
 opening remarks, and I fully understand her concern—              read the report—although he was kind enough to analyse
 which is widely shared—that there should be a debate on           it with the parents—far more scrutiny is required by the
 the matter. I am probably one of the few who has had an           House of Commons; possibly by the Select Committee on
 opportunity to read the report thoroughly, and I shall pass       Home Affairs, which should be asked to report?
 on my hon. Friend’s remarks to my right hon. Friend the              Furthermore, I add my voice to that of my hon. Friend
 President of the Council. I hope that my right hon. Friend        the Member for Liverpool, Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) and
 will take them into account.                                      ask that there should be a proper debate following a
                                                                   reasonable period to allow us to read the report. For
   M aria Eagle (Liverpool, Garston): I thank my right             example, it would seem that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 hon. Friend for his statement and for his consideration in        ruled as not significant a couple of videos stolen from
 seeking your permission, Madam Speaker, to speak to the           Sheffield Wednesday. How on earth could he say that they
 families first before making it. He has accepted the deep         were not significant if he had never seen them? Many
 disquiet that they feel as a result of the report by Lord         questions have been raised by the report, and the parents
 Justice Stuart-Smith, and I know that it is deep.                 will not feel that justice has been done until they are
 I particularly welcome my right hon. Friend’s                      answered.
 undertaking to publish all the available evidence. What
 would his attitude be if, at some stage, the families were           M r. Straw: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith explains why he
 to consider private prosecutions or taking further action?        came to that conclusion and how he could judge that the
                                                                   videos were not significant when he had not seen them.
    Mr. Straw: Subject to certain constraints, individuals         One of the videos was from a misplaced camera angle.
 in this country may take private prosecutions. That is            It was known that it had been pointing at a wall.
 entirely a matter for them and for the judicial processes.        Therefore, the tape was of no value, even though it was
 It would be improper for me to comment.                           stolen. As for the other video, two points are made. One
                                                                   is that it was a club video. Police videos in part covered
    M r. Derek Twigg (Halton): I speak with some                   the same area. In addition, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 knowledge, as I was on the terraces at Hillsborough that          makes the point that the police admitted that they could
 day and not in some directors’ area. I had to wait for two        see with their own eyes what was going on on the terraces
 hours to see whether my friends were alive, and I know            and did not need this crucial video evidence. That is one
 that a number of people from my constituency and that of          example of why it is very important that everybody should
 my hon. Friend the Member for Weaver Vale (Mr. Hall)              read the report’s details. When they do, they may be
 were killed on that day.                                          reassured that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has gone into the
                                                                   matter in great detail and with great care.
    May I express my bitter disappointment—not at the
 Home Secretary, whom I thank for organising                          That brings me to my hon. Friend’s first point. I have
 the scrutiny—but at the conclusions of the report?                already accepted that it is a matter of fact—there is no
 The families will be bitterly disappointed by the fact that       question about this—that there is great disappointment
 no one has been brought to justice, and such an injustice         among the bereaved families and friends of those who
 does not give confidence in our judicial system. I ask my         died on that terrible day. I do not think that it is correct
 right hon. Friend for his comments on that. If we cannot          to say—to pick up my hon. Friend’s words—that there is
 have a debate on the Floor of the House on the report,            no justice in this world. On reflection, he will perhaps
 would you, Madam Speaker, be prepared to allow an                 accept that Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry was conducted
 Adjournment debate on the subject in the future?                  impeccably, with great thoroughness. There has been no
                                                                   criticism of either the way in which he conducted that
                                                                   inquiry or his conclusions. That may be only partial
     M r. Straw: Of course, I understand my hon. Friend’s
                                                                   justice in the context of this terrible tragedy—it is partial
  personal feelings in the light of the fact that he was
                                                                   justice. I understand that the conduct of the inquests was
  present on that terrible day. I understand, too, that those
                                                                   controversial, but that has a great deal to do with the
  feelings will live with him for the rest of his life. The
                                                                   system of inquests, and that was not found to be unjust.
  families are bitterly disappointed and, as I said, I hope
  that their disappointment will be directed at my right hon.         It is inevitable that an inquiry’s conclusions may be
        learned Friend the Attorney-General and me as well         uncomfortable to one side or another. I hope that those
   as at Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, because it is our view that    who read the report will understand that it represents a
  he has done a thorough, comprehensive and detailed job           thorough inquiry in the best traditions of British justice.
   with the utmost integrity. He has gone into all the
   allegations carefully and, as he said, it was his job to look     M r. Vernon Coaker (Gedling): As one of the
s. at the evidence presented to him and to put compassion           Members of Parliament who represents the Nottingham
1095                      Hillsborough                      18 FEBRUARY 1998                     Hillsborough                    1096


[Mr. Vernon Coaker]                                                        why he was chosen to hold the inquiry. When my hon.
                                                                          Friend has had a chance to digest Lord Justice
area, may I take this opportunity, on behalf of those                     Stuart-Smith’s report, he will appreciate that it has gone.
Members, to express our sympathy with the families and                    into the allegations with great care.
people of Merseyside? Does the Home Secretary agree
that the people of Nottingham, along with those on                           M r. Tony Clarke (Northampton, South): Does my
Merseyside, will want a full and frank debate on the                      right hon. Friend accept that it is that clear evidence that
report, which amounts to more than 200 pages and has                      will make it impossible for the families to accept
only just been published today? Will he do all that he can                disappointment, inasmuch as they know that the police
to ensure a full debate, so that people will have                         failed and that nothing is being done about that? Will he
the opportunity to express their views and opinions to me                 say a few words about the evidence that Lord Justice
and other Members of Parliament, and we can express                       Stuart-Smith put forward in respect of the stolen tapes?
those views in the Chamber?                                               Surely, if the stolen tapes are missing, we must ask two
                                                                          questions. First, who was responsible for that theft and,
                                                                          secondly, for what reason were they stolen if not for
  M r. Straw: I accept my hon. Friend’s point. I should                   concealment? It is for that reason that I add my support
have made the point in response to my hon. Friend the                     to the call of my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool,
Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) that                       Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) for a full debate in the House to
there is obviously considerable feeling about the need for                examine the individual pieces of evidence and missing
a debate. I shall pass that on to my right hon. Friend the                evidence before coming to a conclusion.
President of the Council.
                                                                            M r. Straw: I appreciate that I am one of the few people
                                                                          who have had the benefit of reading the report. If my hon.
   M r. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover): Is the Home Secretary                  Friend reads it, as I know he will, he will see that the
aware that I find it difficult to believe that 95 people were             question of the two missing tapes is dealt with in some
killed but nobody is to blame? Is he further aware that                   particular detail. I have explained why Lord Justice
inquests on the deaths of many people, such as after                      Stuart-Smith reached the conclusion that he did about
mining disasters and for this matter, are not fit and proper              whether the fact that they were stolen was significant.
places to start the procedure? He would do well, during                   This goes back to the point that I made at the beginning of
this Parliament, to introduce measures to ensure that                     my statement. When we consider whether a major public
inquests are fit to deal with not just the death of three                 inquiry into events that took place nine years ago should
people in a, house fire but with mass disasters. I have                   be reopened, with all the inevitable problems caused by
never believed that inquests are competent to do the job.                 the effluxion of time, the issue has to be not only whether
                                                                          there is new evidence—which there might be—but
  Will the Home Secretary do me a favour? If, perchance,                  whether it is of such significance as materially to alter the
there is another unfortunate incident of this kind, will he               conclusions of the first inquiry. That is what Lord Justice
not invite these tinpot judges and justices—distinguished                 Stuart-Smith has examined. He has come to the
though they may be—to deal with the problem? I have                       conclusion that I have described about the two missing
never believed that they understand working-class culture.                tapes.
Over the past few years, all these people—Lord Justice                       It is a matter of supposition why the tapes were stolen.
Scott, Lord Justice Taylor, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—                    People steal things for the purposes of concealment or for
have been investigating matters. What do they really                      more prosaic reasons. They may have wanted the tapes
know about what makes working-class people tick?                          for their own use. No one has ever been apprehended for
                                                                          the theft of the tapes, but in the circumstances described
                                                                          and set out in the report, it is palpable that they were not
  M r. Straw: My hon. Friend makes the point that no                      material to the question whether the police were to blame
one is to blame. It is not the case that the earlier inquiries            for failing to recognise that a serious disaster was taking
found no one to blame. Indeed, on page 49 of his interim                  place at the Leppings lane end. That was the issue. If Lord
report—Cm 765—Lord Justice Taylor was explicit and                        Justice Taylor had said that the police were not to blame
damning. He said:                                                         and that the tapes were likely to disclose why, the tapes
“the m ain reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control”.   would have greater significance. However, Lord Justice
                                                                          Taylor said that the police were to blame. He also pointed
There has been no cover-up of that. There was a failure of                out—this was confirmed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—
police control, and Lord Justice Taylor pulled no punches                 that one of the reasons why the police were to blame was
whatever in reaching that conclusion. I hope that that                    that they did not have to rely on video evidence;
gives the lie to my hon. Friend’s suggestion that judges                  they could see with their own eyes what was going on            j
are incapable of holding investigations into matters of this              and they failed to make proper decisions following that.
kind. I note that whenever there is a call for an inquiry,
there is a great demand for members of the Court of                          M r. Ross Cranston (Dudley, North): May I take my
Appeal to hold them.                                                      right hon. Friend back to the issue of police discipline and
                                                                          the feeling among the relatives that no one has been
    It is inevitable that not everyone will be satisfied by the           brought to justice? May I ask him specifically whether
 result of an inquiry because such judgments defy human                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith addresses the issue of early
 behaviour. However, Lord Justice Taylor’s report showed                  retirement by police officers to avoid disciplinary
 great understanding of soccer and soccer culture. He was                 procedures? May I press him for a speedy response to the
 an ardent soccer supporter himself. I had the occasional                 Select Committee on Home Affairs report on police
 discussion with him about it. That is one of the reasons                 discipline?

    558 CD122-PAG2/6
      1097                   Hillsborough                 18 FEBRUARY 1998                                                           1098


          M r. Straw: I have already referred to Lord Justice                              Point of Order
       Stuart-Smith’s remarks about the fact that no one has been
       brought to justice and that no one has suffered any            4.21 pm
       disciplinary proceedings or even lost their job as a result
       either of those terrible events, or of Lord Justice Taylor’s      M r. Andrew Robathan (Blaby): On a point of order,
       clear conclusion that a failure of police control was the      Madam Speaker. I have given you prior notice of this
       principal cause of the disaster. By implication, it is clear   point of order, which concerns the accuracy of statements
       that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is not happy with what          recorded in the Official Report. We all judge the Official
       happened, and neither are we. I have looked in great detail    Report to be of immense use when we write our speeches
     ' at the helpful report from the Select Committee, of which      or assemble arguments, and it is important that
       my hon. Friend is a member. As I said earlier, we intend       statements recorded in it are accurate, so I ask your
       to make an early announcement about that matter, with a        guidance. On 21 January, the hon. Member for Broxtowe
       view to improving the system of police discipline.             (Dr. Palmer) introduced a ten-minute Bill about air
                                                                      weapons. I have spoken to the hon. Gentleman and we
                                                                      have discussed the matter, although sadly he cannot be
                                                                      here this afternoon. I should say that I wish him no ill
                                                                      and I am sure that it was confusion of facts, rather than
                                                                      any other cause, which led to this point of order.
                                                                      The Official Report states:
                                                                         “In the past few years, one police officer w as killed and another
                                                                      7,000 injured by airgun attacks.”— [Official Report, 21 January
                                                                      1998; V ol. 304, c. 1014.]
                                                                      However, in response to a written question from me, the
                                                                      Home Secretary said that, although he had no figure for
                                                                      the past two years, he could find no fatal injuries and a
                                                                      total of 22 injuries recorded during eight of the past
                                                                      10 years. I can find no other evidence of anybody being
                                                                      killed. Every policeman injured is a serious matter, but the
                                                                      discrepancy between 22 and 7,000 is large and I wondered
                                                                      whether you could give your judgment on that, Madam
                                                                      Speaker.

                                                                         M adam Speaker: The answer is a polite no. It is not
                                                                      a point of order: the hon. Gentleman is challenging the
                                                                      figures used by another hon. Member and that is not a
                                                                      matter for the Speaker, but a matter for debate and
                                                                      argument. It is not for the Speaker of the House to
                                                                      determine the figures or to become involved in arguments
                                                                      about the substance of debates. The hon. Gentleman may
                                                                      try to use other methods to bring the matter to the
                                                                      attention of the hon. Member for Broxtowe (Dr. Palmer).




y
d
n
:r
y
y
e
e

          559 CD122-PAG2/7
    D LUTY _                           Fax:0151-9334525                            10 Jul ’98      15-2? .




                SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES' COURT
i



                        The Court House • Merton Road • Bootle • Merseyside . L20 3BJ_____


               D. Luty, Solicitor                                                     Telephone: 0151-933 6999
               Clerk to the Justices                                                  Extension:

               My Ref: OL/JMH           Your Ref: DRL/H29                             Fax No;   0151-922 4285


                                                                                                10* July, 1998




               Dear Sirs,
                                       ADliNGTON -V- DUCKENFTF.I.n a n d MURRAY


                        I refer to our earlier correspondence in relation to the above case and, in particular,
               your letter of today.
                       The proceedings in respect of the defendants Duckenfield and Murraywere brought
               before the court this afternoon and the magistrates agreed that they should be withdrawn. The
               court made an order that the defendants’costs should be taxed and made payable from central
               funds in accordance with Section 16 erfthe Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.




                                                       Yours faithfully,




                                                    Clerk to the Justices.




               Messrs. Watts, Leather,
               Solicitors,
               Central Buildings, l 11Floor,
               41 North John Street,
               Liverpool. L29RR
10. JUL. 1998 1 3 : 1 0                                                                                                                                                 KC. 2 43 8   ?. 2 / 2




                            Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
                        Facsimile 0113 2459412. Docurooir Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@ w alfeerm oK kco.uk
                                                  Web: Hwp;//www.,«valkcinioriis.co.uk

          Messrs. Watts Leather                                                                                Oux r e f               R B M /M T /M U R R A Y
          Solicitors
          1st Floor
          Central Buildings                                                                                   Your ref                 D R L /H 2 9
          41 North John Street
          LIVERPOOL
          L2 9RR                                                                                               10 July 1998
          BY FAX

          Dear Sirs

          ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

          We refer to your letter of the 9th July. We have spoken to and now faxed the Clerk
          to the South Sefton Magistrates Court indicating that we have no objection to the
          withdrawal of the Summonses in absence.

          Although in ow view we undoubtedly would have been entitled to a Costs Order
          against the Prosecution, we have not sought such Order from the Court.


          Yours faithfully



          ]
          Partner




         H.\WP\C31M"MAT\RBM\REVIE’iV'(MURRAY30.LETU0 Jiiy 1998




                  A Air t f t b t fa rm e r/ u n i., » trfrn t , h u fe a m at J )r n h v t a jitrrz . R tp tU trd b , T h i Lew S u itQ t» tk f nwtfccf t/m w /u w u iuM tct,.
 W INCKW OBTH & PE M B E R T O N                                                            IN C O B F O K A T IN G   SHERWOOD & Co

  SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                            35 GREAT PETER STREET
  Our ref:    SBE\NAFO\24332-J                                                              WESTMINSTER
                                                                                            LONDON SW1P 3LR
  Your ref.   DR1AH29
                                                                                            DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                            FAX.      0171-593 5099
  Watts Leather Solicitors                                                                  TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000
  1st Floor
  Central Buildings
  41 North John SWSfet                                                                       10 July 1998
  Liverpool L2 9RR

                                                                                     Bv Fax & Post: 0151 236 1936

  Dear Sirs,

  Adlington -v- Duckenfield and Murray

  We acknowledge receipt of your letter of 9th July, and accordingly enclose herewith a copy
  letter we have faxed to the Clerk to the Justices this morning.

   In the circumstances we invite you to advise us of your intentions to apply for Summonses
   elsewhere so that we can make appropriate arrangements in the event o f the issue of a
   Summons, particularly in regard to service.

   We look forward to hearing from you.

   Yours faithfully




   PARTNF.fcS
   NICHOLAS OWSTON    ALISON GORLOV           P fcre* WILLIAMS   PAUL IRVING                 NAOMI GOOPE                 CONSULTANTS
   BRIAN UOOO         STEPHEN WIGGS           ANDREW MUfckAY     RONALD WARRANTS             h e a d o r TAX             FRANK ROBSON DBF.
   tAUU MORRIS        HUGH Ma CMH'GALD        CHRISTOPHER VINE   ROBERT BOTCAI               GEORGE BULL*                ANTHONY TAYLOR
   MICHAEL THATCHER   JOHN REES               ROGER FITTClN      s i m o n Ea s t w o o d




5 0 'd   9E6T9E2IST06                    □1                  CQSEJ8D) HldOflMDNin                 NOSd            62:2T      8 6 6 I-T lf-0 T
£ 0 'd I d lO l


          W IN CK W O R TH & PE M B E R T O N                                                                           tNCOM-ORATlNC     SHERWOOD &     Co

          SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                                        35 GREAT PETER STREET
         Our ref:          SBE\NAFO\24332-l                                                                             WESTMINSTER
                                                                                                                        LONDON SW1P 3LR
         Your ref:         DL/JMH
                                                                                                                        DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                                        FAX       0171-593 509?
          FAQ: MR D. LUTY                                                                                               TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000
          Clerk to the Justices
          South Sefton Magistrates Court
          Merton Road                                                                                                   10 July 1998
          Boofie
          Merseyside L20 3BJ

                                                                                                             Bv Fax & Post: 0151 922 4285

           Dear Sir,

           A dlington -v- D avid D uckenfield

           We have received the enclosed letter from Watts Leather Solicitors dated 9th July 1998.

           Accordingly, we write to confirm our agreement that the Summons be withdrawn as
           requested, in the absence of the parties.

           As the Information is not being proceeded with, we request that the Court make an Order in
           accordance with Section 16 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, in favour of Mr
           Duckenfield for payment out of Central Funds in respect o f his costs incurred relating lo ihe
           Summons, such costs to be determined. If the Court is not inclined to agree such an order
           we request the opportunity to be heard on the question of costs.

           We look forward to hearing from you in regard to the Order made as requested, and if you
           wish to clarify any matters, please do not hesitate to contact Nicholas Owston or Simon
           Eastwood o f our office.

            Yours faithfully




            PAJtlftKRS
            NICHOLAS OWSTON
            BRIAN' HOOD
                                     ALI&ON GORLOV            PETERWILLIAMS            PAUL JK VINO                      NAOMI GOODE         CONSULTANTS
                                     STEPHEN WJGUS            ANDREW MURRAY            RONALD FARRAMIX                   HEAD O F TAX        FRANK RORSQK Obi:
            PAUL MORRIS
            MICHAEL T H a tth f .R
                                     HUGH M a CDOUOALD
                                     JOHN REI-S
                                                              CHRISTOPHER VIN£
                                                              ROGER FITTON
                                                                                       ROBERT BOTKAJ                     GEORGEBtiLL*        ANTHQNY T a U O K
                                                                                       SIMON EASTWOOD

                                           t»<trwk>ut    ml     r».              firm ii ret"!***) t> TV L>» tioctolt I* iht      tit



       £ 0 ‘d       9 £ 6 I9 £ £ IS t0 6                 01                   CQSET8D3 HiaOnXDNIff                             WO^d     62.-2T   8SST-lD f-0T
                                                S < 2 srf   h y      jfcKryC                                    ,° \g




                        WATTS LEATHER SOLICITORS
                             Partners: Karen M Watts and David R Leather




9th July 1998                                                            DRL/H29

Walker Morris
Solicitors
Kings Court
12 King Street
Leeds LSI 2HL

Dear Sirs

Aflinyrton v Duckenfidd and Murray

We are in receipt of your letter of 8th July and would again express our disappointment by your failure to
deal with the substance of the matters raised in our letter o f 3rd July in particular, the factors of
convenience to which we referred.

We have been in touch with the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices and he is willing to contact the
Magistrates to request that the summonses be withdrawn in absence. He has indicated that this matter
can be placed before the Court tomorrow 10th July or Monday 13th July. We have made formal
application that this be done.

We make it clear that our withdrawal of these summons is done in an attempt to avoid protracted and
sterile judicial review proceedings and in order to advance the prosecution as quickly as possible. We
shall be applying for summonses elsewhere.

 In the circumstances we invite you to fax the Clerk to the South Sefton Magistrates immediately agreeing
 that the summonses be -withdrawn in absence.

 Yours feithfully




 WAT




        1« Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Slrcct Liverpool L2 9RR. T d 0151 236 1919. Fu* 0151 2361936
                                   Jflwt         hy         ;/^                3.-5'Srn^.             q.~l. 9<?



                            WATTS T-EATHER SOLICITORS
                                 Partner*; Karen M Watts and Damd R Leather



Mr.D.Luty, Solicitor
Clerk to the Justices
South Sefton Magistrates Court
The Court House
Merton Road
Bootle
Merseyside
L20 3BJ

9 July 1998

Ref: DL/JMH                                                           DRL/H29
                                                                                 «

Dear Sir,


Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

Please find enclosed copy letters from solicitors acting for Messrs. Duckenfidd and Murray and our
response thereto. You will note that we have invited them to fax you immediately agreeing that the
summonses be withdrawn in absence. In anticipation o f their agreement we now make formal
application that the summonses be withdrawn. We should be grateflil if you would arrange for this
matter to be placed before the Court tomorrow 10th July or Monday 13th July and our application for
the summonses to be withdrawn in absence considered.


Yours faithfully




 WA




            1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L29RR. Tel 0151236 1919. Fax 0151 236 193$
9 July 1998                                                   DRL/H29



Winckworth and Pemberton
35 Great Peter Street
Westminster
London SW1P 3LR

Your Ref: SBE/NAFO/24332-1


Dear Sirs

Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

We are in receipt of your letter of 8th July. We are profoundly disappointed by your failure to deal with
the substance of the matters raised in our letter o f 3rd July, in particular, the factors of convenience to
which we referred.

We have been in touch with the Clerk to the South Sefton Justices and he is willing to contact the
Magistrates to request that the summonses be withdrawn in absence. He has indicated that this matter
can be placed before the Court tomorrow 10th July or Monday 13th July. We have made formal
application that this be done.

We make it clear that our withdrawal o f these summons is done in an attempt to avoid protracted and
sterile judicial review proceedings and in order to advance the prosecution as quickly as possible. We
shall be applying for summonses elsewhere.

We note that in your letter of 8th July you say that it does seem sensible for the informations to be
withdrawn at the earliest time. We invite you therefore to fax the Clerk to South Sefton Magistrates
immediately agreeing that these summonses be withdrawn as outlined above and that parties be excused
attendance.


Yours faithfully




WATTS LEATHER
W IN C K W O R T H & P E M B E R T O N                                                                                                               IN C O RPO R A TIN G       SHERWOOD & Co

SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                                                                     35 GREAT PETER STREET
                                                                                                                                                     WESTMINSTER
Our ref:               S B E /N A F O /2 4 3 3 2 -1                                                                                                  LONDON SW1P 3LR
Y o u r ref:           D R L /H 2 9
                                                                                                                                                     DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                                                                     FAX       0171-593 5099
Messrs Watts Leather                                                                                                                                 TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000
Solicitors
1st Floor Central Buildings
41 North John Street                                                                                                                                   8 July 1998
Liverpool L2 9RR


Dear Sirs

Adlington -v- Duckenfield and Murray

We refer to your letter o f 3rd July which responds to our letter o f 1st July 1998 to the Clerk
to the South Sefton Justices.

We note your comments but are bound to confirm, our instructions are to proceed to argue
the question o f jurisdiction at the earliest time. We have contacted South Sefton again, and
understand that the Clerk to the Justices is awaiting for your further advice once you are
aware o f the Defendants’ approach. We are aware that the solicitors for Mr Murray, Walker
Morris, have responded in similar terms.

In the circumstances it does seem sensible for the informations to be withdrawn at the earliest
time. If you do not agree, in any event it seems desirable for the 17th July date to be
vacated, with a new date to be fixed, without undue delay, to allow for the question of
jurisdiction to be argued fully at South Sefton. Liaison with the various parties would be
required to allow for counsels’ availability to be taken account o f and we will naturally liaise
with the court in this regard.

 We have sent a copy o f this letter to the court so that they appreciate the position and hope
 that matters can be resolved quickly and in a pragmatic fashion. We look forward to hearing
 from you.

 Yours faithfully




 PARTNERS
 NICHOLAS OWSTON                       ALISON GORLOV                         PETER WILLIAMS                       PAUL IRVING                          NAOMI GOODE                      CONSULTANTS
 BRIAN HOOD                            STEPHEN WIGGS                         ANDREW MURRAY                        RONALD FARRANTS                      HEAD O F TAX                     FRANK ROBSON OBE
 PAUL MORRIS                           HUGH MACDOUGALD                       CHRISTOPHER VINE                     ROBERT BOTKAI                        GEORGE BULL*                     ANTHONY TAYLOR
 M ICHAEL THATCHER                     JOHN REES                             ROGER FITTON                         SIMON EASTWOOD

 The firm is a m em ber o f E u r 6 » e a U   ao In te rnational netw ork o f law yers. *Non«solicftor. T b e firm is re g ulated by The Law Society la the conduct o f Investm ent business.
               Kings C ourt,            12   King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
           Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                      Web: http://www.walkermorris.co.uk


Messrs. Watts Leather                                                                    Our ref                RBM/MT/MURRAY
Solicitors
1st Floor
Central Buildings                                                                         Your ref DRL/H29
41 North John Street
LIVERPOOL                                                                                 8 July 1998
L2 9RR



Dear Sirs

ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your letter of the 8th July. We had understood that Mr. Duckenfield’s
Solicitors had been in touch with you to indicate that they took similar objection to
the issue of the Summons in the South Sefiton Magistrates Court, and that neither
Defendant did submit to the jurisdiction o f that Magistrates Court.

The Writer will be out o f the Office on the 9th July, but noting your wish for a
response by the 10th July, will give this matter urgent attention on that day,
transmitting any further letter by fax to you.



  ours faithfully



R.B. Manning
        ming                                      II
Partner




H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVIEW\MURRAY26.LET\8 July 1998




        A list o f the partners’ names is open to inspection at the above address. Regulated by The Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
               W A T T S T FATHER SOLICITORS
                     Partners: Karen M Watts and David R Leather



 8 July 1998                                                                    D R L /H 29




 W alker M orris
 Solicitors
 K ings Court
 12 King Street
 Leeds L S 1 2H L



 D ear Sirs

 Adlington v D uckenfield and Murray

 W e have received your letter o f 6th July and are disappointed by your failure to respond to the
 substance o f our letter o ¥ $ r July and to our invitation to yo u to put forward what you
 contend w o u ld be a suitable court. W e note that you have “very carefully considered” our
 letter.

 Y ou will have understood our contention that, if either defendant subm its to the jurisdiction,
 the court has p ow er to hear the com m ittal proceedings, w hether your construction o f the
 enactment is correct or not. Since w e have not yet heard from Mr D u ck en field’s solicitors, w e
 cannot ob viou sly advance matters or add significantly to our previous letter. A s you know,
 w e have asked them to reply by Friday 10th July, so that w e can take decisions before the 17th
 July.

 In the m eantim e, m ay w e have a reply to the substance o f our last letter.

  Yours faithfully




1ST Floor Central Buildings 41 North John S tr e e t Liverpool L2 9RR. Tel 015 1 236 1919. Fa* 0151 236 1936
              Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
          Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                    Web: http://www.walkermorris.co.uk


Messrs.Watts Leather,                                                                    Our ref               RBM/MT/MURAY
Solicitors
1st Floor Central Buildings                                                              Your ref DRL/H29
41 North John Street
LIVERPOOL
L2 9RR                                                                                   6 July 1998




Dear Sirs

ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND M URRAY

We acknowledge your letter of the 3rd July providing us with a copy o f the letter of
the same date to Winckworth & Pemberton. We have very carefully considered the
various points that you have set out. At this moment we intend to confine ourselves
simply to the fundamental starting point. The Summonses have not been validly issued
and therefore must be quashed.

We believe that the reason that the Clerk to the Justices at South Sefiton has copied
you with the correspondence, is to invite you to agree that the Summonses have not
been validly issued. We would invite that course of action, and seek your confirmation
as quickly as possible.

If you persist with the view that South Sefton Magistrates Court have validly issued
the Summonses, then if the Clerk to the Justices is not himself to quash the
Summonses upon the submissions before him, there is no alternative but to make an
application to the Divisional Court.

We do regret the fact that you have copied your letter to the Clerk to the South Sefton
Justices and the Director o f Public Prosecutions, since it contains so many matters
which are wholly extraneous to the single point which must be decided by the Clerk
to the Justices as to the law. In the circumstances, we have similarly copied this letter.


  ours faithfully



R.B. M anning
Partner




        A list o f the partners' names is open to inspection a t the above address. Regulated by The Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
 SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES' COURT
         The Court House • Merton Road • Bootle • Merseyside • L20 3BJ


D. L uty, Solicitor                                                     Telephone: 0151-933 6999
Clerk to the Justices                                                   Extension:

My Ref: DL/JMH           Your Ref: DRL/H29                              Fax No:    0151-922 4285


                                                                                   3rdJuly, 1998




Dear Sirs

                        ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY


      I refer to your facsimile m essage of today and to the letter addressed to Winckworth
& Pemberton, Solicitors.

        1have drafted replies both to Mr. Duckenfield’s solicitors and to Mr. Murray’s solicitors,
copies of which are en closed . In view of the contents of your letter to Winckworth &
Pemberton, I await further developments and shall be grateful if you will keep m e advised of
the position.




                                        Yours faithfully,




                                     Clerk to the Justices.




                                                                          FJVED
Messrs. Watts Leather,                                             “ 7 JUL 1998
Solicitors,
1st Floor, Central Buildings,
41 North John Street,
Liverpool. L2 9RR
 SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES' COURT
         The Court House • Merton Road • Bootle • Merseyside • L20 3BJ______


D. Luty, Solicitor                                                       Telephone: 0151-933 6999
Clerk to the Justices                                                    Extension:

My Ref: DL/JMH            Your Ref: RBM/BQW/Murray                       Fax No:    0151-922 4285


                                                                                    3rdJuly, 1998




Dear Sirs,

                          ANNADLINGTON -v- BERNARD MURRAY


          1 confirm receipt of your letter of the 2nd July regarding the above matter.

         1 have today written to Messrs. Winckworth & Pemberton advising them that the
 informant proposes to contact both them and yourselves regarding this matter. Once contact
 has been m ade and any subsequent discussions have been concluded, then decisions wall be
 taken regarding the further conduct of this case.




                                          Yours faithfully,




                                      Clerk to the Justices.




 Messrs. Walker Morris,                                                   P i^CElVEB
 Solicitors,
 Kings Court,                                                             !    ~ 7 J U L 1998
 12 King Street,
 Leeds. LSI 2HL
 SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES' COURT
         The Court House • Merton Road • Bootle » Merseyside . L20 3BJ


D. L uty, Solicitor                                                          Telephone: 0151-933 6999
Clerk to the Justices                                                        Extension:

My Ref: DL/JMH               Your Ref: NAFO/24332-1                          Fax No:    0151-922 4285


                                                                                        3rdJuly, 1998




Dear Sirs,

                           ANNADUNGTON -v- DAVID DUCKENFIELD


        I               refer to your letter of the 1st July regarding the sum m ons issued by this Court on the
26th June, 1998.

        In view of the contents of that letter, I have provided a copy to the informant for her
consideration. 1 understand that she will be contacting you today by facsimile m essage, to
suggest a m ethod by which your submissions can be resolved.

        At this point, it is not therefore appropriate for m e to com m ent further and I shall await
 developments.



                                             Yours faithfully,


                                                dW
                                         Clerk to the Justices.




 Messrs. Winckworth & Pemberton,
 Solicitors,                                                                      “ 7        J998
 35 Great Peter Street,
 Westminster,
 LONDON. SW1P3LR
                 WATTS t ;f a t h e r s o l ic it o r s
                       Partners: Karen M Watts and David R Leather



   W alker M orris
   Solicitors
   Kings Court
   12 K ing Street
   Leeds
   L S I 2H L



   Ref:   R B M /B Q W /M U R R A Y                                           Ref: D R L /H 29

   3 July 1998



   Dear Sirs

   Adlington v D uckenfield and Murray

   As solicitors for the prosecu tor in the above matter, w e have been forwarded a cop y o f your
   letter o f 2nd July 1998 addressed to the Clerk to the Justices at South Sefton M agistrates’
   Court.

   As you have associated you rselves with the v iew expressed in the letter from W inckworth and
   Pemberton dated 1st July 1998, \ye en close a cop y o f our letter to them and w ou ld invite you
   to consider the contents th e r e o f and take your client’s instructions.

   W e invite you to reply by 10th July so that w e can m ake our decisions before 17th.

   Yours faithfully




1ST Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 9RR. Tel 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936
                WATTS LEATHER SOLICITORS
                      Partners: Karen M Watts and David R Leather



  Mr D Luty
  Clerk to the Justices
  South Sefton M agistrates’ Court
  M erton R oad
  B o o tle
  M erseyside L 20 3BJ

  3 July 1998                                                        Ref: D R L /H 29



  D ear Sir

   Adlington v D uckenfield and Murray

   W e act for the prosecutor in the above matter. W e en close cop y letter to W inkworth and
   Pem berton w hich w e are also copying to M r M urray’s solicitors and the DPP.

   W e should be grateful if yo u w ou ld let us kn ow what your intentions are in this matter.



   Yours faithfully




1ST Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 9RR. Tel 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936
                 WATTS T,FATHER SOLICITORS
                      Partners: Karen M Watts and David R Leather



   3 July 1998                                                                DRL/H29


   Winckworth and Pemberton
   Solicitors
   35 Great Peter Street
   Westminster
   London SW1P 3LR

   Ref: NAFO/24332-1


   Dear Sirs

   Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

    1.     We act for the prosecutor in this case who has laid the informations with the support
           o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“HFSG”). The Clerk to the South Sefton
           justices has sent us a copy o f your letter of 1st July 1998. The point you make is not
           that the court has no jurisdiction to hear the case if either defendant were to appear
           before it; it is rather the technical jurisdictional argument, which has nothing to do with
           the substance o f the allegations, that the court has no means o f compelling Mr
           Duckenfield and Mr Murray to appear before it. We do not agree with your
           construction o f the sections or your interpretation of R v Blandford, The evident
           purpose o f section 1(2) and 2(3) of the 1980 Act is to deal with practicalities and there
           is clear acknowledgment of this in Blandford. We have instructed counsel to advise
           further on the point. However, we regard it as essential to set out the practical reasons
           that led us to commence these proceedings in Liverpool and we invite Mr Duckenfield,
           through you, to appear at the court so that, on either view o f the law, the court has
           power to hear the matter.

   The reason for commencing proceedings in Liverpool

   2.      In the last nineteen months, we have been in regular contact with the Home Office on
            matters relating to the disaster which formed the subject matter of the “Scrutiny”
            conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, o f which you are no doubt aware. In this
            period the Group have been supplied with a large number o f witness and other
            statements about the events o f 15th April 1989, which its members had never seen
            before. The witnesses who made these statements will form a very substantial part of
            the evidence which we intend to present against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.

                                                      -   1
                                                          -




1ST Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 9RR. Tel 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936
3.    A large proportion o f these witnesses come from Liverpool. We intend to call them to
      prove that the decision to open Gate C at the ground was the responsibility of both
      defendants; was causative of the deaths of 96 people; and was grossly negligent. The
      two named victims are representative o f all. The prosecution case will be simple, but
       many witnesses will be tendered. The allegation o f misfeasance is based on the same
      facts. The allegation o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice refers to Mr
      Duckenfield’s allegation that the Liverpool supporters forced the gate.

4.    The committal proceedings will o f course be held at the court at which the proceedings
       are instituted. It is strongly arguable that those proceedings fall within the old
       committal scheme. The amendments in Schedule 1 to the Criminal Procedure and
       Investigations Act 1996 were brought into effect on 1st April (“the appointed day”) by
       virtue of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (Commencement)
       (Section 65 and Schedules 1 and 2) Order 1997, and apply to any alleged offence in
       relation to which Part 1 o f that Act applies. Section 1(3) of that Act makes provision
       in respect o f “alleged offences into which no criminal investigation has begun before
       the appointed day”.

5.    It seems to us the better view is that the present proceedings fall within the exception.
       Although no police investigation was in progress in April 1997, a police investigation
       “began” in 1989, and it would therefore appear that either of the defendants, or indeed
       the prosecution, would be entitled to call live evidence at committal. If either
        defendant required us to prove a prima facie case, we should have the task o f calling a
        large number o f eye witnesses whose statements will form part of the substantial
        bundle o f evidence that we shall serve on you in due course in order to justify
        committal for trial.

6.    It will therefore be apparent to you that the factor of convenience tells overwhelmingly
       in favour of committal proceedings in Liverpool. Among our witnesses, some are in
       dubious health. Not all are young. Many have little money, and would need the
       reimbursement o f travel and accommodation expenses if the proceedings are held
       outside Liverpool. We doubt that we would be required to call evidence of forensic
       pathologists, or the witnesses who produce the transcripts of the evidence that the two
       defendants gave to the inquest or the Taylor Inquiry.

Submission to the jurisdiction

7.    Whatever the court chosen, there will be inconvenience to some. We accept o f course,
      that attendance at committal proceedings will be inconvenient for Mr Duckenfield if
      held anywhere other than near his home. Your client may decide to submit to the
      South Sefton jurisdiction in the interests o f saving time and money. It is undoubtedly
      open to him, or Mr Murray to do so. If either “appears” or is “brought before” the
      court by virtue o f section 2(3), and seeks to join issue with the other party on the
      merits, as opposed to some arid technicality as to the efficacy o f the summons, the
      court has jurisdiction on any basis; and by virtue o f section l(2)(b) the court would
      have jurisdiction over the other defendant, however widely or narrowly the two
       subsections fall to be construed.

8.     In a matter o f such importance as the Hillsborough disaster, surely it is essential that
       prosecution and defence concentrate on the substance o f the case rather than captious
       technicalities. Do you suggest that South Sefton is an inappropriate court?

Alternatives to Liverpool

9.     If, contrary to our view, section 1 o f the Magistrates Court Act 1980 is to be
       construed as you contend, it would be open to the informant to commence
       proceedings in the County o f South Yorkshire, where the alleged offences were
        committed (section l(2)(a); or where either defendant resides, that is, West Yorkshire
       in the case o f Mr Murray, and Dorset in the case o f Mr Duckenfield (section l(2)(c).
       We are inclined not to lay the informations in Sheffield, because, among other reasons;
        (a) proceedings in that city would revive painful memories for relatives of the victims,
        (b) it is unlikely that many witnesses from Sheffield would be called at the committal,
        and (c) neither defendant lives there.

10.    The options would appear to be, therefore, Sheffield or some other part o f South
       Yorkshire, even though neither defendant resides in that area, and few witnesses do;
       Pontefract or some other part o f West Yorkshire; or Dorset. It is hard to imagine
       another location in Dorset, if Dorset were chosen, more suitable than Bournemouth.
       An important factor would be cost. We should wish the proceedings to be held in a
       place where hotel accommodation would be cheap and plentiful. For this reason,
       Bournemouth, out o f season, seems an obvious possibility, and there may be other
       locals in Yorkshire which may be suitable on the same grounds.

11.    There would be the further advantage that a court at Bournemouth would commit for
       trial to a sitting o f the Crown Court on the Western Circuit; and no doubt both
       prosecution and defence would argue that it would be fairer to all parties if the trial
       were held at some venue outside Yorkshire, Merseyside and Lancashire. We should
       tell you that we would not resist an argument by the defence in due course that, in the
       interests o f fairness, wherever the committal were held, the trial itself should not take
       place in Merseyside.

12.    These ideas are no more than suggestions. We have not yet weighed the pros and cons
       finely. We will consider constructively any suggestions you or Mr Murray might wish
       to make as to venues for committal proceedings away from Sheffield, where
       informations might sensibly be laid.

13.    We invite you to keep us informed o f your intentions. If you decide to apply for
       judicial review o f the South Sefton summonses, we shall have to consider whether it is
       right to allow the matter to be delayed for several months, so that a technicality can be
       determined at great expense, when we could be proceeding expeditiously at another
       venue to which your argument cannot apply.

14.    We are sending a copy o f this letter, with uncontroversial covering letters, to the
solicitors for Mr Murray, who support your position, to the Clerk to the South Sefton
Justices and to the Director o f Public Prosecutions, whom we have already notified of
the existence o f the summonses. The return date at the South Sefton court is 17thJuly.
We invite you to reply to this letter by 10* July, so that we can make our decisions
before 17*h.


Yours faithfully
D LUTY____________                           Fax: 0151-9334525                                                           03 Jul ’98               11:35




                     Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2H L Telephone 0113 2832500.
                 FacsirpUc 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info0 walkcrniorris,co.uk
                                                        W eb ; http://w w w .w alkeiT 7jo rris ^ o ,n k



    FAO D Luty                                                                           Our ref               KBM/BQW/MURRAY
    Clerk to the Justices
    South Sefton Magistrates’ Court
    Merton Road                                                                          Your ref
    Bootle

     lW                                                                                  a * * ,9“



     Dear Sirs

     OUR CLIENT : BERNARD MURRAY

     We write to advise you that we have been instructed to act on behalf o f Mr Bernard
     Murray in relation to a summons purportedly issued on 26 June 1998 in your Court.

     We have been made aware o f a letter -written to you by Winkworth and Pemberton
     who act on behalf of Mr David Duckenfield. The three summons5 against our Client
     are identical to three o f the four summons’ against Mr Duckenfield, Although we
     have only been instructed very recently, we wish to say immediately that we associate
     ourselves with the views that have been put forward by Winkworth and Pemberton.
     We shall be considering the matter urgently over the course o f the next few days and
     it is likely that we shall then write to you again, although the need for such further
     submission would obviated if you promptly agree that you must quash this summons.

     Yours faithfully




    R B Mannir
    PARTNER




     H:\WP\CMM-MAT\RBMXRJTVIEWMURRAY8 1ET\2 July 1998




             A fltf o fih tftititu tf   is opt* a>Intpectim ai the Above sddreti. Rifiulsted by The law Svrtefy in the    of inurnment butintu.
D LUTY                                            Fax: 0151-9334525                                             02 Jul ’98 09:50



  WINCKWORTH & PEMBERTON                                                                                    INCORPORATING SHERWOOD & Co

  SOLICITORS AND PARLIAMENTARY AGENTS
                                                                                                            35 GREAT PETER STREET                   ’
                                                                                                            WESTMINSTER
   O urrcf:'           NAFO/24332-1                                                                         LONDON SW1P3LR                      .
   Your ref:; •
                                                                                                            DX        2312 VICTORIA
                                                                                                            FAX       0171-593 5099 .
    Clerk to tlxe Justices •   '                                                                            TELEPHONE 0171-593 5000
  • South Sefton Magistrates Court \
    Merton Road
  . Bootle                                                                                 ?.S$               1 July 1998
    Merseyside L20 3BJ

   For the attention o f D Luty

                                                                By fax 0151 922 4285

   Dear Sirs ' •

   David Duckenfield

   We. are enclosing a copy of a Summons purportedly issued on 26th June 1998 in your Court
   bearing the number 2270.

   In our submission this Summons was not validly issued. Under the Magistrates Courts Act
   i980 s. 1(2).-

                  "A Justice of the Peace for an area to which this section applies may issue, a
                • summons...under this section - • •

                     (a)        If the offence was committed or is suspected to have been committed within
                                the area, or

               •. (b)           It appears to the Justice necessary or expedient, with a view to the better
                    . .         administration of justice, that the person charged should be tried jointly with,
                                or in the same place as, some other person who is charged with an offence, or
                                who is in custody, or who is being or is to be proceeded against, within the
                                area...”


    We act for Mr Duckenfield who we understand has been summoned with Mr.Murrayih'
    connection with allegations o f offences in Sheffield. Consequently the proviso ats.l(2)(b)'
    does notapply. •

    The Summons should not have been issued as on its face it is clear that the allegation is that
    Mr Duckenfield committed the offence at a place outside the jurisdiction or area o f the
    County of Merseyside.

    We also have regard to s.2(3) of the Magistrates Courts Act 1980 -



    PARTNERS
    NICHOLAS OWSTON              AUSOS GOBIOV                 PETE8. W a x lA M S   PAUL 1RVIWC               KAOMIOOODS               CONSULTANTS
    BRIAN HOOD \                 STEPHEN 'VtGGS                ANDREWMURRAY         RONALD F AHRANTS          HCAD O F TAX             FRANK ROBSON OSE
    PAUL MORRIS                  HUGH MACDOUGALD               CHRIS TOWttSS VINE   RODERT BOTKAJ             GEORGS BULL*             ANTHONY TAYLOR '
    MICHAEL THATCHER             JOHN REES                     ROGER FITTON                  1
                                                                                    SIMON F-A. TWr>Or>

    Tfc* flfta b i         «f       *nlntvn*tWm) iwtworn v f trw rtn ,                     b y lk ln S a e lflf 1a ilH«MAKta(lBMiMU)tulitiL
LUTY                         Fax: 0151-9334525                        02 Jul /98 Jjy:_bl




                                              -   2-

          "A magistrates court for a county-.shall have jurisdiction as examining justices over
          any offence committed by a person who appears or is brought before the court,
        . whether or not the offence was committed within the county..."

 The words11appears...before the court" have been considered in the case o f Blandford f!955\
 All ER 681 where the same provisions of the 1952 Act were considered.

         "...in our opinion the words "who appears" must mean "appears on a summons
         lawfully issued"'’

  We therefore maintain that the enclosed copy Summons was not validly issued and ask you
 ..to'qiiash,. it. without the need_for.an.attendance^. — . .... -■ *— ... •

  If you do not agree that the Summons should be withdrawn and nullified without an
  attendance then we would ask please that a date be fixed before or after 17th July (in which .
  case the hearing would have to be adjourned) so that our submissions on tbe invalidity of the
  Summons may be heard.

 . In the event that you are not prepared forthwith to quash the Summons and you require us
   to submit arguments on the validity of the Summons then we would ask that Mr Duckenfield
   will not be required to attend. It would seem quite improper that he should have to attend
   court to answer a summons which he contends and is advised was not validly issued.

• . May we ask you please to let us have your response without delay because we will have no
   alternative but to apply to the Divisional Court if you do not confirm that the Summons is
   invalid and may be regarded as a nullity or you require submissions on the validity of the
   Summons to be made in court. Pending consideration of such an application to the Divisional
   Court, in the unlikely event that this course of action is necessary, would also result in an
   application to your Court for the first bearing to be adjourned.

  Yours faithfully
