.1nifty.’97 (TUE) 16:14                                           ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                                                                 TEL:


                                                                                     THE L£SA|_ SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS
                                                                                             J     ATTORNEY GENERALS CHAMBERS
                                                                                                                   9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

 G « n M * l    • n q u ir io s   0 l 7 l - j f |.J 8 : > n 5 S                                                      LONDON SW1E 6JP
 D ir e c t   I m a               O   i 7 l 4 * 2 8




              Dame Barbara Mills QC
              Director oij Public Prosecutions
              Crown Projp&milon Service                                                                                  .s.o.
              Headquarters                                                                   iCJPJS. HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                                  PRIVATE OFFICE
              50 iAidgateTOlI **                                                                    RECEIVED:             c J X j^ Z
              LONDON EC4M7EX                                                                 I 13 M M 1997
              13 May 1997                                                                                              |w»   ^




              HILLSBOROUGH

              The Attorney General has asked me to thank you for your letter of 9 May 1997
              which, together with its enclosures, outlined and explained your view that you
              should now advise the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that the further
              information provided by the Hillsborough Families Support Group does not
              justify reopening the police investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

              The Attorney General is content to endorse that view. He has, however, asked
              me to pass on some points relating to the proposed handling

          The first point relates to the relationship between your decision anrf questions
          relating to the inquest. The position in relation to the latter is that there is no
          outstanding decision so far as the Attorney General is concerned. Applications
          under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 have been considered in the past
          and refused. There was also, as you are aware, an unsuccessful application
          for judicial review of the coroners decision. There has been no formal
          application under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 since the ITV
          documentary drama ‘'Hillsborough'* was broadcast. The previous Attorney
          General undertook in correspondence with interested members of Parliament
          that there would be liaison with the Home Office to ascertain whether any of
          the material generated in response to the inquiries which the Home Secretary
          had initiated would in any way have influenced his earlier decisions. That was
          done and the then Attorney General concluded in March that there was no
          such material. My letter of 14 March 1997 to Dru Sharpling refers. The
          Attorney General was able to reach a conclusion more miirk-kr thnn
                    Uic v^ro uccuuse m e issues wnicn tail properly to be considered in
          relation to the inquest are much narrower.


         S W /1305/4
iS-MAY.’97(TUE) 16:15   ATTORNEY GENERAL                TEL:                            P. 003




     The question of announcements and handling therefore needs to take account
     only of the position of the CPS and the Home Office. Your decision has rightly
     been taken independently of Home Office consideration of the request for a
     further public inquiry but the communicating of that decision will need to take
     account of the position which has been reached. My understanding is that the
     Home Secretary received a submission from his officials in his last weekend
     box and (as of yesterday) had not responded. Advice from officials within the
     Home Office remains unchanged but it may be that the new Home Secretary
     is more sympathetic than his predecessor. In the event that he were minded
     to announce a public inquiry, it might be sensible to let that go first and for
     you then to say that you did not consider there to be any grounds for a further
     criminal investigation at this stage but the position could, if appropriate, be
     considered further in the light of any further evidence emerging as the result
     of the inquiry. On the other hand, if it appears that the Home Secretary is
     unlikely to make a decision in the near future, or that the decision is to be
     against the holding of a public inquiry, then it would be right for you to
     proceed with an announcement which ought, to the circum stances, to be quite
     low key.

     Finally, you raised the possibility of a joint meeting between the HFSG. Home
     Office, CPS and this office. Whilst the Attorney General has every sympathy
     for those who lost relatives in the disaster, the point has now been reached
     where careful explanations have been given over the years and, certainly so far
     as the inquest is concerned, there has been full ventilation of the issue before
     the Divisional Court, Given that there is no prospect of any good coming out
     of such a meeting, let alone the HFSG now accepting explanations which they
     had previously rejected, the Attorney General would not welcome the
     involvement of his office in a meeting which might serve only as a gratuitous
     invitation to reopen the question of a further application to the High Court
     under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. He accepts, of course, that the
     Home Office and the CPS m ust be free to handle the issu e as they think fit.

     If I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.

          o
              lo




     SJWOOLER u

     S W /13 05 /4
Dame Barbara Mills DBE QC
                                                                                                               CPS
Director of Public Prosecutions
                                                                                                               Headquarters
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                               London EC4M 7EX


r                                                                                              Direct Lim:      0171-273 8098
                                                                                               Switdiboard:    0171-273 8000
    RESTRICTED - INVESTIGATION                                                                   Facsimile:    0171-329 8366
                                                                                                   dx No:      300850 Ludgate EC4

    The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP                                                                                                    c x -   t/v
    Attorney General
    9 Buckingham Gate
    London SW1E 6JP
L                                                        J
                                                                                                              9 May 1997
                                                                                                                              <*=1/
                                                                                                                             v .i-
    Pus*
    HILLSBOROUGH

    The facts of the Hillsborough disaster are very well known. In case, however, you would
    wish to refresh your memory about the details, I attach at Annex 1 the background note
    which was prepared for the Attorney General in 1990. As you will see, the Crown
    Prosecution Service decided that there was insufficient evidence to provide a realistic
    prospect of conviction against any person on any charge.

    Thereafter, the inquest was held between 19..11.90 and 28.3.91. At the conclusion of the
    inquest, the jury returned a verdict of accidental death. This verdict was challenged in the
    Divisional Court in 1993. The court upheld the Coroner’s direction to the jury and said that
    there was no good reason for ordering a new inquest. In addition there has been the Taylor
    Enquiry into the disaster with its detailed findings, and as a result of those findings, the
    police have paid compensation.

    Over the years, the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) have continued to press for
    more and more inquiries into the causes of the disaster. Their campaign was given a major
    impetus when in December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama documentary programme
    about the disaster. The HFSG claimed that research for the programme and its airing has
    brought to light fresh evidence and/or new witnesses which prove that evidence was
    suppressed, and perjury was committed, and a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice has
    taken place. The HFSG has been in correspondence with the CPS, the Law Officers’
    Department and the Home Office. They seek to have a fresh investigation by the police
    which they maintain would lead to criminal proceedings, a reopening of the inquest, and a
    public inquiry. For this reason, the CPS, LSLO and the Home Office have kept in close
    contact because of their varied responsibilities in connection with the requests from HFSG.
    The CPS’s responsibility focuses on whether there is new material which, if properly
    investigated, might lead to a realistic prospect of conviction.

    I summarise the "new evidence" and the CPS’s conclusion. The new evidence is suggested
    to be:-

                                                                                                              cont’d     /


                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
         C'O   pj)       ( X jy ^   £ tsJ'JLf




           I c k M X -

                                    <^"■1 &}. £




     IjO^Sr AuuXu^ dJlm£

9?     L t ^ | G uvH ^d^

^uC?               O^MvcUJl
-2-

       i       a video tape of footage from the score board camera, known as camera 5, of
               the Leppings Lane Terrace areas where the deaths occurred.

       ii      a statement and an affidavit from Mr Houldsworth, the engineer for the design
               and maintenance of the club and police CCTV systems at Hillsborough and;

       iii     a statement from Doctor Walker who was involved in the attempted
               resuscitation of some of the injured people who had been taken to Northern
               General Hospital.

Hie Video Evidence and Mr Houldsworth’s Evidence

The HFSG believe that relevant videos were stolen, and that therefore the jury did not see
the relevant tapes. They also claim that the police were not telling the truth when they said
that the cameras were not working satisfactorily, and that they could see much more than
they claimed, and in consequence were negligent in taking no action about the desperate
situation on the Leppings Lane Terraces.

Two video tapes were stolen in mysterious circumstances, but these were the Club video
tapes and not the police video tapes. The police video tapes have always been made
available to the Taylor Enquiry, the legal teams, and to the inquest. Although the two tapes
were not themselves shown to the jury, a compilation tape was shown. Viewing confirms
that the relevant material was shown on the compilation tape to the inquest jury.
Interestingly, it has now come to light that the Coroner himself had a video tape recording
made of the entire main inquest proceedings. From this it can be determined which video
tape was actually shown to the jury.

The allegation relating to the clarity of the monitored pictures depends on clashes of evidence
between the police and Mr Houldsworth. Mr Houldsworth’s evidence from 1989 is not so
precise as his evidence now given in an affidavit in 1996. Mr Houldsworth himself, of
course, was not present to see the actual police monitor at the time. In one important
respect, his evidence is undoubtedly wrong because he maintains that a time lapse mode on
a monitor will not contain a time and date imprint. It is clear from the recordings which
exist which were in time lapse mode that there is a date and time imprint on them.

Even if Mr Houldsworth’s evidence and comments are justifiable, his criticisms come
nowhere near the standard of proof required for criminal liability.

Doctor’s Walker’s Statement

At the original inquest, the Coroner imposed a cut-off time for inquiring into the evidence
of 3.15 pm. The reason for this was that the evidence showed a pattern of rapid
unconsciousness leading to death. Since the crushing occurred at about 3.00 pm, the
Coroner selected a cut-off point approximately a quarter of an hour later. The evidence of
Doctor Walker suggests that he treated a boy at hospital who was still alive after 3.15 pm.
The suggestion by HFSG is that this evidence was deliberately suppressed. A detailed
analysis of Doctor Walker’s evidence tends to suggest that if he is speaking about a young
man called Philip Hammond, he is completely at variance with every other medical person

                                                                                   coat’d     /
♦

-3-

who treated Philip Hammond, all of whom concluded that he was dead on arrival at hospital.
If he is speaking about any other young man who was brought to hospital, there is no
evidence again that anyone with serious crush injuries could have survived. Irrecoverable
brain damage will ensue within four to six minutes of the crushing.

Conclusions

The conclusions, with which I entirely agree, are that there is no new evidence as alleged
by the HFSG and their legal representatives, and therefore no grounds for reopening the
police investigation into the Hillsborough diaster.

Handling

It would seem to me that the first decision to be made is precisely the decision which I have
set out above. Assuming that there is no fresh evidence to justify a police inquiry, decisions
still have to be made as to whether there is sufficiency of evidence to justify reopening of
the inquest. This is, of course, a matter for the law Officers, but in view of our analysis
of the so called "new evidence", it may be that the Law Officers will conclude that there is
no justification for reopening the inquest. The third decision, as to whether there should be
a further public inquiry, is obviously a matter for the Home Office. In view of the fact that
the three departments have kept closely in touch, it is important that this cooperation
continues, and that coordinated responses are given. There is no doubt that the HFSG feel
deeply that there should be some form of further investigation. If it is decided that no
department will be taking any further steps, in my opinion, a meeting should be held with
the HFSG to explain why it is that the departments are not reopening the issue. It may be
that a joint meeting between the three departments with the HFSG would be appropriate. I
doubt whether any such meeting would satisfy them entirely, but it would give an opportunity
to explain the reasons for the decision. It may well be that they will dispute these reasons,
as they have in the past disputed decisions which have been taken, but I favour a face to face
meeting with the group which represents people who have suffered such tragic loss and who
still grieve for their friends and relatives, particularly when they believe that they have not
been told the full truth.

In addition to the original briefing to the Attorney about the facts of the Hillsborough
disaster, I am attaching the CPS Review of the points recently made by HFSG at Annex 2
together with the relevant appendices. It is a lengthy document, which is why I have tried
to give an introductory brief analysis of the points made by the HFSG and our responses to
them. I would welcome an indication as to how you wish to take this difficult matter
forward.




DAME BARBARA MILLS QC

Encs.
                                                               A/sjA/ev I.




ATTORNEY GENERAL
               Background Note: Hillsborough Disaster

1.      On the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough stadium,
        Sheffield 95 people died and over 400 were injured due to
        gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens behind
        the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

2.      A public enquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor produced
        an interim report in August 1989* The West Midlands
        Police assisted in the preparation of the report and
        later conducted a criminal investigation which was
        requested by the D.P.P. The criminal investigation was
        extensive producing bulky documentation and a full
        transcript of the evidence given at the enquiry. The
        police investigation was meticulous.

3.      A copy of Lord Justice Taylor *s Interim Report and a copy
        of Counsel's opinion by Gareth Williams Q.C. and Peter
        Birts Q.C. are attached. It would be useful to refer to
        the plans at Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 of the report.


Facts

4.      There is little, if any, dispute as to what actually
        happened,Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the police
        officer responsible for policing the match.

5.   At 2.52 pm (3 minutes before kick-off) Duo^er? field
     ordered one of the exit gates, Gate C, at the Leppings
     Lane end to be opened. This was to relieve massive
     overcrowding and crushing at the turnstiles caused by a
     build up of supporters arriving after 2.30 pm. In the
     f    minutes after the gate was opened 2000 supporters
     entered the ground and went into a tunnel under the west
     stand which gave access only to the central pens 3 and 4.
     Those pens were already full. There was no controlled
     way in which supporters were allowed in to the pens. The
     additional influx caused intense pressure and resulted in
     the collapse of a crush barrier 124A near the front of
     pen 3. Many died from suffocation and crushing and some
     were trampled on. Perimeter gates were not opened by the
     police partly because of orders not to do so without
     permission and partly because officers did not appreciate
     the severity of what was occurring initially. Later when
     the emergency was appreciated the small size and number
     of the gates made evacuation extremely difficult.

6.   The build up of fans outside the ground was due to the
     geography of the turnstiles, their marking and numbers
     and to a loss of police control of supporters outside
     becoming keen to get inside before the kick-off.
7.    The three major causal factors were:-
      i-   the layout of the ground
      ii. the opening of the exit gate (gate C)
      iii. the build up outside the ground
Layout of the Ground

8.    The club were advised by a structural engineer, Dr
      Eastwood. The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 required
      expert advice to obtain a safety certificate under the
      Act from the local council. Dr Eastwood advised
      additional crush barriers, these were installed in 1979.
      A certificate was granted.

9.    The safety certificate did not specify maximum numbers
      for the pens. This, with turnstile monitoring of
      numbers, would have limited entrance to the pens.

10.   It was the policy of the police at semi-finals to allow
      movement of supporters between pens before the kick-off
      after which the radial gates would be closed and locked.
      Hence without a control on the numbers entering the
      tunnel access pens 3 and 4 were liable to become grossly
      overcrowded. The police had accepted responsibility for
      monitoring the pens and their policy of "letting the fans
      find their own level" was severely criticized by Taylor.

11.   The exit gate C, opened following Duckenfield's
      instruction, is opposite the tunnel. No steps were taken
      to cordon off the tunriex or divert the fans around the
      sides of the West stand. The supporters had nowhere to
      go but the already crowded pens 3 and 4.

12.   At 3.04 pm a surge forward in pen 3 caused the crush
      barrier 124A to *-»reak. This appears to have been a major
      factor in the deaths since there were far fewer deaths in
      pen 4 where no barrier collapsed. Barrier number 144 had
      been removed in 1986, its absence meant there was no
      retarding structure as fans emerged from the tunnel into
      pen 3. There was unbroken diagonal pressure from the
      mouth of the tunnel down to barrier 124A. the collapse
      of barrier 124A was a major factor in the cause of the
      deaths.- Barrier 124A was slightly corroded but it had
      been tested in July 1988 and had passed loading tests
      specified in the Government's Green Guide. Taylor found
      that corrosion played a part in the collapse but the
      effective cause was the excessive unanticipated pressui^
      exerted at the time of the forward surge.

13.   The crushing in pens 3 and 4 was not recognised by police
      either in the control box or on the perimeter of the
      pitch. Even supporters nearby, broadcasters and stewards
      were not immediately aware.

14.   Even after the crush, and until 3.06 pm, the main police
      concern was to prevent a pitch invasion.
The build up outside the Ground
15.   The opening of gate C which precipitated the disaster was
      made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at
      the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm.
      As kick-off time approached the crushing increased. The
      police lost control of the crowd. The crush became
      unmanageable, many feared for their lives. The kick-off
      was not postponed. This course was only to be taken if
      there was a major cause of delay eg. a motorway accident
      or fog. Taylor concluded that the kick-off should have
      been postponed.

16.   There was considerable evidence that people would be
      killed if gate C was not opened and that Duckenfield had
      no alternative but to do so. That being so neither
      Duckenfield nor other officers took any steps to deal
      with the consequences of opening the gate. The tunnel
      was not closed off even though such action had been taken
      by the police in 1988. Duckenfield did order the influx
      at gate A, which had been opened earlier, to be
      monitored. His omission to do so at gate C was said by
      Taylor to be "a blunder of the first magnitude". This
      was the immediate cause of the crushing in pens 3 and 4.
      It was not the sole cause.

17.   The layout of the turnstiles, inadequate space for the
      formation of orderly queues and the limited extent of the
      waiting area combined with poor designation and marking
      of turnstiles contributed to slow turnstile operation.

18.   There were only 7 turnstiles to admit 10,100 fans at the
      other end of the ground there were 60 turnstiles to admit
      29,800. Taylor concluded that the police and club should
      have foreseen potential queuing and waiting to admit
      fans.

19.   Many supporters arrived after 2.30 pm. Tickets advised
      arriving 15 minutes before kick-off.  Some arrived
      without tickets. The evidence shows many had been
      drinking. Taylor concluded the majority had not been
      affected by drink. Unruliness contributed to the pushing
      effect. This contributed to the loss of control by the
      police.
20.   The main factor in the police loss of control was
      ineffective strategy planning for the large number of
      arrivals. Taylor concluded that by controlling the fans
      and postponing the kick-off gate C could have remained'
      closed.

Responsibilities

21.   The layout of the ground was the responsibility of the
      Club, Eastwood, the Council and the police. No one
      foresaw that up to 2000 fans would ever be allowed to
      enter pens 3 and 4 when they were already overcrowded.
      No one anticipated gate 3 being opened or the crushing
      outside the ground. The police must take the main
      responsibility for letting the fans "find their own
      level”, however, the Club must share responsibility for
      the way in which supporters were allowed to fill the pens
      at semi-finals.
22.   The opening of gate C was Duckenfield*s responsibility.
      In the circumstances his decision was correct- His
      failure was to give no order to deal with the sudden
      influx of fans. Had the tunnel been cordoned off the
      disaster would almost certainly have been averted.

23.   The layout of the turnstiles, their numbers and marking
       are primarily matters for the police and the Club, but
       the Council have a partial responsibility to ensure safe
       access to the ground.

Criminal Offences

24.   The two offences would be Manslaughter and Culpable
      Misfeasance. These potential offences were considered
      against all parties, ie. the club, the Council, the
      police and the structural engineers (Mr Eastwood).

The Club

25.   The Club's responsibility for the layout and alterations
       inside the ground and for the layout of the turnstiles is
      where any potential liability exists.   It is clear that
       these were not the sole, or even the major causes and
       that any actions and omissions by the club only partly
      contributed to the crushing and deaths. The Club not
       only relied on its own consultant engineer Dr Eastwood
      but it responded to the suggestions and advice of the
      police in important matters.

26.   There is insufficient evidence to establish the actus
      reus of manslaughter against the club. Additionally the
      evidence does not show either the recklessness or gross
      negligence required for the manslaughter offence.
Eastwood and Partners

27.   Eastwood’s advice formed only part of the events that
      lead tot he structural condition at the ground. It could
      not be said that his advice caused the deaths. In fact
      some of his advice, not acted on for financial reasons,
      may have lead to maximum limits being set for pens 3 and
      4.

28.   Again there is insufficient for the actus reus of
      manslaughter nor can the required recklessness or
      negligence be established against Eastwood or his firm.
The Council

29.   The Council is responsible for the safety certificate and
      compliance with the Green Guide. There were minor errors
      on the council’s part but these only contributed in part
      to the ground conditions.   These are too remote to
      amount to the actus reus of manslaughter. Again there is
      no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence.

The Police

30.   It is agreed that the main responsibility for the
      disaster must rest with the police. They have partial
      responsibility for the ground layout. They were
      responsible for the "find their own level" policy with
      the supporters and also for supervising the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles. The difficulties of large scale admission to
      the ground should have been foreseen. However, the
      police failures occurred as part of a complex sequence of
      events, often outside the control of the police. The
      difficulties at Leppings Lane were partly geographical
      and resulted largely in the arrival of vast numbers of
      supporters after 2.30 pm. Those matters were beyond
      police control. Unruly behaviour by a minority cr«*i-*»d
      problems.

31.   Responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off
      and to cordon off the access tunnel is confined to
      Duckenfield. As an organisation the police cannot be
      said to have caused the deaths by their strategy and
      operational shortcomings. Whilst there were errors of
      judgement and practice there is no evidence that the
      police acted recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner
      as an organisation.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

32.   The failure to cordon off the access tunnel and not to
      postpone the kick-off were bad errors of judgement. They
      were his ultimate responsibility. He failed to notice
      the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4. He was recently
      promoted and had little experience for this semi-final
      match. His slowness to respond to what was happening was
      a result of is lack of experience.
33.   His failures significantly contributed to the crowd
      pressure which caused the crushing and collapse of
      barrier 124A. Had Duckenfield the requisite intention to
      support a charge of manslaughter? Clearly there was no
      unlawful or dangerous act on his part.  In failing to
      postpone the kick-off or order closure of the tunnel
      after opening gate C did he do an act which created an
      obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury
      either not giving thought to the possibility of such risk
      or having recognised that there was some risk involved
      nevertheless gone ahead and taken it?

34.   There are difficulties in proving that he intended to do
      an act which created an obvious and serious risk of
      causing personal injury. The Director and Counsel
      concluded that it was not an obvious risk at the'time.
      It is easy with hindsight to judge, but there must be a
      grave doubt as to whether the omissions created a risk
      which was obvious to anyone on the ground at the time.

35.   The Director concluded that there was insufficient
      evidence under the recklessness head of manslaughter
      against Duckenfield. Nor was there evidence that he was
      grossly negligent in his failures to act.

36.   Counsel and the Director concluded that there was no
      evidence that Duckenfield was wilfully neglectful of his
      duty or was culpable so have to committed the offence of
      Culpable Malfeasance by a public official.

Conclusions

37.   The Director's decision not to issue proceedings was
      reached solely on the basis of an insufficiency of
      evidence to prove any criminal offence against any
      individual or body corporate ie. the City Council, the
      Police, the Engineers. The decision was reached in
      accordance with the Director's code for Crown
      Prosecutors. The Public Interest factor was not one
      which came into play as the evidential sufficiency
      criterium had not been established in respect of any
      potential defendant. Full consideration was given to the
      possibility of the proseuction of each of the bodies
      involved despite their corporate status.

38.   The disaster was caused not by one single error or
      failure but by the combined effect of a series of
      mistakes, mis judgments and poor decisions, made by groups
      of people both over a period of time and by individuals
      on the day of the disaster.

Coroner's Inquests

39.   The Inquests began after the disaster and were adjourned
      when the Director requested a criminal investigation.
      The Coroner is obliged to adjourn an inquest when the
      Director makes such a request under the Coroner's Rules.
                                 7.


      Once the Coroner has received notification that the
      Director has decided not to issue criminal proceedings
      (or after such proceedings have concluded) the Coroner
      may resume the Inquest hearing. The Hillsborough Inquest
      recently recommenced in November 1990. The latest
      estimate is that the Inquests will continue hearing
      evidence and are likely to conclude in March 1991.

40.   The point made by Kenneth Hind MP about the matter being
      forgotten if action is not taken against those
      responsible can be answered by pointing to the detailed
      interim and final report of the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the civil proceedings at which
      the police admitted liability and the fact that
      disciplinary action is being considered by the Police
      Complaints Authority against various officers.

41.   The Coroner's jury may be influenced by the publicity
      surrounding the Director’s decision. The criminal
      investigation and any prosecution must take precedence
      over the Coroner's Inquisitorial hearing where no
      individual can be held responsible. The Public Inquiry
      itself has been widely reported and such publicity can
      also be said to influence the jury’s conclusions.
