                                                                                                                  ■0


From:              Michael Kennedy
To:                CPSHQY.CCU.crostong, CPSHQY.CCU.CROSTONG
Date:              20 August 1998 5:24pm
Subject:           HILLSBOROUGH - PRESS OFFICE LINE ON PRIVATE PROSECUTION

G

I attach a draft new line on the Hillsborough private prosecution which Clare has sent to me. I am a little
concerned about the wording of some parts of the draft especially para 2, so I have made some changes which
are also attached.

Please could you check this second draft to ensure you agree that it better describes CPS policy on taking over
private prosecutions and that it accords with the current position vis a vis your handling of the case.

Many thanks

M




CC:                DCOS.stocksc

Files:             C:\MGK\HILLPRIV.LOG C:\MGK\HILLPRIV.001
DRAFT NEW LINE: (IF ASKED WHAT THE CPS WILL DO IN RESPECT OF THE
PRIVATE PROSECUTION)

"Unless new evidence should emerge, the CPS has only two options with regard to
the private prosecution. We can either take it over and discontinue it or allow it
continue, without interfering.

"Before taking over a private prosecution to discontinue it, the CPS must be satisfied
that there is clearly "no case to answer". The basis of this position is that any
prosecution commenced with evidence which is does not establish a "case to
answer" would be an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution.

Clearly there is a distinction between the "realistic prospect of conviction" test in the
Code for Crown Prosecutors which the CPS uses to review cases sent by the Police
and the "no case to answer" test mentioned above.

Accordingly, there will be some cases which do not meet the CPS Code test of a
'realistic prospect of conviction’ where there is a "case to answer" and in which the
CPS will not intervene. To apply the Code tests to private prosecutions would
unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their own cases.

Before the review decision can be made in this case the CPS must be assured that
all relevant material has been considered carefully and in its entirety. This review is
now being carried out."

Guidance ONLY if asked:

How long will it take ?
The Magistrate has adjourned the case until beginning of October. He will then ask
for a progress report.

Why do you have to review it again ? (surely you've done it several times already)
The case was reviewed in 1990 under the Code for Crown Prosecutors. The
evidential standard applied when the CPS reviews private prosecutions is different.
We have explained this in the statement above. The review is taking place now.

Who will be doing this ?
A senior lawyer from Central Casework division.

Is it the same lawyer who reviewed it before ?
We can't go into any more details of the review process.

Why can't you take it over and run it ?
On 18.2.98, the CPS reaffirmed its stated view of June 1997, that the material which
has been presented and considered to date would not justify fresh criminal
investigations. As far as the CPS is aware at present, there is no new evidence to
consider.
$3 ^
re.
DRAFT NEW LINE: (IF ASKED WHAT THE CPS WILL DO IN RESPECT OF THE
PRIVATE PROSECUTION)

"Unless new evidence should emerge, the CPS has only two options with regard to
the private prosecution. We can either take it over and discontinue it or allow it
continue, without interfering.

"If the CPS is to take over the prosecution and discontinue it, we must be satisfied
that there is clearly "no case to answer". A private prosecution commenced in these
circumstances would be unfounded, and would, therefore be an abuse of the right to
bring a prosecution.

Clearly there is a distinction between the "realistic prospect of conviction" test in the
Code for Crown Prosecutors which the CPS uses to review cases sent to us from
the Police and the "clearly no case to answer" test mentioned above.

Accordingly we recognise that there will be some cases which do not meet the CPS
Code test of 'realistic prospect of conviction' where nevertheless we will not
intervene. It has been considered that to apply the Code tests to private
prosecutions would unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their own cases.

Before this decision can properly be made the CPS must be assured that all relevant
material has been considered. This review is now being carried out."

Guidance ONLY if asked:

How long will it take ?
The Magistrate has adjourned the case until beginning of October. He will then ask
for a progress report.

Why do you have to review it again ? (surely you've done it several times already)
The case was reviewed under the Code for Crown Prosecutors. The policy for
reviewing private prosecutions is different, as explained in the statement above.
This review is now taking place.

Who will be doing this ?
A senior lawyer from Central Casework division.

Is it the same lawyer who reviewed it before ?
We can't go into any more details of the review process.

Why can't you take it over and run it ?
On 18.2.98, the CPS reaffirmed its stated view of June 1997, that the material so far
presented would not justify fresh criminal investigations. As far as the CPS is aware,
there is no new evidence to consider.
