             H IL L S B O R O U G H
              IN Q U IR Y TEAM



    <a / \
/


                    M,   fa l/iA
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                         FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                  Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                                Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                           Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                    Fax:        0742 731483
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                         W rr        Medico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                          Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                              Your Ref:    EMS/DW
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                     /    uur1
                                                                           Our Ref:     JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                           o.K          25 January 1990



         Miss E M Steel
         Hillsborough Steering Committee
         C/0 Castle Chambers
         Cook Street
         Liverpool
         L2 9SH



                                                  a .0 .



         I refer to your letter of 17 January 1990 when you very kindly informed
         me that you were going to request a change of policy from the Home Office
         in respect of the release of individual statements made by your clients.
         It was very kind of you to afford the courtesy to me of informing me of
         your intention.

         I also noted that you had a similar concern with the Coroner with regard
         to the release of details about individual fatalities.

         My criminal investigation continues, but hopefully will be concluded in
         the Spring and depending upon the decision reached by the Director of
         Public Prosecutions we can then review the policy on release. I know
         that all the parties concerned in this investigation wish to be as
         helpful as possible, but quite rightly they feel it is important to
         ensure that the integrity of the investigation is maintained.

         I have copied this letter to the offices of the Director of Public
         Prosecutions, HM Coroner at Sheffield and the Secretary to the Public
         Inquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor.

         I am sure you will write in due course or telephone me if you feel that I
         can help in any other way.




   PLEASE REPLY T O T H E O FFIC E A T                     Lloyd House, Birmingham
      HILLSBOROUGH                    STEERING                 COM M ITTEE

                    c/o C astk Cftam6ers, Coof^Strect, LiverpoolL2 9S 9f
                      Tel: 051 2 5 5 0628 J c ^ 05 l 236 0047 <DX 14100




Mervin Jones Esq.,                                                17th January 1990
Assistant Chief Constable,                                        EMS/DW
Lloyd House,
C.olmore Circus Queensway,
BIRMINGHAM    B4 6QN




Dear Mr Jones,

At a recent meeting of the Steering Committee we again discussed the problems
of individual members of the Group are having due to the restriction on the release
of individual clients statements to their Solicitors imposed whilst the criminal
investigation is continuing.

As this restriction is certainly not of your making I have been asked by the
Committee to write directly to the Home Office to ask whether the Policy could
be reconsidered in the light of the problems for individual clients - as I mentioned
before the need to relive events of that day by making a further statement do
cause considerable distress to some people.

I did not want in anyway to be seen to be going "over your head" and therefore
as a matter of courtesy I felt I should write to you first to say that I would
be writing with that request towards the end of this week.

There is a second matter which in a sense effects the Coroner but may also at
the moment be subject to the DPP's direction which is the release to Solicitors
dealing with individual fatals of the file relating to the whereabouts of each
individual deceased.

This may become an issue dependent upon our negotiations with the Insurers.

We have been seeking to agree with the Insurers a sum as the appropriate measure
of damages in the majority of cases for pre-death     pain and suffering but of cours
on the basis that if in any individual case there were particular circumstances
which meant that the period was longer or the pain and suffering more intense
then it was open to the Solicitors to negotiate a separate and higher figure.

The current position is that the Insurers have indicated that they would want
the element of pain and suffering proving in every case.   In order to do that
the Solicitors would have to be in a position to show where the deceased was,
at approximately what time they entered the Pen, for how long they were involved
in the crushing and how bad etc.

I am hopeful that we will be able to persuade the Insurance Company to take a
C/ tnd




different line but if they persist and that information is not available to the
Solicitors then that would mean holding up final settlement of the cases until
after the conclusion of your investigations for the DPP and presumably the Inquest

The Coroner was able to let us have the post mortem repo rts on a provisional
basis because of the unavoidable delays and we would be seeking his Authority
for the additional papers on the same basis.

It may be that it is not necessary for me to pursue that second request at this
stage but I thought I would write fairly fully to you to let you know our position

All good wishes.

Yours sincerely,




IISS E M STEEL
