ATTORNEY GENERAL

               Background Note: Hillsborough Disaster


1.      On the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough stadium,
        Sheffield 95 people died and over 400 were injured due to
        gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens behind
        the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

2.      A public enquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor produced
        an interim report in August 1989.  The West Midlands
        Police assisted in the preparation of the report and
        later conducted a criminal investigation which was
        requested by the D.P.P.  The criminal investigation was
        extensive producing bulky documentation and a full
        transcript of the evidence given at the enquiry. The
        police investigation was meticulous.

3.      A copy of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and a copy
        of Counsel’s opinion by Gareth Williams Q.C. and Peter
        Birts Q.C. are attached.  It would be useful to refer to
        the plans at Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 of the report.


Facts

4.      There is little, if any, dispute as to what actually
        happened.Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the police
        officer responsible for policing the match.

5.      At 2.52 pm (8 minutes before kick-off) Durdenfield
        ordered one of the exit gates, Gate C, at the Leppings
        Lane end to be opened.  This was to relieve massive
        overcrowding and crushing at the turnstiles caused by a
        build up of supporters arriving after 2.30 pm. In the
        five minutes after the gate was opened 2000 supporters
        entered the ground and went into a tunnel under the west
        stand which gave access only to the central pens 3 and 4.
        Those pens were already full.  There was no controlled
        way in which supporters were allowed in to the pens. The
        additional influx caused intense pressure and resulted in
        the collapse of a crush barrier 124A near the front of
        pen 3. Many died from suffocation and crushing and some
        were trampled on. Perimeter gates were not opened by the
        police partly because of orders not to do so without
        permission and partly because officers did not appreciate
        the severity of what was occurring initially.  Later when
        the emergency was appreciated the small size and number*
        of the gates made evacuation extremely difficult.

6.      The build up of fans outside the ground was due to the
        geography of the turnstiles, their marking and numbers
        and to a loss of police control of supporters outside
        becoming keen to get inside before the kick-off.
7.    The three major causal factors were:-

      i.   the layout of the ground
      ii. the opening of the exit gate (gate C)
      iii. the build up outside the ground

Layout of the Ground

8.    The club were advised by a structural engineer, Dr
      Eastwood.  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 required
      expert advice to obtain a safety certificate under the
      Act from the local council.  Dr Eastwood advised
      additional crush barriers, these were installed in 1979.
      A certificate was granted.

9.    The safety certificate did not specify maximum numbers
      for the pens.  This, with turnstile monitoring of
      numbers, would have limited entrance to the pens.

10.   It was the policy of the police at semi-finals to allow
      movement of supporters between pens before the kick-off
      after which the radial gates would be closed and locked.
      Hence without a control on the numbers entering the
      tunnel access pens 3 and 4 were liable to become grossly
      overcrowded.  The police had accepted responsibility for
      monitoring the pens and their policy of "letting the fans
      find their own level" was severely criticized by Taylor.

11.   The exit gate C, opened following Duckenfield's
      instruction, is opposite the tunnel.  No steps were taken
      to cordon off the tunnex or divert the fans around the
      sides of the West stand.  The supporters had nowhere to
      go but the already crowded pens 3 and 4.

12.   At 3.04 pm a surge forward in pen 3 caused the crush
      barrier 124A to break.  This appears to have been a major
      factor in the deaths since there were far fewer deaths in
      pen 4 where no barrier collapsed.  Barrier number 144 had
      been removed in 1986, its absence meant there was no
      retarding structure as fans emerged from the tunnel into
      pen 3. There was unbroken diagonal pressure from the
      mouth of the tunnel down to barrier 124A.   the collapse
      of barrier 124A was a major factor in the cause of the
      deaths.  Barrier 124A was slightly corroded but it had
      been tested in July 1988 and had passed loading tests
      specified in the Government's Green Guide.   Taylor found
      that corrosion played a part in the collapse but the
      effective cause was the excessive unanticipated pressu^fe
      exerted at the time of the forward s urge .

13.   The crushing in pens 3 and 4 was not recognised by police
      either in the control box or on the perimeter of the
      pitch. Even supporters nearby, broadcasters and stewards
      were not immediately aware.

14.   Even after the crush, and until 3.06 pm, the main police
      concern was to prevent a pitch invasion.
The build up outside the Ground

15.   The opening of gate C which precipitated the disaster was
      made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at
      the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm.
      As kick-off time approached the crushing increased. The
      police lost control of the crowd.  The crush became
      unmanageable, many feared for their lives.  The kick-off
      was not postponed.  This course was only to be taken if
      there was a major cause of delay eg. a motorway accident
      or fog.  Taylor concluded that the kick-off should have
      been postponed.

16.   There was considerable evidence that people would be
      killed if gate C was not opened and that Duckenfield had
      no alternative but to do so. That being so neither
      Duckenfield nor other officers took any steps to deal
      with the consequences of opening the g a t e . The tunnel
      was not closed off even though such action had been taken
      by the police in 1988.  Duckenfield did order the influx
      at gate A, which had been opened earlier, to be
      monitored.  His omission to do so at gate C was said by
      Taylor to be "a blunder of the first magnitude". This
      was the immediate cause of the crushing in pens 3 and 4.
      It was not the sole cause.

17.   The layout of the turnstiles, inadequate space for the
      formation of orderly queues and the limited extent of the
      waiting area combined with poor designation and marking
      of turnstiles contributed to slow turnstile operation.

18.   There were only 7 turnstiles to admit 10,100 fans at the
      other end of the ground there were 60 turnstiles to admit
      29,800.  Taylor concluded that the police and club should
      have foreseen potential queuing and waiting to admit
      fans.

19.   Many supporters arrived after 2.30 pm.  Tickets advised
      arriving 15 minutes before kick-off. Some arrived
      without tickets. The evidence shows many had been
      drinking. Taylor concluded the majority had not been
      affected by drink.  Unruliness contributed to the pushing
      effect.  This contributed to the loss of control by the
      police.

20.   The main factor in the police loss of control was
      ineffective strategy planning for the large number of
      arrivals. Taylor concluded that by controlling the fans
      and postponing the kick-off gate C could have remained *
      closed.

Respons ibilities

21.   The layout of the ground was the responsibility of the
      Club, Eastwood, the Council and the police. No one
      foresaw that up to 2000 fans would ever be allowed to
      enter pens 3 and 4 when they were already overcrowded.
      No one anticipated gate 3 being opened or the crushing
      outside the ground.  The police must take the main
      responsibility for letting the fans "find their own
      level", however, the Club must share responsibility for
      the way in which supporters were allowed to fill the pens
      at semi-finals.

22.   The opening of gate C was Duckenfield's responsibility.
      In the circumstances his decision was correct. His
      failure was to give no order to deal with the sudden
      influx of fans. Had the tunnel been cordoned off the
      disaster would almost certainly have been averted.

23.   The layout of the turnstiles, their numbers and marking
      are primarily matters for the police and the Club, but
      the Council have a partial responsibility to ensure safe
      access to the ground.

Criminal Offences

24.   The two offences would be Manslaughter and Culpable
      Misfeasance.  These potential offences were considered
      against all parties, i e . the club, the Council, the
      police and the structural engineers (Mr Eastwood).

The Club

25.   The Club's responsibility for the layout and alterations
       inside the ground and for the layout of the turnstiles is
      where any potential liability exists. It is clear that
       these were not the sole, or even the major causes and
       that any actions and omissions by the club only partly
       contributed to the crushing and deaths. The Club not
      only relied on its own consultant engineer Dr Eastwood
      but it responded to the suggestions and advice of the
      police in important matters.

26.   There is insufficient evidence to establish the actus
      reus of manslaughter against the Club.  Additionally the
      evidence does not show either the recklessness or gross
      negligence required for the manslaughter offence.
Eastwood and Partners

27.   Eastwood's advice formed only part of the events that
      lead tot he structural condition at the ground.  It could
      not be said that his advice caused the deaths. In fact
      some of his advice, not acted on for financial reasons,
      may have lead to maximum limits being set for pens 3 and
      4.

28.   Again there is insufficient for the actus reus of
      manslaughter nor can the required recklessness or
      negligence be established against Eastwood or his firm.

The Council

29.   The Council is responsible for the safety certificate and
      compliance with the Green Guide. There were minor errors
      on the council's part but these only contributed in part
      to the ground conditions.   These are too remote to
      amount to the actus reus of manslaughter.  Again there is
      no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence.

The Police

30.   It is agreed that the main responsibility for the
      disaster must rest with the police. They have partial
      responsibility for the ground layout.  They were
      responsible for the "find their own level" policy with
      the supporters and also for supervising the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles.  The difficulties of large scale admission to
      the ground should have been foreseen.  However, the
      police failures occurred as part of a complex sequence of
      events, often outside the control of the police. The
      difficulties at Leppings Lane were partly geographical
      and resulted largely in the arrival of vast numbers of
      supporters after 2.30 pm. Those matters were beyond
      police control.  Unruly behaviour by a minority created
      problems.

31.   Responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off
      and to cordon off the access tunnel is confined to
      Duckenfield. As an organisation the police cannot be
      said to have caused the deaths by their strategy and
      operational shortcomings.  Whilst there were errors of
      judgement and practice there is no evidence that the
      police acted recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner
      as an organisation.

Chief
" ""  Superintendent
      ' *.... —..    Duckenfield
                             -.»I                           t

32.   The failure to cordon off the access tunnel and not to
      postpone the kick-off were bad errors of judgement.  They
      were his ultimate responsibility.  He failed to notice
      the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4. He was recently
      promoted and had little experience for this semi-final
      match. His slowness to respond to what was happening was
      a result of is lack of experience.
33.   His failures significantly contributed to the crowd
      pressure which caused the crushing and collapse of
      barrier 124A. Had Duckenfield the requisite intention to
      support a charge of manslaughter? Clearly there was no
      unlawful or dangerous act on his part.  In failing to
      postpone the kick-off or order closure of the tunnel
      after opening gate C did he do an act which created an
      obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury
      either not giving thought to the possibility of such risk
      or having recognised that there was some risk involved
      nevertheless gone ahead and taken it?

34.   There are difficulties in proving that he intended to do
      an act which created an obvious and serious risk of
      causing personal injury.  The Director and Counsel
      concluded that it was not an obvious risk at the time.
      It is easy with hindsight to judge, but there must be a
      grave doubt as to whether the omissions created a risk
      which was obvious to anyone on the ground at the time.

35.   The Director concluded that there was insufficient
      evidence under the recklessness head of manslaughter
      against Duckenfield.  Nor was there evidence that he was
      grossly negligent in his failures to act.

36.   Counsel and the Director concluded that there was no
      evidence that Duckenfield was wilfully neglectful of his
      duty or was culpable so have to committed the offence of
      Culpable Malfeasance by a public official.

Conclusions

37.   The Director's decision not to issue proceedings was
      reached solely on the basis of an insufficiency of
      evidence to prove any criminal offence against any
      individual or body corporate ie. the City Council, the
      Police, the Engineers.   The decision was reached in
      accordance with the Director's code for Crown
      Prosecutors. The Public Interest factor was not one
      which came into play as the evidential sufficiency
      criterium had not been established in respect of any
      potential defendant.   Full consideration was given to the
      possibility of the proseuction of each of the bodies
      involved despite their corporate status.

38.   The disaster was caused not by one single error or
      failure but by the combined effect of a series of
      mistakes, misjudgments and poor decisions, made by groups
      of people both over a period of time and by individuals
      on the day of the disaster.

Coroner's Inquests

39.   The Inquests began after the disaster and were adjourned
      when the Director requested a criminal investigation.
      The Coroner is obliged to adjourn an inquest when the
      Director makes such a request under the Coroner's Rules.
                                 7.

      Once the Coroner has received notification that the
      Director has decided not to issue criminal proceedings
      (or after such proceedings have concluded) the Coroner
      may resume the Inquest hearing.  The Hillsborough Inquest
      recently recommenced in November 1990.  The latest
      estimate is that the Inquests will continue hearing
      evidence and are likely to conclude in March 1991. .

40.   The point made by Kenneth Hind MP about the matter being
      forgotten if action is not taken against those
      responsible can be answered by pointing to the detailed
      interim and final report of the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the civil proceedings at which
      the police admitted liability and the fact that
      disciplinary action is being considered by the Police
      Complaints Authority against various officers.

41.   The Coroner's jury may be influenced by the publicity
      surrounding the Director's decision.  The criminal
      investigation and any prosecution must take precedence
      over the Coroner's Inquisitorial hearing where no
      individual can be held responsible.  The Public Inquiry
      itself has been widely reported and such publicity can
      also be said to influence the jury's conclusions.
1.    ISSUE

1.1   What action should this Department take in the light of the transmission of the
      Hillsborough drama/documentary on the 5 December 1996, and subsequent
      correspondence.

2.    ACTION REQUIRED

2.1   Present position to be established with the South Yorkshire Police and all other
      interested parties.

2.2   A response is required to an enquiry raised by David Alton MP on behalf of the
      Hillsborough Family Support Group.

3.    TIMING

3.1    Briefing note and draft response to David Alton is required by 31 January 1997.

4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   The Hillsborough Disaster was and still remains an unparalleled occurrence of our
      time and led not only to a fundamental re-appraisal of safety at public events, but has
      since resulted in precedents being set in the Civil Courts as to what might constitute
      post traumatic stress.

4.2   For a detailed understanding of what then followed the original background note
       prepared for the then Attorney General together with its accompanying annexes
       remains valid. (Appendix I)

4.3   At the conclusion of the re-commenced inquest, verdicts of accidental death were
      returned on all the victims.

4.4   The proceedings at the Coroner’s Court were challenged by way of Judicial Review.
      The Divisional Court however found nothing upon which they felt that they could
      question the actions of that Court.

4.5   On Thursday 5 December 1996 the independent television network screened a
      drama/documentary based on the disaster written and produced by one Jimmy
      McGovern.

4.6   On the 17 December 1996 the Home Secretary was required to respond in the House
      to an Adjournment Debate specifically on this matter. A transcript of what then took
      place is attached. (Appendix II)

4.7   Following on from this debate the Home Secretary wrote to the Chief Constable for
      South Yorkshire Police asking him to express a view on certain issues that have been
      raised by the programme and requesting answers to 10 specific questions. A copy of
      this letter has been obtained via LSLO and is attached. (Appendix III)
4.8    A copy of the programme has been obtained and this has been viewed by this office.
       Contact has also been established with the South Yorkshire Police Officers who are
       dealing with this matter so that we can be briefed as to what the current position is.
       The Chief Constable proposes to prepare his response to the Home Office by 31
       January 1997 and then send it to the Home Office. He is likely to advise the Home
       Office that the programme contained no new material.

4.9   We have an understanding with LSLO that CPS would not ask for enquiries at this
      stage. Once the Home Office have the police response, LSLO would like a tripartite
      meeting at officials level to consider a co-ordinated way forward.

4.10 The screening of this programme and in particular certain parts of its content has
     resulted in eight of the deceased families writing both to this Department and in some
     cases to either the Home Secretary, the Attorney General or both asking that both the
     original inquest be set aside and that a new criminal investigation be commenced in
     the light of the new evidence disclosed in the programme. In addition it would appear
     that the Hillsborough Family Support Group has also written to every member of
     Parliament generally, and in particular to David Alton MP. who has forwarded a
     copy of the same to the Director.

4.11 The Attorney General has also received a copy of the same letter from David Alton
      MP. Furthermore, a letter in the same terms has been forwarded to him by Dennis
      Skinner MP.

4.12 LSLO has advised Private Office that their reply to David Alton MP will also respond
      to his letter to the Director.

5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

5.1   The three crucial questions that fall to be considered are:-

5.2   Has any "new" evidence come to light arising from the screening of the TV
      programme ?

5.3   Does this evidence support the view that one or more Police Officers may have
      committed perjury at the Coroners Court or otherwise attempted to obstruct the
      course of justice; and

5.4   Is there now sufficient doubt for the Attorney General to be asked once more to
       consider exercising his powers under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 to require
       a fresh inquest to be held.

6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1   At present this Department has insufficient evidence upon which any substantive
      decision can be made.

6.2   Once the Chief Constable has reported to the Home Secretary it is recommended that
      a meeting is held between this Department, the Home Office and the LSLO (as LSLO
      propose) so that it can be established, 1) whether or not a further enquiry is to
      commence and if so 2) in what form and 3) to agree how any further enquiries either
      from the HFSG, relatives of the deceased or the media generally will be handled so
      as to avoid any possibility of confusion between us.

6.3   Since the Attorney General’s response to David Alton MP will be on behalf of both
      himself and the Director, the Director need not now reply to the MP (Draft at
      Appendix IV)

6.4   Subject to any instructions to the contrary, Prosecutions Branch 3, Central Casework,
      York, will respond to the private correspondence in terms similar to the Attorney
      General’s letter.

6.5   If any further MPs correspondence is received on this point, it should first be
      established whether LSLO have likewise received a letter and consequently who
      should respond.

7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   That until such time that this Department is satisfied whether a further criminal
      investigation is justified or not, that no action is taken from which it could be
      misconstrued that this Department either has or intends to re-open the Hillsborough
      Enquiry.




P R P Pearson
29 January 1997
3       I
                                                                                            Z l & S

OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and time raised          £ o (3 fr<             Number     D 5 S ?

Title   \ a ; ( A A C A jfU C '      l" p n 3 ^ f(                  ■ f (\ 07 Kj l l o c H
(In clu d e source an d a ny docum ent num ber i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions -- urgent action —Yes/No ___
                                                                                                                           Racaivar



                                                                                                                           Indaxar
Document regi^red/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statamant Raadac
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                           Indaxar
Indexed-ds
        -dsyndic
            indicated

No{s) of actions raised
                                                                                     __
Examined- further action to be taken                                                                                  O/M         SIO
                                                                                          •.1   f    .•     *        __ A —
                                                                                       ic y                (         d J
                                                                                    ----J l —i--- -------- ;------

                                                                                                                            Indaxar
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                           61

                                                 M. GODDARD


                Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

     SergVant Goddard, just one general question, please,
     prefa&ed with this.   Can you tell the Jury how long
     you hav*^ been a serving Police Officer? - A. I was a
     Cadet foX Sheffield City in 1959 and appointed Police
     Officer i\ 1962.

Q.   For how long\have you been a Sergeant? - A. October
     1976.        \

Q.   Without going im.o detail, as part of your duty you
     have to attend at\all manner of events and
     emergencies? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   I want you to put the event when you were in the
     Control Box and you started to receive the calls from
     Mr. Marshall outside to open the gates because
     otherwise someone would be killed, just put that in
     the circumstances in which it happened, put that in
     the context of your experience as a Police Officer.
     How does this rank in terms of emergencies that you
     have been involved in? - A. The most dire emergency
     certainly.   I had never known anything before like
     this at all.

          THE CORONER:  Sergeant GoHHarrT\ j am most
     grateful to you for being here. Thank you very much
     for helping us.

          What we are now going to do is we are going to
     hear Mr. Bichard in a moment. We are going to press
     on today, but what I wane to do is you will remember
     you were asking about the video, and I think we will
     show this video now of the scene as far as we have got
     it at Leppings Lane.  In fact, it was, of course,
     taken by Mr. Bichard so it is a convenient time to
     actually look at it, but I am going to get Mr. Killoch
     who has actually selected the piece out that we need
     to describe it.

                   JOHN KILLOCH Recalled

                      By THE CORONER:

Q.   Give your name so we know who you are. - A. Sergeant
     John Killoch, sir, West Midlands Police. I have just
     taken a short sequence from one of the South Yorkshire
     Police videos, which shows pictures taken from one of
     the CCTV cameras situated at the ground on 15th April.
     These show scenes inside Leppings Lane of the Leppings
     Lane pens, the West Stand.  I should mention, sir, I
     think the Jury are already aware but some of the
                                                 J. KILLOCH


     pictures are in what they call time lapse, so that it
     will jump.

          THE CORONER: Yes.   It is not very long, about 10
     or 15 minutes.
Q.   Before we start, can you remember what time the
     sequence begins? - A. It starts, sir, at approximately
     15.02 and the first few frames are actually shown on
     the concourse area, and then the camera moves into the
     West Stand.

                   (The video was shown)
                                                            63




      MR. BEECHEY:       That is C.539.

     THE CORONER:    Have got an identification number or
something on the tape so that we know?

     MR. KILLOCH:   Yes,       sir.   The original
identification is TB.l.         That is the West Midlands
Police reference.

      THE CORONER:       Mr. Maxwell?

     MR. MAXWELL:    Sir, I am here today as you might
have guessed in order to present to you written
submissions on law of the Sheffield City Council.    I
would normally do that, of course, at the end of the
evidence.   That may yet be possible, but perhaps not
today, but we obviously want to comply with your
timetable.   At the moment it is a bit like Blue Peter,
"Here is one I made earlier"!    Sir, in due course, it
will be presented.

     Sir, there are certain matters I would wish to raise
with you now and which might be better dealt with in the
absence of the Jury, with our leave, sir.

  \                  (The Jury left C o u r t )

     MR. MAXWELL:     Sir, I have kept up with the evidence
in thes^xlnquests with my daily dose of transcript and
the commerH^s I make to you now concern the ending of
these Inquests and the ending of the evidence.        They are
intended to blfeshelpful.     I hope they are not taken as
some forensic cri de c o e u r , but there may be an element
of that in it.

     Sir, you may remember that case where the evidence
that went before an Inquest was likened to the tip of an
iceberg.   Normally, of course, icebergs get smaller but
there is at least a risk, sir, of the evidence here
getting larger in quantum and may be getting unbalanced.
Alternatively it may be that tHe Jury is about to be
asked to look unnecessarily beldt* the water line.
                                         s\
                                              ' \
     I know you h ave considered this already but there
are reasons why in my respectful submission you could
reconsider the point.    Messrs. Goddard, Bichard and Ryan
have run as a trio, or Goddard and Bichar<| as a duo, for
a long time in these proceedings.    I know\you have
considered already just h ow far one should go with their
evidence.

     Sir, I comfort myself in asking you to reconsider
the position w ith two thoughts.  T h e first is that you
have always shown that as your own man, and as very
                            H IL L S 3 CBCL'GH




                'ul 2 lerghths
                 Video ?ef *.'c            TB2/A/PART A
                VHS/i-iunatic              NUMATIC
                Durat;or                   1 HOUR




Data Base

 15.03.00        Close up on Pens 3 -    Police by fence.
                 Man in Bib (Steward?) on fence.



 15.03.26       Gate 'V open.        Fans climbing over fence and perimeter track.



15.03.25        Steady flow over fence onto pitch from inside pen.
until



15.06.20        Fans on fence starting to pull people out of pen.
                Cordon of Police along pitch.
continuous      General scenes of people climbing out of pen, focused mainly
                on pitch.



15.09.47        Police at fence.



Continuous      People climbing out of pen.



15.16.10        Ambulance arrives.



15.19.57        Senior Police Officer on fence with Loudhailer.



15-22.08        Police inside pen entering via open gate.



1 5 .2 5 .4 2   Changes to long range view of goal area West Stand, congested
                with spectators.
                               SCHEDULE

                     VIDEO T A P E R E F E R E N C E : TB2
 Times of views of Leppings Lane terrace and W est Stand on TB2 video cassette
                                      tape



12:00:22                  12:42:13                   13:33:49
12:00:43                  12:42:34                   13:34:10

12:05:03                  12:45:50                   13:36:20
12:05:24                  12:46:11                   13:36:41

12:06:30                  12:51:37                   13:43:11
12:06:51                  12:51:58                   13:43:32

12:15:31                  12:55:14                   13:47:52
12:15:52                  12:55:35                   13:48:13

12:19:08                  12:56:41                   13:49:19
12:19:29                  12:57:02                   13:49:40

12:20:34                  13:00:17                   13:51:50
12:20:56                  13:00:38                   13:52:11

12:24:11                  13:02:49                   13:53:17
12:24:32                  13:03:10                   13:53:38

12:27:47                  13:04:16                   13:54:43
12:28:09                  13:04:37                   13:55:04

12:31:24                  13:05:42                   13:56:10
12:31:45                  13:06:03                   13:56:31

12:33:55                  13:09:18                   13:57:36
12:34:16                  13:09:40                   13:57:57

12:36:27                  13:10:45                   14:00:08
12:36:48                  13:11:06                   14:00:29

12:37:53                  13:14:21                   14:01:35
12:38:14                  13:14:42                   14:01:55

12:39:20                  13:29:51                   14:18:38
12:39:41                  13:30:12                   14:23:39

12:40:46                  13:32:22                   15:02:54
12:41:08                  13:32:44                   15:25:42
I


I


I


I
I
I   ANNEX F

I
1


I
1


I
I


I


I


I


■
a


■
n
Statement of Dr Edward C Walker, SHO in Anaesthetics at Rotherham DGH
regarding the Hillsborough Incident on Saturday 15th April 1989


At 3.00 pm on the day                 of the incident I had just returned home and

happened to turn on the television to see pictures of the crowd disturbance

at the Hillsborough ground.                   There was no talk at that time of any

casualties nor from the pictures did it seem apparent that there would be

a great number of people injured or killed-

However, I decided that it night be worth my travelling to the Northern

General Hospital just to see if I could be of use in the event of any

casualties being received.

I live at Tinsley and as fdrove out of the house^I encountered an

ambulance travelling towards the centre                          of Sheffield with lights                     and

siren on, and          I put my own headlights on and followed immediately behind

this ambulance.

It transpired in fact that this ambulance was in fact on its way to

Hillsborough,but it passed the Northern General Hospital in doing so.

I turned off into the hospital grounds.

I arrived at           the Casualty Department to be told that they did know of a

disturbance at Hillsborough and also that ambulance control had tolc them

that there was a paediatric cardiac arrest coming into the department.

However, the two events were not linked as far as we knew.                                            We learned

later that the paediatric cardiac arrest was in fact from the ground.

This first child received v/as in cardio-respiratory standstill and we

instigated routine cardic— pulmonary resuscitation.                                    I intubated the child

and in doing so noted that there v/as evidence of gross inhalation of

stomach contents.           As far as 1 can recall we did establish sinus rhythm



throu:rnout.          1 oeiievj           ccv r.as since died.

vFhilst resuscitation v:as oeir.r: carried out cn this first patient, the second

child    3r,r,iv*?c               ^         ''z '   c r:r*cio—o 1 <1    n3 .V   'f   CPP0   3   ~   SinHsr*


        cqrti*3:c. out.       ^^^ ^        '• wp.c - u"^               ■
                                                                       “-c•’ 2                                      2
 good output although he also had fixed dilated pupils throughout and

 has also I believe since died.

These two patients had taken up the available space in Resuscitation room

 and I believe the next case v/as taken into the "clean theatre area” .

 This patient had a good cardiac output but was irritable cerebr^firand

 in a decerebrate posture, although not actually fitting at that time.

 I intubated this patient without any drugs and another doctor took over

his further care.             During this time more casualties had arrived and

were being taken through to Plaster room area, Qne of these was in a

similar pesitl-on-to the last patient, ie cerebrally irritable but

breathing and with a good cardiac output.                          I took the decision to leave

this patient in the care of a non-medical member of staff, as there were
                              a.
further patients in^cardiac arrest state coming in.

As far as I can recall the next patient I dealt with v/as also in the

plaster room area.             He v/as^cardiac and respiratory arrest.                          I intubated

him and was joined by a doctor whose name I never found out, who was

apparently at Hillsborough and had come to the hosDital from there.

I think he said he was from Liverpool.

There was also a police officer present v/ho assisted us with ventilation

and cardiac massage.               We had dificulty eis^abiishing venous access and

we eventually resorted to a central line.                                    v/as re-established with

a good cardiac output.               However, his output fell at one stage and he

re-arrested.         We re-started him.but then he arrested for a third time and
                                                                      4s
his pupils were fixed and dilated throughout.^ At this tine as there

were more casualties arriving,we took a joint decision to abandon

resuscitation on this patient.                   It was during this time that we ran into

       "jiffituiti-'s C'OtaiP.ins muL-ven- such                        Intravenous                         3nd

drui.:' .   Tngse        re of course not available routinely in the piaster room/

and people that we asked to "etch druets were                                 a-rtsc-^not faniliar

                          •n pr o s c u r e s ' f o r example _iunicr s t u d e n t n u r s s s 1 and .1

r e n e r - b e r one o a r t i c - j l a r i n c i d e n t where I was b m u a h f back   2   wfcial o f A t r o c i r
    and a vial of Adrenaline but no syringe or needle with which to draw

    them up.     I eventually resorted to drawing up the drugs in a discarded

    syringe, diluting u0£qa*^tap water, and injecting down the endo-tracheal

    tube.

«— Sfts I recall the next patient I attended to was in the recovery area

    of the clean theatre.     He was having closed cardiac massage and being

    hand ventilated with a face mask.    I inspected this patient and we

    continued routine cardio-pulmonary resucitation.      Unfortunately due to

    the large number of cardiac arrest situations that were going on at

    this time there were no cardiac monitors at all available and we

    resuscitated this patient 'blind' throughout the procedure.

    \j)L also ran into a problem here in that although there was an ambu-^

    bag available to ventilate the patient through the endo tracheal tube,

    v/e had great difficulty in finding a) suitable piping and b) a suitable

    oxygen outlet through which to oxygenate the patient.       This patient

    was therefore ventilated on air before this situation was remedied.

—     believe at this stage i was asked to go round to the dirty theatre

    area where there was a young boy who was fitting.      He had been treated

    by one of the casualty officers and by Dr Ryan and required intubation

    and ventilation.

    Operating department assistants were available at this stage.and I

    carried out a routine rapid sequence induction before transferring the

    patient to GITU.

    An identical procedure was the        ‘          ’’    second patient in the

    dirty theatre area who was alsc^ transferred to GITU

    I then got involved   in the resuscitation of a patient in the Resus area



    asystcie for some 15 minutes and I believe resuscitation attempts were

    abandoned.

    I then vent up to ward 50 where the victims who had/been sent to GITU

    were acmit'ec. jje\verai cf ~nese deteriorated neurologically on the ward
and I carried out rapid sequence inductior£on two of these patients before

transferring them to CICU.

As far as I can recall this covers the major amount of work in the immediate

primary care of the patients vdWfgJa I encountered.

I would like to list a few of the difficulties which I encountered during the

course of the afternoon -

a)     There appeared to be considerable delay before activating the Major

Accident Procedure, I am unclear to exactly how long this was but I

understand that members of casualty staff were trying to do this and found

that they could not get through to the hospital switchboard.

I am not aware of the standard procedures for activating the Major Accident

Plan       but I am unclear as why this could not have been done by Ambulance

Control.

b)     Identification of patients - obviously the standard Major Accident

Procedure did not get under way until a good number of patients had come

into tho department.                    Had I personally known what the scale of the

disaster was going to be, I think the simplest way would have been to Letter

or Number the patients with a marker pen.

c)     Although this was probably a unique event in the number of cardiac

arrest situations that were going on simulataneously^                               I am sure that the

lack of available cardiac monitors was detrimental to some patients.

d)     I noted that in the Major Accident packs all the endo^tracheal tubes

that I could find were uncuffed and of one size.                          They were also uncut
               n St
and did#flfc have             any angle piece connectors already attached.                    This led to

some delay in establishing satisfactory ventilation. &ue to the large extent

ot" i n i 3.2.s t i or"!s 1 '.'iy:r-z         t-irjS". v/a.s     c \x^T c c \ ')r;? s

e)     As 1 mentioned previously there >-35 difficulty in oxygenating one

 patient due to the lack of available suitable oxygen tubing cc conenct

an anfau-ba-t zc ar. o'cv.-ten outlet.                As I recall there was only one oxygen

            ih t.r'.'S r^ccv^^v ^r,° 2 for* ci^sn tnG2t.PG snd                          s connected to a
 Boyle's machine.

  f)   There appeared to be a lack of suitably large^venous cannulae.

  g)   The only available peripheral venous cannulae were of Jelco or
  Cathlon types, ie they require a separate injection port to be attached
  once thev have been inserted into a vein and they are also difficult
                                                                   %    *
  to secure effectively.    I would stress very strongly that Venffrlon catheters

  should be available as these do not require separate needles to be attached

  to the syringe with which the injection     is to be given,and thetj* are also

  much easier to secure.     ^ ‘'sieek” adhesive tape is undoubtedly the easiest

  and msot effective tape to use when securing venous cannulae and drips in

  a hurry.   This was not available.

K/Again this is probably due to the number of cardiac arrests which         going

  on at one tine^    We encountered a shortage of basic cardiac arrest drugs such

  as Adrenaline, Atropine and Lignocaine.     We very soon exhausted the/supplies
             0 * Miai         "
                        preparations.    As I recall most of the cardiac arrest

  drug trays that were opened     only contained one or two vials of Atropine and

  Adrenaline.    In the situation that we found ourselves in during the day

  Atropine, Adrenaline and Lignocaine were the only drugs which we really needed

  in the acute stage of cardio Dulmonarv resuscitation.



  These points are purely those which came to nind in the immediate aftermath

  of the disaster.     I make no claims whatsoever   as to their relevance for

  future planning^and as much as anything this is merely a wayo? noting them

  before they /set forc;otton by me.




                                                        587
                                                                          Sheffield Health Authority



*                               K © r t i M a r m   Ca€m®5raJ             jMcsgpatal

jfe<     JW/DS/                                                   Herries Road, Sheffield   SS 7AU
frCT-                                                         Tdephotm (0742) 434343

J^e reply io   a   i S Dept.    F-Xt-

         3rd Hay, 1 9 8 9

I       Dr. H-G. Shroader,

I       Consultant Anaesthetist,
        I-ioyal Hallamshire Hospital.


         Deai- Dr. Shro^.der,


         I would like to inform you of the outstanding contribution made by one
         of the rotating Anaesthetic Senior House Officers on the 15th April
         following the Major Accident at Hillsborough Football Ground.

        Dr. Edward Walker, S.H.O. in Anaesthetics presently at Rotherham was at
        home and heard of the incident on the radio.   He therefore decided on.
        his own initiative to come to the Northern General hospital and arriv.ed,
        here juat as the first casualties were arriving.   Almost immediately
        the department was flooded with lar^e numbers of acutely ill patients
        reouiring urgent resuscitation.    For a time Dr. talker was the only
        person with anaesthetic training in the Resuscitation Hoom and he was
        instrumental in bringing sp«edy treatment and resuscitation to a large
        number of patients.

        I am indebted to the cool and efficient actions of this young Doctor
        on that day and he deserves special commendation.


         Yours sincerely,


                                    A

        J. WABDROPE
        Consultant in Accident and Emergency Medicine



                                                                                                   /
         Dr, V. Boyd, Consultant Anaesthetist, Rotherham District General Hospital,   /
                                                    Moorgate rtoad* motherham.      v




                                                        588
i                                                                                                      Sheffield Health Authority



                                         K o f f t t e m                  Cn®ffis®m£                   M @ g p I 4 a J .

tr9<- JW.DS                                                                                     H«fd<w fioed, Sheffield S3 7AU
Jrel                                                                                                 Telephone 0742 434343
                                                                                                            Fax 0742 68G47£
se reply to


          A ccident and Emergency Department

          15th J u n e , 1^39


I;
i


          Dear Co'US&rfU'S,

          As vou nay 'xncr, f.he V/est, Midlands P o lic e a re i n v e s t i g a t i n g the i n c i d e n t
          a t H ills b o ro u g h stadium on th e T?th April 1939-                    One arm o f th e i n v e s t i g a t i o n
          c on ce rns the Coroner and he i s e s p e c i a l l y i n t e r e s t e d 1.n th e p a t i e n t s who were
          b roug ht to th e Accidcnt and fv5ier,«;ency Department o f th e N o rthern General
          H o s p ita l and have su b se q u e n tly d ie d .          I have p rovid e d an o v e r used s ta te m e n t
          o f th e s i t u a t i o n but the Coroner would I i ;<s ^uch n o r e d e t a i l on the
          a c t i v i t i e s in th e R e s u s c i t a t i o n Hoom on t h a t day,  I have t h e r e f o r e provided
          th e P o lic e w ith a l i s t o r people involved in the A ccident and Emergency
          Department.

          You may t h e r e f o r e he asked f o r a s t a t e n e n t by West Midlands P o l i c e .
          There say he a i f f a c u l t i e s in p a t i e n t i d e n t i : i c a t i o n b u t a l l the a v a i l a b l e
          in fo rm a tio n on p a t i e n t s i s housed w ith Mrs. C h r is . S to c ’.cwell In the Medical
          Records O f f i c e .

          I have contacted the Solicitors actir.r, for the Health Authority in this
          matter and they have advised that if you have anv reservations regarding
          these statement.3, you contact them Pefore speaking to the Police.

          The' S o l i c i t o r s concerned a r e Ox icy u Coward, a d d re ss - 2 3 Glossop Road,
          S h e f f i e l d S10 2KB, Telephone Ho, 727-V35 and the person d e a l i n g w ith t h i s
          m a t t e r i s Miss 0. H o l l a t t .


          Yours s i n c e r e l y ,




          J . WARDHOPE
          Consultant In Accident and C<n.';r';~?ncy Medicine.




                                                                                 589


     -i   i. i.   c 1“   )e r r   r
                                                                          Sheffield Health Authority




n ref.   JW /D S
                                                              ffaH       IHIospSftaS



*ase reply to                           Ext.
                                                                Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU
                                                                       Telephone (0 7 4 2 ) 4 3 4 3 4 3




a        Accident and Emergency Department

         3rd Kay, 1 9 8 9




a        Dr. E.C. Walker,
         S.H.O. in Anaesthetics,
         Rotherham District General Hospital,
         Moorgate Road,

■        Rotherham.



 a       Dear Ed,




 a       Thank you very much for your very important report on the incident on the
         15th April.



 a
         I owe a great debt to you for the work you did that day and from your
         account your efforts were very significant in bringing speedier treatment
         to a large number of patients.


a        If there is anything I can do for you in the future, please do not
         hesitate to let me know.



a        Yours sincerely,



a
a        o   • i*kRDROPE    F .i^ *C *S .
         Consultant in Accident and Emergency Medicine



a
R
a
R
                                                   590
R
  D r . E d W a l k i -k




' 8 February 1 9 9 7


 Mr. Janies Watdrnpe,
 C on su ltan t, Accident       & E m ergency D ept.,
N o r t h e r n G o u c ralH o sp ital,
 Sheffield
 S 5 7A U .


 Dear Jim,
A s a rot.-i.Hl o f the Granada ’Kills!* irougli drama broadcast In Doccuibcc iast, I have finally been p u l in touch
'.'.'illi liiu Hillsborough Family Support Group, and have m et up with the H am m on d s, Ilie parents o f Pin! ip
 H am m ond, the first victim to arrive at the N G H . He was the first victim I attem pted to resuscitate oa the
Jay, Mrs. H am m on d has been trying to discover t*\y id en tity for nearly eigh t years.
 i have aLo scon copies of the inquest and policc statem en t transcripts, anu learned that I was referred to on
several occasions as an ’unidentified doctor’, and liial D r. Slater stated that P h ilip in Ilia op in ion was dead
 by the tim e lie arrived at the hospt tal.
 I should he graletui if you could let mo know whether y o u fenoy o f any reason that I was not contacted by
W est Midlands Police to provide an official statem ent, nor ashed to appear at the inquest. In my statcsr.cnI
 lo you [ said that at one stage Philip did indeed have a sinus rhythm and a cardiac outp ut, which is obviously
 a t odds with Dr. S i ater's evidence.


 I look forward to hearing from you.


 Kind regards,


 Yours sincerely,




 D r. E d Waijkkr
    D r .E;_d__________________________
    fa.
              W a lk e r
                                        -                                       ____________________ & && 1
                                                                                                                        .Jm

                                                                                                                      'mfci
                                                                                                                       ' V>& t
                                                                                                                      ■ ,l-!
i 3 Fc.oruaiy                                                                                                                 ^
                                                                                                                              J-T
Richard e m it a. Editor,                                                                                        i'
T hcB M L                                                              .                                                          ;
B M A K o u Se,              -                         '                                                                      •
Tavistock Square,
Lem J e n 'X \ ,1 H 9 JR.                                                                                    ;


hdiior,                                                                                    V


In Decfcr.aljer last year. I reviewed Lie H iJsL orcv.rh television d ra m a io r th e B M J. I had keen keen to ub
.his as I was involved v o lu n tarily in rc su sd ia iio n ciiorls 011 c ia iiv o i liio victim s wiio arrived ai. l£c
N orthern G e n e ra l H o sp ital. I n o rd er tc d onate The tee to tn e lam ily su p p o rt group. I m ad e c o n ta ct witfi
    1               1 r          |    . 1 I* *             ■' J «\              /                   '**-
-no sccrclarv, who 1 now m o w is th e lather o i ihc lirsl viclim i a lour Icon -ycat-Oiti jjov] x> atrpcar al Ihe
acciaent      & em ergency department.                                                                                            ‘

I have also te e n given, ior the tirst time, copies o i inquest transcripts and post-m ortem tinumcs. I reau
:h al I am retorted to several Limes ns an m udculiiicd doctor', ocspile m y identity being well known, and
despite the iact that I provided tne consultant concerned with a written account                 oi m v actions on the dar.
A ilh o tig h I was pim Jcd cvl. iio l having been asked ior a ~ialeinc.nl Ly ^"csi Yorkshire uoiicc i.jvho wete-
ckargeu w itk gathering evidence tor Lae inquests). I had u n til n ow assum ed that what happened at tne
a o sp ila is was never brought up. I d u d il upset.ing and to som e cxleiil rastuling .o he reicrrcd ic ii: njv
ajiici'.-.e.


Three points out o i m any deserve mention, rirstlv, I sav in m y report that the rirst victim a i one stasie mad
a good cardiac ou tp u t and a sinus rliythm on the EL G . cccoucily, i n o te ik a l many victims fcac( evidence
o i gross soilin g c i th e airway w ith gastric contents. Thirc.lv, rn^st "resuscitation urugs uscu wefe
adnihiisierc-d via the endolracheal luhes.


In lixc inquest an a post m ortem report, ike pathologist. stales he thought il iikeiy thai la c iirsi. viclim was
dead hv th e tim e he arrived, and pcssihiyoetore that, as his pulse was crdy teir hy a txh eem a n . who was
probably in iacl palpating ms ow n pulse. Tnerc is no m eiuiou in ik e post m ortem rcporl i have seen uier.
I       understand in any others) o i hrcnchiai soiling. Finaiiy. m u ch is made o i there being n c m arts                       qz
a u e m p lc d cn m iu ialiou o n the hr si victim I recdvca. T he supposilioii is ihal no rcsusci.alioii w£s
attempted, whereas in iact adrenaline snd atropine were given via Lie tracheai r^ute. S om eon e other than
m e removed llic cndoLracheai iube hciore ‘.he boy got as iar as h e post m ortem room , a iih o u tii ii w£>klct
.oe difficult to say ercactiy wiien this happened, as ail th e deceased i including :hose that died at the hospitali
were transported hicK to the temporary mortuary ai mo ioolhali ground. Tiiis parlicidar he v s parents neve;r
even knew h e had heen at the hospital until she m ontlis iater.                .                                             \
         2
13 L               !UC <

  eras only one or m an y volunteers w ho did v ; u : they cnuui on th a t dav. In particular, I worLeci ro,
  Itk a doctor, iro m Liverpoo. o r ab o u t m y own a«!e (2 6 at th e :im e). I nev«r saw jn m again. 1 h a w
v iiiin g ly involved in ik e families attem p ts to win a fudiciai’.reviev o t -kc inquest verdict. O n e wev i i
x abie to Jo so is to ask ii ta e ie are any o t.ie i doctors reading this who were involved o n ik e u a y .a n d
approached to provide s ta te m e n ts n o r appear at in e inquests, it. like n:e. they te ti th a t certain asnects
events o n tk e day were at th e very least glossed over ai th e inquests. I should be sgrateiu. ii tne-.' corEl
contact either nursed (via e-mail, o r thro u g h this journal i. or co n tact tn e r'anilv sunnort aroun dirtctiv. 7
c o n :s e t is:                                                                          ;


             Mr      H amxu -'u a




  ou rs siucereiv.

                                                                                                                        I



1)1?. H d W'.U.KFl?
                                                                      593
                                                                                                                      WG 4 1 3
                                                   - 3 -                                                        (Amended 9.87)
                                        West Midlands Police
                                 S T A T E M E N T OF W IT N E S S
                        (C.J. Act 1967, s . 9; M.C. Act 1980, s .1 0 2 ; M.C. Rules 1 9 81, r.70)


Continuation of statem ent o f        JAMaS ^WARDROPE....................
life-saving treatment to the huge number of patients.


Thirteen patients were brought to the_Northern General Hospital on that day
and subsequently died.                  From the medical records in my jjossession and also
with the help of post mortem evidence provided by .H.M. Coroner, I am able to
give the following details of the treatment of these patients .-


N.G.H. Ma.ior Incident Ho.
 (Majax No)
2.       LEE .NICHOL...........................................................
         This young bpy was brought in as a cardiac arrest ...                                      Resuscitation
         resulted in return of normal cardiac output, but he did not breatheon
         his .own.        He was therefore transferred to the General Intensive Care
         Unit and I believe he died.on the Intensive Care Unit three days later.


8.       PHILIP HAMMOND........................................................
         There is no definite documentary evidence in the medical nptes. that
         Mr. Hainmpnd received resuscitation, but the post mortem states that there
         were three E.C.G. electrodes attached to his chest.                                        I would interpret
         this as it being probable he did enter the Resuscitation Roora.of the
         Northern General Hospital, but a cardiac tracing showed no cardiac activity
         and in view of the large number of patients present at the time.,
         resuscitation attempts .were not                   t a k e n        further.


9.       BARRY BENNETT........................................................
         There is no. documentary evidence, .in the hospital notes to suggest that
         Mr. Bennett.received resuscitation.                            However.the post mortem.reports,
         shows there, was a needle.injection mark on.one of his .arms which, w o u l d
         indicate some attempt had been made at resuscitation.


20... .. VICTORIA.HICKS.....................................................
         There, is.definite, hospital                and post mortem.evidence .that.Miss. Hicks
         received intensive resuscitation, efforts after, being brought, in. ;Lp. .a,
         .state of cardiac arrest .but. unfortunately, .these, efforts .were. not.
         successful.
            :essrul.                                                                        i

Signed                                                   Signature w itnessed       by                 .)v \)
                                                                                                     Form MG 11 (T)
                                          South Yorkshire Police                                               LO
                                           Witness Statement
                           (CJ Act 1967, s.9 MC Act 1980, s. 102, MC Rules 1981, r.70)


  Statement of DR EDWARD C W ALKER..................................................................................

  Age if under 21 2 6 .........     (If over 21 insert "over 21")     Occupation Doctor..........................

                                  (4 typed)
  This statement (consisting of 7 page(s) each signed by me) is true to the best of my knowledge and
  belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have
  wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

  Dated the       20th day of July 1989

  Signature E C W alker...............................



  I am currently working as a Senior House Officer in Anaesthetics. I qualified in Medicine in 1986,

 and since August of 1988, I have been on the Trent Regional Health Authority anaesthetics

  rotation.



 At the time of the incident in question I was employed as an Anaesthetist at Rotherham District

 General Hospital.



 On the afternoon of Saturday April 15th, I was off duty. I returned home from walking the dog at

  around 3.00 pm. I turned on the television to see crowd disturbance at the Hillsborough Football

 Ground. The match appeared to have been abandoned, and the television coverage ceased. I

 listened briefly to a local radio station, who were also reporting a disturbance at the ground.



 As I am familiar with the Northern General Hospital in Sheffield, I decided to make my way there

 in case I could be of assistance in the event of casualties being received.
                                                                                                             4




  Due to the location of my house, I almost immediately encountered an ambulance, which I

 assume was on its way to the ground. It had its lights & siren on, and I followed immediately

  behind it, with my headlights on.




Signature ...E C Walker                  Signature witnessed by ...A R Dicks            Julie Appleton
                                                                                          Form MG11A (T)

                                                                                          Page No 2
Continuation of Statement /Interview Of DR EDWARD C WALKER



  As it passed the Herries Rd. entrance, I turned off into the Northern General Hospital.



  I entered the Accident & Emergency Department to be told that a Paediatric "cardiac arrest" was

  expected (via Ambulance Control), and that there was an incident of some kind at the

  Hillsborough stadium. No-one in the department was aware that these two pieces of information

 were related.'



  The first casualty arrived within two or three minutes. I believe this patient to be a boy I know

  only as "Lee", who I believe was declared "Brain dead" on the Intensive Care Unit (ITU) the

  following Monday.



  He was in Cardiopulmonary arrest, with fixed, dilated pupils. I intubated him, established venous

  access, and instigated routine resuscitative measures. His heart had stopped beating, but we

  managed to re-establish him in normal rhythm.



  Whilst I and another doctor were treating Lee, the second victim arrived. He was of similar age

  (around 12 -1 4 years), with blond hair. He was also in Cardiopulmonary arrest. I intubated him,

  and noticed evidence of gross inhalation of stomach contents. He also had rr.crked gaseous

  abdominal distension, possibly indicating that he had had "mouth-to-mouth" resuscitation at some

  time.



  I also established venous access, and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was also established in

  a normal sinus heart rhythm, but his pupils were fixed and dilated throughout, and I believe he

  has since died.



 These two boys had taken up the space immediately available in the resuscitation area, and the

  next patient I dealt with was in the A & E Department Theatre.




Signature ...E C Walker.           Signature witnessed by ...A R Dicks   Julie Appleton
                                                                                             Form MG11A (T)

                                                                                             Page No 3
Continuation of Statement /Interview Of DR EDWARD C WALKER



 This patient was aged around twenty, with fair hair, of slim build. He was cerebrally irritable, but

  not actually fitting.    I was able to intubate him without any drugs, and left him in the care of

  another doctor.



  I next saw another unconscious, cerebrally irritable patient, with shoulder-length brown hair, and

  aged around twenty.        I judged his airway to be adequate, and left him in the care of a non­

  medical member of staff.



 The next patient I dealt with was in Cardio-Pulmonary arrest. He was aged around twenty, of

  stocky build, with ginger hair. I intubated him, and gave appropriate drugs down the endotracheal

  tube, as he did not have any venous access. I was assisted by a doctor of around my own age

  from the football ground. I never discovered his name.



  I resorted to a central venous line via the Right subclavian route in this patient. We got his heart

  beating in a normal rhythm, and he was ventilated adequately.



  However, he re-arrested on two distinct occaisions, and developed bizzare E.C.G. complexes,

 with a very poor output. At this stage I took the decision to abandon resuscitative measures on

  this patient.



  I next saw a patient of around forty, with thinning hair and of heavy build.           He was having

  Cardiopulmonary resuscitation from another doctor. I intubated the patient to help with this.



  I then was asked to see a boy of around fifteen with black hair, who had already had resuscitative

 treatment.       He was however fitting, and had a poor airway.           I gave this boy appropriate

  anaesthetic drugs to sedate and paralyse him, intubated him, and transferred him to the I.T.U. I

  believe he has since made a good recovery.




Signature ...E C Walker.             Signature witnessed by ...A R Dicks    Julie Appleton
                                                                                            Form MG11A (T)

                                                                                            Page No 4
Continuation of Statement /Interview Of DR EDWARD C WALKER



  I then performed a virtually identical procedure on a boy of similar age with light brown hair.

  I transferred him to the I.T.U. also. I do not know what has happened to this boy.



  I was then briefly involved with a male of around thirty in the resuscitation room.He had already

  had considerable effort put into his resuscitation, but was still asystolic (iehis heartwas not

  beating). I placed a central venous line on this patient. I believe resuscitative measures on this

  patient were abandoned.



  I then went to Ward 60, and performed rapid sequence inductions and intubations on two

  patients who had deteriorated neurologically. I transferred these patients to the Cardiac Intensive

  Therapy Unit.



  I later dealt with a female patient who came into the A & E department having "arrested". She

  was not from the Hillsborough ground. She was transferred to the I.T.U.



  This, I believe, covers the bulk of the work I did on the day of the disaster.



  I left the Northern Geueiai hospital at around 9.00 p.m.



                                               E C Walker




Signature ...E C Walker.            Signature witnessed by ...A R Dicks    Julie Appleton
Peter Pearson




RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.      I attach correspondence from the Hillsborough Family Support Group and
        accompanying documents. You will see also an opinion from Alan Jones QC.

2.      This is obviously a sensitive case with considerable background and history. I am
        afraid that from the CPS perspective I am not conversant with the detail of our
        involvement in this case.

3.      I doubt whether we will be able to supply a substantive reply within the usual
        timescales but I would grateful for an indication within the next 10 days the likely
        timescale for consideration of the papers. Although the matter of further investigation
         is one entirely for the police, I would be grateful for your initial view on the
        materials submitted, in particular the fresh video evidence.

4.      We will obviously need to consider carefully whether to meet the HFSG. My initial
        reaction is "no" based on the fact that we only have powers to invite the police to
        investigate the matter further.

5. .    Presumably HFSG could have presented the new information direct to the police. I
        understand why they did not chose us to do so given the concerns expressed in the
        letter.

6.      Please feel free to discuss the matter over the video conference. I should try to get
        to York in the next two weeks. As you would expect the Director has a keen
        personal interest in developments in this case.




■ > >                                rL .^ Ml
Dru Sharpling                        Nj J H        ^
5
CPS^Central
      rownr rosecutor                1 i
            Casework

7 March 1997

Ext. 1225
DIRECTOR’S PERSONAL CORRESPONDENCE


Date received:                                ]                                                B/F DATE AND
                                                                                                 COMMENTS

Post book reference no:                f j)

From :          Ps                            i -£                        to ^ \




                                ( (r   0 f°               .
K ey s u b je c t/title :


T R c              h i u S S o e c u g H
                                                                                                     CPS CENTRAL CASEWORK
 O i S A ^ r t i e                : i C       <t-8°i                                                         CCP
                                                                                                           0 5 SISAR 1997
Private Office;                        Acknowledgement               YES/N3




A C T I O N                   B Y


COPIED TO:            j)    f tA_ Js          (p     C a -^ S         i                                     A     J j
                                                                                      H- viO-UL^            h°<Jp&£

I---1              to provide the Director with a draft reply by
I___ I

                   to reply direct and copy reply to the Private Office

                                                                 pUru^-        Ic g ^ w p
                   to advise the Director                        1                     J                                       JLr
                                                                                      of-

                   to deal

                                                   4 - . 3T                                                         of
   —i              for information                               J                                    •.         , ,      ._
       i                                                                                    ^ U —e                      (j &

                                                                ruLJU?L v-t •
NB:        All correspondence should be dealt with within 14 days o f receipt and draft
           replies for the Director’s signature should be accompanied by a disk.
                                                                                                              m
Dame Barbara Mills DBE QC                                                                                    CPS
Director of Public Prosecutions

                                                                                                             Headquarters
                                                                                                             50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                             London EC4M 7EX

r                                                          1                                  Direct U ne    0171-273 8098
    Ann Marie Adlington                                                                       Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
    Solicitor                                                                                   Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
                                                                                                   d x No:   300850 Ludgate EC4
    Hillsborough Family Support Group
    21 Rosemont Road
    Aigburth
    Liverpool LI 7 6BX
L                                                         J




                                                                                                   4 March 1997




    I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your letter of today’s date enclosing Counsel’s
    Opinion and two copies of Annexes A-G, addressed to the Director of Public Prosecutions.

    A substantive reply will be provided as soon as the contents of the reports have been
    considered.
        .KJ<> S i




    JANE GILL (Miss)
    Senior Personal Secretary to the
    Director of Public Prosecutions




                            Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
                                                                                    vSBOR0&
           I .•



           Sf/ppcp'                                                                   Sf/ppO^
                         Hillsborough Family Support Group

      Dame Barbara Mills
      Director of Public Prosecutions
      50 Ludgate Hill               p
      London                                  C.P.S, HEADQUARTERS
                                                  PRIVATE OFFICE
      EC4M 7EX                                       RECEIVED:
                                                "4 MAR 1997         j:..   4th March 1997

                                          COPIES TO:
      Dear Dame Barbara

                      The Hillsborough Disaster 15th April 1989.

       Pursuant to Counsels Opinion obtained by the Hillsborough Family
       Support Group from Alun Jones Q.C, I enclose a copy of that
       Opinion together with Annexures referred to therein.

      Please also find enclosed copies of the video tapes referred to
      in paragraph 6 of the Opinion together with the draft statement
      of Chairman, Trevor Hicks, which describes how he obtained
      possession of the video tapes and his comments in relation to the
      same.

       I further enclose copy of the video tape referred to in paragraph
       7. This video tape was recently supplied by South Yorkshire
       Police to one of the bereaved families in response to a request
       for a copy of the actual footage presented to the jury.

      I hope that you feel able to convene a meeting as suggested in
      the final paragraph of Counsels Opinion and look forward to
      hearing from you.


      Yours sincerely




      Ann Marie Adlington
      Solicitor




CHA IRM A N                         VICE-CHA IRM AN /SECRETARY                   TREASURER
T. Hicks                            P. Hanunond                                  Mrs. J. Traynor
 04-MAR-9n 19:4T    TREUOR HICKS ENGLRND WORTHSIDE                                          P02




          vSBO«o(




                                                                              $l/I>pQ*
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group

      Damo Barbara Mills
      Director of Publia Prosecutions
      50 Ludgate Hill
      London
      EC4M 7 EX.

      4th March 1997                                     tKlVATfi AND CONFIDENTIAL


      Dear Dame Barbara,

      ye?- Hillsborough Disaster

      The HFSG represents the interests of the families bereaved by the
      football disaster at Hillsborough/ She III eld on the 15th April
      1989. I write to you both as a bereaved father and in my capacity
      as Chairman of the HFSG.

     Following say telephone conversation with Jane Gill on the
     telephone yesterday we are arranging for a full bundle of
     documents and supporting video tapes to be hand delivered to you
     today by Phil Hammond (Vice-Chairman} and Ann Adlington
     (solicitor). Further copies will be passed to the police Policy
     Directorate (acting on bohalf of the Home Secretary) on Thursday
     of this week.
     We felt that you would appreciate an opportunity to examine this
     material properly and privately. We have therefore attempted to
     avoid media attention at Lilia Lliue - hence the "private and
     confidential" nature of our submission.
     The bundle is large and the background somewhat complex,
     therefore I felt it useful to summarise the key issues for yous-
              Pre-production research/ and the screening of the Jimmy
              McGovfim/Oranada TV programme brought to light fresh
              evidence and/or new witness's. Some of this has reached the
              public domain and is probably already known to you.

              Follow up of these matters has led to the discovery of even
              more cvidcncc which not only corroborates the fresh
              evidence, it proves that suppression of evidence, perjury
              «uld uuuapixacy to pervert the course of justice all
              featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.



CHAIRMAN                              VICE-CHAIRMAN f SKCKtCTAKV         TFK a SVRKR
                                      P. Hammond                          Mrt. J. Tfnynnr
T.lKok>
                                                                     P 04
_m R _g q i5 : 4 a   TBEUQR H IC K S ENGLfiND WORTHSIDE   vs




     We have instructed Alun Jones QC and he has seen/ reviewed our
     material and his Opinion appears to support our view.
     Naturally these are matters for your office and we would formally
     request you to examine the evidence and to initiate a full and
     urgent criminal investigation into these matters.

     We will gladly make ourselves available should you/your staff
     require a meeting to discuss the evidence/ issues or we will
     provide any further detail/material you request.
     This clearly is a matter of public interest and not just victims
     families seeking retribution and/or vengeance. All we have ever
     sought is a proper and even handed investigation into the events
     that cost the lives of our loved ones.

     Justice can only be done when those charged with investigating
     the circumstances and presenting the results to an inquiry or a
     jury do so in an honest and even handed way. Clearly that cannot
     be the case in the light of the evidence we now place before you.
     Yours sincerely




     Trevor Hicks
     Chairman.
     0 4 -M A F I-9 n 1 S :4 S   TREUOR H IC K S ENGLAND WORTHSIDE                                                              P01




                                                                                                           NvV^0ft%
                                                                                                          •V        ^

                                                                                                       *’* ■              *U— ^


              suppo^
                                                                                                       V- K<?
                                                                                                       ^ -"II

                                                                                                                 St/ppCS?^
                                                                                                                          W o


                                      Hillsborough Family Support Group
         FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION OF                                                    PAGE/S (inclusive)


ATTN:                                                                        FAX NO:
TO:                                                       ............       DATE:           .......
                            SUBJECT:                        'tyfffff...................................
D&lt            Ms        f a

                                   fv&7*5<      ■&                        7&ie/W0*#

                     jf            0U/4&>       /fi      Ym           vvaa            />&>                   /trrm m
/trrr& t                 /frfp      K7>M Ff' S7>r?&9&r                                fa r       &/*7>a?                        y&t

WCC                r tf              ftf? y     /,p f                 m        ///c c /M      r & tp f i* * 4 2 cs»efrp*t

         &                         qiiritfMt;    /tff& a ft                 &&*       Yd£/e&-Aef 7 V                        of
ife             ee?6£&vc&                 &     7#pr}j/tf/w /M l                                             /7Z                2&&T
£r*bvs^



  Y m k            y&        //*     /fnrfc/w&s.




 CHA IR M A N                                         SECRETARY                                           TRKASURRIt
 T. I licks                                           I’. I lummond                                       Mrs.   S.   Troynor
                                                                                   P0S
0 4 -M ftR -S n 1 5 : 4 0   TREUOR H IC K S ENGLAND WORTHSIDE




        Statement bv Trevor Hicks


        Video Evidence - Hillsborough Disaster


        I Trevor Hicks of Fern Hill Barn, New House Lane, Long
        Preston, Skipton, North Yorkshire . BD23 4QU. would make the
        following statement in connection with video material I have
        viewed in recent weeks.


        Earlier in m y career I was Divisional Director of Chubb Alarms
        Ltd, a company which sold, installed and serviced security
        systems and hence have a reasonable working knowledge of
        closed-circuit television systems (CCTV)




        a)         It is m y firm belief that the material I viewed is
                  genuine footage recorded by the South Yorkshire Police
                   video system and that the time and date codes on that
                   footage are correct .


       b)         I am content that the video material proves three key
                  pointsi -
                  1)        The crucial camera (scoreboard/Camera 5) was working
                            from llOOhrs through till 1700hrs at least.
                  2)        It could pan, tilt, and zoom and produced pictures
                            of sufficient quality and detail to "identify facial
                            features"
                  3)        The footage contain excellent views of people
                            standing at the front of Pena 3/4 of the Leppings
                            Lane terraces and can be seen to zoom during such
                            sequences.


       c)         All of the above corroborate Roger Houldsworth's
                  statement and in m y opinion shows that Police Officers
                  Ryan and Sichard gave false witness.




                                                        1
0 4 -N A R -9 H   1 5 :4 9   TFEUOR H IC K S ENGLAND WORTHSIDE                          P0E




        d)          B e c a u s e of the large number of "sequences" contained
                    within the videos it is incomprehensible that the person
                    or persons who edited the "Compilation Video" did not
                    know of the existence of the extensive footage from the
                    scoreboard camera.


         e)         It was not produced despite several requests from the
                    inquest jury and this indicates suppression of critical
                    evidence.


         f)         It is m y belief that had this footage been produced and
                    shown to the jury it would have totally changed their
                    view of "what the police could see".



        Background
        Following discussions with Katie Jones of Granada Television,
         I contacted Mr Chris Bryer, Head of Factual Programmes at
         Yorkshire Television in an attempt to establish what material
        was still in their archives following their production "First
         Tuesday".


        After our telephone discussion he agreed to see what was
        available and contact me further.                        The following day he
        returned m y call and advised that he and Roger Finnigan
         (Senior Producer and co-producer of the First Tuesday
        programme) had discussed m y telephone call /various aspects of
        Houldsworth's evidence. He made the following comments:-


        1.          They had conducted an interview with Roger Houldsworth a
                    few weeks after the Disaster and were looking to see if
                   any video footage of that remained.


        2.         They have a written transcript of the aforesaid Roger
                   Houldsworth's Interview.


        3.         They had found some footage of police video tapes which
                   had been supplied to them by South Yorkshire police when
                   they were researching/making the First Tuesday programme.


                                                         2
0 4 —MAR—9 T 1 5 : 4 9   TREUOR H IC K S ENGLAND WORTHSIDE           0                      pm




        4.       The circumstances of the supply of video tapes were as
                 follows:-
                      An approach was made to South Yorkshire police.
                         The request required ratification by Peter Wright,
                         the then Chief Constable.
                         At a subsequent meeting with Peter Wright, a box of
                         VHS video tapes were handed to Messrs Brier and
                         Finnigan.
                         Working copies (broadcast video tape format)of the
                         VHS video tapes were made by Yorkshire Television
                  (Notet these were the tapes viewed by me. )


        Mr Brier confirmed that both he and Roger Finnigan remembered
        carrying out the interview with Houldsworth and that it was
        Interrupted by a police officer.                     He later confirmed that this
        was Superindent Burton (?) who at the time was in charge of PR
        at West Midlands police.


        It was agreed that we should meet so that I could examine
        whatever video footage they had and that meeting took place on
        Friday 24 January 1997.


       Meeting At Yorkshire T - Friday 24th January 1997
       Following a preliminary discussion mainly surrounding
       Houldsworth'a evidence and the relevance thereof, we crossed
        to another building and entered an editing suite.


       We viewed at length several video tapes including references
       PI-Part 1,2 & 3 and P4-Part 1 & 2, which clearly showed that
       the score board camera (camera 5 on map attached as appendix
       A) was working.


       The pictures from this camera were clear enough to enable
       identification of individuals and in only one case was there
       any evidence of the flaring (whitening of screen) appearing.




                                                     1
0 4 -M flR -S H   1 5 :5 0   TREUQR H IC K S ENGLAND WORTHSIDE         0




       The clarity of the images was more than satisfactory and
        therefore raised a serious doubt in m y mind regarding the
        truthfulness of evidence by the police officers responsible
       for operating the CCTV.


       TapeB PI-Part 1,2 & 3 shows several different sequences taken
       from the scoreboard camera ( camera 5) from the earliest time
       of 1200hrs through to 1423 and then 1502 through to 1523hrs.


       Although there is no footage recorded from this camera between
       1423 and 1502 it is more than probable that the camera was
       working perfectly well throughout this period. The screen in
       the police control box would of course show the output from
       this cainera even when it was not recording.


       Tape P4 - Part 1 & 2 include                   similar footage timedat1557 and
       through until 1722 when the                    tape runs out.


       These sequences Include some very clear shots of the front of
       of the West Steuad and Pen 3/4 on the terraces. Camera 5 can be
       seen to pan, tilt and zoom,                    especially when looking ata group
       of four people at the front                    of the terrace.


       Both sequences of video tape show the arrival of a Limousine
       Registration NTV2 and comparing the video time bases we were
       able to establish that the footage had come from two video
       machines -which fits the configuration of the Sheffield
       system.

       I contacted Roger Houldsworth by telephone and he confirmed
        that the two video machines in the police control box operated
        in parallel .            This would appear sensible as it would enable
        recording via either VCR of any of the two "sequencing"
        devices output enabling the police to either view or record a
        specific incident while the other machine was still on auto-
        sequence .
04- n m - g n i s : s i   treuor hicks England uorthside   0              P09




      It is m y opinion that this footage has never been seen before
      by myself and I believe has not been included in any police
      compilations and/or other tapes that I have seen.


      From m y knowledge of close circuit television and of this
      particular CCTV system , this evidence is uncontroverslal proof
       that camera 5 - the black and white scoreboard camera was
      working between the hours of may 1100am and 1700pm.        In all
      cases bar one, the images are clear and cannot be described as
      Inferior.


      In addition to the proof of quality, the sequences contain
      pan,       tilt and zoom actions which not only prove that these
       facilities were functioning, they prove that the operators
       (i.e. the policemen) were using the camera and da facto must
      have known it to be working and been able to see the terraces.


      Messrs Bryer and Finnigan operate in the television world and
      have produced many documentaries (including First Tuesday)
      which have relied upon video evidence. They gave me the
      impression that in their opinion this footage was more *rh»r>
      adequate.


      Subject to rechecking research and/or other footage, Messrs
      Bryer and Finnigan appear to agree with myself that this
      supports Houldsworth's evidence that the CCTV equipment
      viewing Pens 3 and 4 was functioning satisfactorily , both
      prior and subsequent to the opening of Gate C.


      Furthermore , t h e y advised that the transcript of their
      interview with Houldsworth tends to support Houldsworth's
      statement and in effect corroborates his position has not
      changed between the disaster and now regarding the performance
      of the equipment.


      It ia m y belief that the footage I viewed totally supports
      Houldaworth's position.




                                                   5
0 4 MAR 3 1 1 5 :5 1   TREUOfl H IC K S ENGLAND WORTHSIDE              p 10




      I was loaned a working copy of the tapes so that I could look
      at all the relevant sections in detail and I would confirm
       that the compilation attached is a true copy of that working
      copy. YTV can confirm that the original tapes, including those
      with footage from camera 5 were supplied to them b y South
       Yorkshire Police.


      It has been agreed that Granada Television , Yorkshire
      Television and the Hillsborough Family Support Group will
      continue to work together on further research of this and/or
      other evidence to establish to what degree it is contradictory
       to the case presented to the inquest jury/ others.




      Trevor Hicks                                          Date:
MAR-B'j-B?   17 =0 2 F R O M < B R U C E C A M P B E L L CO           ID«                                     rtWito   *




                                      The Hillsborough D isaster: April 1989.


                                                         Opinion



        Introduction

        1       ! am asked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
                appropriate legal course to follow in the light o f three areas o f fresh evidence that
                have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters o f Liverpool
                Football Club, died in the Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
                cup was beginning in April 1989. After a long inquest, held in April and May 1990,
                and later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, verdicts o f accidental death
                were recorded on the victims .

        2       A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six o f the
                bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fircsh inquest The main
                complaints o f these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
                presented in the Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as Annex A . In
                summary form, those main complaints were,

                2.1      The Coroner imposed an arbitrary cut-oflFpoint in time o f 3.15, which had the
                         effcct o f excluding relevant evidence as to the failure to implement the “Major
                         Disaster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                         emergency services promptly,

                2.2      The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances o f the deaths
                         o f the 95; hr failed therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                         o f the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                         medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to 5.12, and 7)

                2.3      The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages o f his
                         summing-up on the subject, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many o f the
                         Liverpool supporters were under the influence o f drink, The report by Lord
                         Taylor, which was severely critical o f the police, had ruled out the
                         consumption o f alcohol as a cause o f the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

                2.4      The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                         scicciion o f evidence and treatment o f witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

                2.5       flic Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial task to perform, in
                         directing them that Acre was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                         and unlawful killing.




                                                              1
                                                                      ID*                                     PACE   3
.MAR-03-97   17.02 FROM = BRUCE CAMPBELL            CO




        3      The inquest verdicts were not quashed. The judgment o f the Court is at Annex B .
               The Court was strongly influenced by the fact that the lawyers originally instructed
               for the families had acquiesced in many o f the Coroner's decisions (eg page 7), that
               the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have made a difference, or had
               heen properly excluded (pages 14- 36); that the directions o f the Coroner to the jury
               were orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
               40),

        4      Since 1993, as I am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
               Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
               that the legal system failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
               circumstances o f death. After the 1993 judicial review it seemed to me that the
               disaster would probably rceede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
               has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
               professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals police officers
               at the inquest, and suppression o f evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
               course o f justice at the inquest. None o f the following matters were made known at
               the inquest.

        5      The evidence o f Roger Houldsworth. Attached is an affidavit o f Roger Houldsworth,
               dated 25"’ November 1996, attaching a statement o f May 1989 and supporting
               documents, and commenting on evidcncc given at the inquest ( Annex O . Contrary to
               the evidence presented, no cameras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures o f the
               I.eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. I f this evidence is correct, video
               tapes and Mr 1louldsworth’s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number o f
               officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at large in
               Dcccmber 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
               disaster. (The evidence o f the witnesses referred to by Houldsworth is at Annex

        6      The now videotape evidence. Very recently, a member o f the Family Support group
                has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies o f
               those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
               told that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the
               South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
               inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks o f the Family Support
               Group in the presence o f Mr Houldsworth, Mr Philip Hammond o f the Family
               Support Group, and Ann Adlington o f my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
               that policc officers were lying, and that the pictures o f alt relevant areas o f the ground
               were clear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
               Mr Houldsworth in his evidence o f November 1996. Events in the relevant area may
               not, for various reasons, have been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm, but
               they were clcarly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

        7      I have al so heen shown a copy o f what was, I am told, presented to the jury. It is a
               very badly duplicated and blurred picture o f individuals escaping from the stricken
               pens shortly after 3 pm, in which it is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The


                                                         2
MAR-03-97   17-03 F R O M " B R U C E   C A M F B E I X CO           ID.                                       P »GE




                 tape has bad interference in die picture, It appears that this tape is a copy at several
                 generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
                 the videotape o f which the new evidence is a much better copy, but it presents only
                 events after 3 pm.

        8        The importance o f the new evidence. The question whether the police could and did
                 notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pin was central at the inquest. On Day 77,
                 page 125, the Coroner directed the jury (Annex HI:

                 “The assessment o f the terraces” is a “very important factor” and “maybe the single
                 most important factor in the whole inquest”. “The total sum o f evidence from the
                 Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
                 that none o f them noticed any problems with the pens until     3 o-elock”.

        9        None o f this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the cote issue in the
                 case in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner as the critical time, I
                 believe that the existence o f this evidence would have been o f crucial significance to
                 the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

        10       The evidence o f Dr Ed Wallcer In February 1997 the evidence o f Dr Walker came to
                 light; sec Annex F. . The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
                 appears at Annex G. The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
                 “sinus rhythm and cardiac output” after arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
                 Sheffield, The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
                 criticisms o f the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
                 points out in his letter o f 7th February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that o f Dr
                 Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3rd May 1989 by Dr Wardrope, who was
                 closely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15thJune 1989 to
                 stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
                 at the inquest.

        11      It is difficult to exaggerate the significance o f the concealment o f Dr Walker's
                 evidence. At page 10 o f the Divisional Court's judgment o f November 1993 the
                 Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
                 the evidence disclosed the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousness leading to rapid
                 death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
                 revealing remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his letter o f 3rdMay 1989 “Almost
                 immediately the department was flooded with large numbers o f acutcly ill patients
                 requiring urgent resuscitation”. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
                 structured by the Coroner on an utterly different factual assumption.

        12      The previous investigation. One o f the most striking aspects o f this history is the way
                in which the evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
                exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
                questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
                Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner.


                                                             3
                                                                    ID-.                                   PACE   5
MAR-03-97   17.04 F R O M = B R U C E   CAMPBELL CO




        12       Conclusion. In my view these new pieces o f evidence call for a full police enquiry or
                 public inquiry. Exhibits such as the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
                 analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
                 production o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
                 this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director o f
                 Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with a full copy to the Home Secretary,
                 who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few months.

        13       I hope that the Director might feci able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
                  two or three o f the Family Support Group, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this
                  advicc.




        3 Raymond Buildings
        Gray’s Inn
        London WCI


        3rd March 1997.                                                       Alun Jones QC




                                                        4
               CROSS REFERENCE OF PAGE NUMBERS

COUNSEL'S OPINION                       PAGE NUMBER IN BUNDLE


Paragraph 3:   Page 7                        Page 30
               Pages 14 - 36                 Pages 37 - 59
               Page 9                        Page 32
               Page 40                       Page 63
Paragraph 8:   Page 125                      Page 578
