                                                     [H O U SE O F LO RD S]

        REGINA                                                                                         RESPONDENT

                                                             AND

        ADOMAKO                                                                                          APPELLANT

         1994 May 10, 11; June 30                                      Lord Mackay of Clashfem L.C., Lord Keith
                                                                          of Kinkel, Lord Goff of Chieveley, Lord
                                                                               Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Woolf

        Crime - Homicide - Manslaughter - Involuntary manslaughter - Breach o f duty - Appropriate test
           - Whether necessary to show gross negligence - Whether jury to be directed as to
            "recklessness"

                  The defendant, an anaesthetist, was acting as such during an eye operation, which involved
             paralysing the patient, when a tube became disconnected from a ventilator. The patient suffered a cardiac
             arrest and subsequently died. The defendant was convicted o f the manslaughter o f the patient by breach
             o f duty.
                  On appeal against conviction the Court o f Appeal (Criminal Division) dismissed the appeal.
                  On appeal by the defendant, on the question o f the true legal basis of involuntary manslaughter by
             breach o f duty:-
                  Held, dismissing the appeal, that in cases of manslaughter by criminal negligence involving a breach
             o f duty the ordinary principles o f the law of negligence applied to ascertain whether the defendant had
             been in breach of a duty o f care towards the victim; that on the establishment o f such breach o f duty the
             next question was whether it caused the death of the victim, and if so, whether it should be characterised
             as gross negligence and therefore a crime; and that it was eminently a jury question to decide whether,
             having regard to the risk o f death involved, the defendant's conduct was so bad in all the circumstances
             as to amount to a criminal act or omission (post, pp. 187B, D-E, 189G-190B).




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
   [1995]                                                                                                       172
   1 A.C.                                    Re. v, Adomako (H.L.(E.))

             Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8, C.C.A, and Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions
        [1937] A.C. 576, H.L.(E.) applied.
             Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, H.L.(E.) considered.
             Reg. v. Seymour (Edward) [1983] 2 A.C. 493, H.L.(E.) disapproved.
             Per curiam. In cases o f involuntary manslaughter it is not necessary for the trial judge in directing
        the jury to refer to the definition o f recklessness given in Reg. v. Lawrence although it is perfectly open
        to him to use the word "reckless" in its ordinary meaning as part o f his exposition o f the law if he
        deems it appropriate in the circumstances o f the particular case (post, pp. 188H-189A, G-190B),
             Decision of the Court o f Appeal (Criminal Division) sub nom. Reg. v.Prentice [1994] Q.B.           302
        affirmed.

        The following cases are referred to in the opinion of Lord Mackay of Clashfem L.C.:

        Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576; [1937] 2 All E.R. 552, H.L.(E.)
        Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen (1985) 82 Cr.App.R. 18, P.C.
        Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510; [1981] 2 W.L.R. 524; [1981]1 All E.R.974,
            H.L.(E.)
        Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302; [1993] 3 W.L.R. 927; [1993] 4 All E.R. 935, C.A.
        Reg. v. Seymour (Edward) [1983] 2 A.C. 493; [1983] 3 W.L.R. 349; [1983] 2 All E.R. 1058,
            H,L.(E.)
        Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354; [1977] 2 W.L.R. 169; [1977] 2 All E.R. 341, C.A.
        Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex parte Gray [1988] Q.B. 467; [1987] 2 W.L.R. 1020; [1987]
            2 All E.R. 129, D.C.
        Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8, C.C.A.

        The following additional cases were cited in argument:

        Akerele v. The King [1943] A.C. 255; [1943] 1 All E.R. 367, P.C.
        Dabholkar v. The King [1948] A.C. 221, P.C.
        Elliott v. C. [1983] 1 W.L.R. 939; [1983] 2 All E.R. 1005, D.C.
        Reg. v. Ball [1989] Crim.L.R. 730, C.A.
        Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341; [1981] 2 W.L.R. 509; [1981] 1 All E.R. 961, C.A.
        Reg. v. Church [1966] 1 Q.B. 59; [1965] 2 W.L.R. 1220; [1965] 2 All E.R. 72, C.C.A.
        Reg. v. Governor o f Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624; [1982] 3 W.L.R.
            450; [1982] 3 All E.R. 104, H,L.(E.)
        Reg. v. Lamb [1967] 2 Q.B. 981; [1967] 3 W.L.R. 888; [1967] 2 AllE.R.1282, C.A.
        Reg v. Lowe [1973] Q.B. 702; [1973] 2 W.L.R. 481; [1973] 1 All E.R.805, C.A.
        Reg. v. Nicholls (1874) 13 Cox C.C. 75
        Reg. v, Noakes (1866) 4 F. & F. 920
        Reg. v. Pigg [1983] 1 W.L.R. 6; [1983] 1 All E.R. 56, H.L.(E.)
        Reg. v. Reid [1992] 1 W.L.R. 793; [1992] 3 All E.R. 673, H.L.(E.)
        Reg. v. Satnam S. (1983) 78 Cr.App.R. 149, C.A.
        Reg. v. Stanley (unreported), 10 October 1990, Turner J.




extract from a JUSTIS database
   [1995]                                                                                               173
   1 A.C.                                Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

        Reg. v. Yogasakaran [1990] 1 N.Z.L.R. 399
        Rex v. Long (1830) 4 C. & P. 398
        Rex v. Williamson (1807) 3 C. & P. 635
        Sweet v. Parsley [1970] A.C. 132; [1969] 2 W.L.R. 470; [1969] 1 All E.R. 347, H.L.(E.)

     APPEAL from the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division).
     This was an appeal by leave dated 23 November 1993 of the House of Lords (Lord Keith of
   Kinkel, Lord Goff of Chieveley and Lord Slynn of Hadley) by the defendant, John Ajare
   Adomako, from the judgment dated 20 May 1993 of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division)
   (Lord Taylor of Gosforth C.J., Henry and Blofeld JJ.) dismissing his appeal against his conviction
   of manslaughter on 26 January 1990 at the Central Criminal Court before Alliott J. and a jury.
     The Court of Appeal on 15 June 1993 certified pursuant to section 33(2) of the Criminal
   Appeal Act 1968 that a point of law was involved in its decision, namely:

        "in cases of manslaughter by criminal negligence not involving driving but involving a breach
        of duty is it a sufficient direction to the jury to adopt the gross negligence test set out by the
        Court of Appeal in the present case following Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and
        Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576 without reference to the test of
        recklessness as defined in Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510 or as adapted to the
        circumstances of the case?"

   Leave to appeal was refused.
     The facts are stated in the opinion of Lord Mackay of Clashfem L.C.

      Lord Williams o f Mostyn Q.C. and James Watson for the defendant. The offence of involuntary
   manslaughter should have the characteristics of (i) clarity, (ii) certainty, (iii) intellectual coherence
   and (iv) general applicability. If these criteria are applied to the judgment of the Court of Appeal
   in the present case, the reasoning on which it is based is found wanting and the conviction cannot
   stand. The criteria can be summarised in the proposition that there must be a single test as to
   what constitutes involuntary manslaughter and that test should be that of recklessness. There is no
   logical or jurisprudential difference between cases of involuntary manslaughter caused by the
   driving of motor vehicles and those caused by any other means.
      The modem development of the law of involuntary manslaughter has created uncertainty as to
   which test should be adopted and, in particular, whether gross negligence should remain at all as a
   substantive test: see the editorial note to Reg. v. Ball [1989] Crim.L.R. 730. The trial judge
   directed the jury that in manslaughter cases of this kind the killing must be as a result of a
   grossly negligent act. He emphasised that a very high degree of negligence was required before
   the crime could be established and he culled passages from Rex v. Long (1830) 4 C. & P. 398;
   Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and Rex v. Williamson (1807) 3 C. & P. 635 (without
   naming them) to illustrate the standard to be applied. In the Court of Appeal it was contended on
   behalf of the defendant that the judge's summing up was deficient in that it adopted the test of
   gross




extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                         174
         1 A.C.                             Reg. v. Adomako (H.JL.(E.))

        negligence alone, epitomised by Rex v. Bateman, 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and Andrews v. Director o f
        Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576, 583, and that it did so without reference to the test of
        recklessness propounded in Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510. It follows on the
        decision in Lawrence and subsequent authorities that to convict for involuntary manslaughter there
        must be recklessness or wilful knowledge of risk which might bring about serious injury or death,
        but nevertheless a conscious intention to take that risk. Further, "recklessness" in this context
        might import wilfully shutting one's mind to the known risk. The defendant argued that the
        manifest differences in approach adopted by the three trial judges in the three cases under appeal
        in Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302 illustrated the difficulty and confusion which prosecutors,
        judges and juries had experienced in the present type of case. It was contended therefore that there
        was a need for uniformity of approach by prosecuting authorities and judges and that preference
        ought to be given to the Lawrence direction as suitably adapted to the circumstances of each case.

           The foregoing difficulty arises out of Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C.
        576 itself, for whilst apparently giving approval to Rex v. Bateman, 19 Cr.App.R. 8, where gross
        negligence was the test, Lord Atkin's speech (p. 583) also supports the proposition that
        recklessness will, in almost all cases, be the most useful underlying criterion.
           Although the gross negligence test was adopted shortly after Andrews by the Privy Council in
        Akerele v. The King [1943] A.C. 255 and Dabholkar v. The King [1948] A.C. 221, the qualified
        terms in which that test was approved in Andrews has led recently to the authorities treating
        recklessness as the primary element: see Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354. This trend was approved
        by the Privy Council in Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen (1985) 82 Cr.App.R. 18, 26, where it
        was pointed out that Lord Atkin in his speech in Andrews clearly thought (and the Board agreed
        with his view) that it was better to use the word "reckless" rather than to add to the word
        "negligence" various possible vituperative epithets.
           In Kong Cheuk Kwan the Board, approving the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Reg v.
        Seymour (Edward) (1983) 76 Cr.App.R. 211, 216, considered "recklessness" as the uppermost, if
        not the only test to apply in the context of a case, where manslaughter had been charged, arising
        out of a collision between two hydrofoil boats. That approach was also adopted by the Divisional
        Court in Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex parte Gray [1988] Q.B. 467 and by Turner J. in Reg.
        v. Stanley (unreported), 10 October 1990.
           Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510 was confined to the meaning of recklessness for the purposes
        of the statutory offence of "driving recklessly" under section 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1972. But
        the Lawrence definition of recklessness has since been held to apply equally to the common law
        offence: see Reg. v. Governor o f Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624; Reg. v.
        Seymour [1983] 2 A.C. 493, 502E-H, 504H, 506E-G and Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen, 82
        Cr.App.R. 18.
           To the question whether involuntary manslaughter requires mens rea, the answer is in the
        affirmative. Although in Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576 Lord Atkin
        did not find connotations of mens rea helpful, he did not suggest that there was a distinction in
        this




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                           175
         1 A.C.                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

        respect between the statutory and common law offences of death by dangerous driving. Reg. v.
        Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510 and Reg. v. Reid [1992] 1 W.L.R. 793 have held and defined mens rea
        in the context of the statutory motoring offences to be "recklessness" in the sense formulated by
        Lord Diplock in Lawrence, and the effect o f Reg. v. Seymour [1983] 2 A.C. 493 and Reg. v.
         Governor o f Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624 is that mens rea is also
        required for common law motor manslaughter.
            It is difficult to see why mens rea should be required in motor manslaughter, where recklessness
        is usually the essential ingredient of the offence, but not in other cases of death by criminal
        negligence. In Reg. v. Lamb [1967] 2 Q.B. 981 and Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354 it was
        emphasised that the mental element was an essential ingredient of the offence there charged
        regardless of whether the test was gross negligence or recklessness. Lord Hailsham of St.
        Marylebone in Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510, 520D-F approved the need for some "guilty
        state of mind" to constitute the mens rea of all indictable offences, thus adopting the approach of
        Lord Reid in Sweet v. Parsley [1970] A.C. 132, 149G.
           The criteria by which the jury are invited to determine guilt or innocence in relation to the
        offence of manslaughter should be clear and unambiguous. They should explicitly encourage the
        jury to focus not upon the outcome of the defendant’s acts or omissions but upon the mental
        attitude which governed the defendant's conduct. A test which adopts negligence alone as the
        central measure may be potentially misleading. If used by itself the term is capable of suggesting
        to the jury that it should be equated with negligent conduct as understood in the context of the
        civil law. The jury may understand by that that no mental element is required at all. Further,
        merely attaching the word "gross" does not provide a mental element. The grossness of an act of
        negligence does not necessarily depend upon intent. The margin by which a defendant has
        departed from the standard of reasonable care does not imply a "guilty mind" unless and until the
        departure is so great, or gross, that the jury can infer that it must have been committed with a
        guilty state of mind. Until that point of inference is reached the margin by which the act or
        omission departs from the ordinary standard of reasonable care may not be the product of guilty
        intent. It may not even be the product of intent at all but of other factors, for example,
        inexperience or panic, which are not in themselves always culpable.
           The foregoing test might enable a relatively minor act of negligence resulting in death to escape
        criminal liability even if it is committed by someone whose attitude is thoroughly indifferent and
        blameworthy. In contrast, a more striking act of negligence would automatically invite criminal
        prosecution regardless of the attitude of the perpetrator.
            If the epithet "gross" is intended to convey to the jury a need to consider both a great degree of
        negligence and an abnormal attitude on the part of the accused then it requires greater elucidation.
        Left as it is the phrase "gross negligence" (a) places undue emphasis upon conduct rather than
        upon an assessment of intent; (b) implies to the jury that they may infer "a guilty mind" simply
         from the fact that negligence is of a particularly high degree without offering any assistance as to
        how that




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                           176
         1 A.C.                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

        "guilty mind" itself can be recognised or defined; and (c) invites the jury to find guilt even in
        circumstances where the jury may be unsure, or may not even have considered, whether or not the
        defendant's state of mind is to be regarded as criminal,
           A further problem with such a test is that it is inherently difficult for a jury to apply in cases
        involving breach of duty where the breach is committed by a skilled person and involves technical
        issues and professional judgments. In such a situation it is safer for the jury to judge the conduct
        of the accused by reference to the character of his mental attitude (about which they can form a
        direct judgment) rather than by reference to the degree by which his conduct fell short of a
        standard of competence - a standard which may in itself be difficult for the jury to fix in their
        minds and which may have to be judged solely through the indirect perspective of expert
        witnesses.
           If the test is to be simply "gross negligence" it would be necessary in particular cases to remind
        the jury of the need to take into account the accused’s state of mind when considering whether he
        is guilty of criminal negligence: see Reg. v. Lamb [1967] 2 Q.B. 981. This is unhelpful unless the
        characteristics of a guilty state of mind can themselves be defined in a way which assists the jury.

           Mere negligence on the part of the defendant should not attract criminal liability for the offence
        of manslaughter until the point at which the jury either conclude that the defendant's mental
        attitude was actually reckless or conclude that the negligence was of such a high degree that a
        reckless state of mind can and must properly be inferred.
           In Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576 Lord Atkin himself did not
        accept that the epithet "gross" was appropriate. He effectively rejected it in favour of "reckless."
        His qualification to the effect that the epithet "reckless" was probably not all embracing cannot be
        read as a concession that "gross" is preferable. In practice, "recklessness" as it is now understood
        is probably all embracing, at least as the basis for directing the jury in cases of manslaughter
        involving breach of a duty of care. In Andrews Lord Atkin, at p. 584, accepted that recklessness
        in the context of the statutory offence will almost certainly create the common law offence, and
        his example of circumstances where it might not apply (p. 583) can in fact be regarded as a
        situation where the defendant is reckless.
           In the circumstances of the present case the jury should have been directed that they had to be
        satisfied that (a) the defendant owed a duty of care to the deceased; (b) the defendant failed in
        that duty in one or more of the respects alleged; (c) the defendant's failure or failures were either
        the cause of the deceased's death or a substantial cause; (d) at the time it was, or ought to have
        been, plain to the defendant that there was a risk of serious harm if he failed in his duty; (e) the
        defendant's state of mind was criminally culpable, that is to say, in general terms, his mental
        attitude amounted to either (i) a conscious or deliberate intention to run a risk which involved
        obvious risk of significant injury or death or (ii) indifference to, or disregard of, such a risk; and
        (f) in particular, in the context of the present case, the failures on the part of the defendant
        (namely, to respond to or remedy the disconnection and avert the risk of




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                         177
         1 A.C.                             Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

        hypoxia) went far beyond a simple matter of ordinary human error or thoughtlessness but
        displayed or implied an attitude of mind on his part which amounted to either actual disregard of,
        or indifference to, that risk or to the duty itself.
           In judging the seriousness and character of the failures alleged and the attitude of mind
        possessed by the defendant the jury must take into account all the evidence which shows how they
        came to arise, including the defendant's own evidence as to how he himself perceived the situation
        at the time, what he did, and why he did it. Such evidence may explain or justify conduct which
        may, at first sight, appear to be governed by a reckless state of mind. The jury may, for example,
        conclude, having taken all such evidence into account, that the defendant's conduct was intended
        not to run the risk but rather to avert or avoid it. If so, the jury may conclude that the defendant
        was not in the circumstances acting recklessly. On the other hand, the defendant's chosen course
        of conduct may be considered to be so bad and so unjustifiable that a mental attitude of
        indifference or disregard is an inescapable inference on the part of the jury whatever excuse is put
        forward.
           A proper focus on the accused's state of mind is of vital importance in considering a count as
        serious as involuntary manslaughter. The fundamental question is: what is the basis of the offence
        of involuntary manslaughter? The judgment of the Court of Appeal [1994] Q.B. 302, 322H-323B
        suggested that such states of mind may, in appropriate cases, be described in at least four ways.
        The list may provide helpful illustrations but they are expressly stated to be non-exhaustive
        examples which do not detract from the simple test and therefore do not resolve the key issue
        which is whether gross negligence of itself is a sufficient direction. In fact, the examples given
        tend to support the wisdom of adopting recklessness as the primary criterion.
          Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576 is consistent with the defendant's
        primary case in that Andrews held that, in cases of motor manslaughter "recklessness" was the
        most appropriate epithet and would almost always suffice. Andrews is also consistent with the
        defendant's case in that it must now be read in the light of the decisions in Reg. v. Seymour
        [1983] 2 A.C. 493, Reg. v. Governor o f Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624,
        Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510 and Reg. v. Reid [1992] 1 W.L.R. 793, by which this House
        has held that (i) the ingredients of motor manslaughter at common law are the same as those for
        the (then existing) statutory offence of death by dangerous driving; and (ii) the ingredients of the
        offence at common law including recklessness are as defined in Lawrence or as adapted to the
        circumstances of the case. Further, if the distinction drawn by the Court of Appeal between motor
        manslaughter and other forms of manslaughter is upheld, Andrews remains consistent with the
        defendant's case in that it related solely to the direction to be given in cases of motor
        manslaughter and is not binding upon cases of manslaughter by criminal negligence not involving
        driving.
           But the House will be invited to depart from Andrews if it is held that that decision (a) applies
        to involuntary manslaughter outside the realm of driving (b) is in conflict with the effect of the
        decisions in Reg. v. Seymour




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                           178
         1 A.C.                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

         [1983] 2 A,C, 493, Reg. v. Governor o f Holloway Prison, Ex parte Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624,
        Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510 and Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen, 82 Cr.App.R. 18, and (c)
        is authority for the proposition that a direction referring only to "gross negligence" is sufficient
           Ann Curnow Q.C. and Anthony Leonard for the Crown. The range of possible duties, breaches
        and surrounding circumstances is so varied that it is not possible to prescribe a standard jury
        direction appropriate in all cases. The judge should tailor his summing up to the circumstances of
        the particular case: Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302, 322H. The difficulties arising from Reg. v.
        Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510 come from putting Lord Diplock's definition of "recklessness" in that
        case in a straitjacket. Manslaughter caused by gross negligence is only a way of describing what
        in the past was involuntary manslaughter. For centuries gross negligence was equivalent to
        "recklessness:" see Reg. v. Noakes (1866) 4 F. & F. 920 and the notes at pp. 921, 922. [Reference
        was also made to Rex v. Williamson, 3 C. & P. 635; Rex v. Long, 4 C. & P. 398 and Reg. v.
        Nicholls (1874) 13 Cox C.C. 75]. The concept of recklessness given its ordinary historic dictionary
        definition is primarily relevant to acts of commission: it cannot encompass all the circumstances
        envisaged as creating criminal responsibility. The concept of gross negligence is primarily relevant
        to acts of omission.
           Recklessness as refined by Lord Diplock in Caldwell and Lawrence requires the jury to be
        directed that they must be sure that the defendant's conduct caused an obvious and serious risk
        and that the defendant either (i) failed to give any thought to the possibility of there being any
        such risk or (ii) having recognised that there was such a risk, nevertheless went on to take it.
        Neither test is appropriate to someone in the position of the defendant, who failed to act to
        prevent death. It was his duty, making use of his training and skill as an anaesthetist, to react in a
        dangerous situation. The risk was known, it was always present and he was there to minimise that
        risk. An anaesthetist ought to recognise when a situation has arisen which requires him to
        intervene and his degree of negligence has to be judged by his failure to act when such a
        situation arises. The use of the phrase "gross inattention" was wholly suited to the role of the
        defendant, who had the duty as an anaesthetist to monitor the patient at all times during the
        operation. [Reference was made to the definition of "negligence" in the New Shorter Oxford
        English Dictionary (1993) and of "negligence" and "recklessly" in the Oxford English Dictionary
        (1933).]
           The present case is one of omission. Lord Diplock's definition of "recklessness" in Lawrence is
        only really applicable where the accused creates the danger or is present when the danger arises. It
        is nigh impossible to apply Lord Diplock's definition of recklessness to cases of omission.
           In Rex v. Bateman, 19 Cr.App.R. 8 a distinction was drawn for the first time between cases
        where death is alleged to have been caused by indolence or carelessness and cases where death is
        alleged to have been caused by recklessness. As to the first category, where a qualified man
        holding himself out as possessing special skill and knowledge was consulted by a patient, it is no
        defence to show that he was diligent in




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [19951                                                                                         179
        1 A.C.                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

        attendance if the patient was killed by his gross negligence and unskilfulness, and where
        incompetence is alleged the unqualified practitioner cannot claim to be measured by any lower
        standard than the qualified person. As to the second category, cases of alleged recklessness, juries
        are likely to distinguish between qualified and unqualified practitioners. A qualified person who
        undertakes a case beyond his powers may be reckless. Further, a qualified person who subjects his
        patient to a reckless experiment may be considered to have acted recklessly, and an unqualified
        person may be reckless in undertaking treatment. "Recklessness" was given its ordinary meaning,
        not the definition it has obtained since Lawrence and Caldwell.
           In Bateman it was held that to support an indictment for manslaughter the prosecution must
        prove the matters necessary to establish civil liability (save for pecuniary loss) and in addition
        must satisfy the jury that the negligence or incompetence of the accused went beyond a mere
        matter of compensation and showed such a disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount
        to a crime against the state and deserving of punishment. The case concerned a medical
        practitioner competent to deal with the medical condition of the deceased. The direction of the
        trial judge, who used epithets such as "gross", "wicked" and "culpable," was approved and the
        court emphasised the need for the jury to be able to distinguish between mistake and error of
        judgment (where liability does not arise) and carelessness and incompetence. Had the court been
        concerned with one of the situations outlined under the second category, then "recklessness" would
        have more closely described the standard that they should have examined. Bateman has not been
        overruled and has frequently been authoritatively referred to with approval, notably in Andrews v.
        Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576, a decision of this House which has never been
        disapproved of.
           The following conclusions may be drawn from Andrews, (a) The House was only considering
        manslaughter from the point of view of an unintentional killing caused by negligence (p. 581). (b)
        It approved Bateman without finding the connotations of mens rea helpful in distinguishing
        between degrees of negligence, (c) Cases of manslaughter in driving motor cars are but instances
        of a general rule applicable to all charges of homicide by negligence, (d) O f all the epithets that
        can be applied "reckless" most nearly covers the case of causing death by driving, but it is not
        all-embracing, (e) The decision draws a distinction between the degree of negligence required to
        be proved in the case of (i) manslaughter (requiring a high degree of negligence as indicated in
        Bateman) and (ii) dangerous driving, in which the degree of negligence is not necessarily as high.
           It must be borne in mind that one is here catering for juries who must understand what the law
        is concerning involuntary manslaughter. In Reg. v. Reid [1992] 1 W.L.R. 793 the House held that
        the ipsissima verba of the test laid down in Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. .510 should not
        necessarily be the only statement on the law given to the jury. But at the date of the present trial
        in January 1990 the trial judge deemed it only safe if "recklessness" was to be the test to use the
         exact language of that test. In the circumstances he cannot be criticised for so doing. The
        defendant




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                          180
         1 A.C.                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

        might not be caught by the Lawrence direction. The question then arises: would the public be
        offended by a verdict of "Not Guilty" in the circumstances of the case? It is extremely difficult, if
        not now impossible, to apply the Lawrence test to a case of omission. Criminal negligence is
        more easily comprehensible than the concept of recklessness.
           The Crown is not seeking to create a crime where the accused is to be judged by some
        objective standard. The test to be applied is one of gross negligence and one takes into account
        the accused's individual circumstances in deciding whether the negligence constituted gross
        negligence. The objective standard is applied to the negligence alone. This is the element in the
        Caldwell/Lawrence test (see [1982] A.C. 341) which the jury has to apply. They do not have to
        go on to consider whether the risk taken by the accused would have been obvious to the
        reasonably prudent person. The harshness of applying the Caldwell test [1982] A.C. 341 in all
        circumstances is exemplified by Elliott v. C. [1983] 1 W.L.R. 939. As to the application of the
        gross negligence test in other jurisdictions, see The Law Commission, Consultation Paper, No.
        135. Civil Law, Involuntary Manslaughter, paras. 3.42-3.46. There may be cases in which the term
        "reckless" is suited to the circumstances of the accused: see Reg. v. Church [1966] 1 Q.B. 59;
        Reg. v. Lowe [1973] Q.B. 702; Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q.B. 354 and Reg. v. West London Coroner,
        Ex parte Gray [1988] Q.B. 467.
           There remains the question whether the test of gross negligence has survived the decisions in
        Reg, v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510; Reg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341; Reg, v. Seymour [1983] 2
        A.C. 493; Reg. v. Reid [1992] 1 W.L.R. 793 and Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen, 82 Cr.App.R.
        18. It is to be observed that neither Caldwell nor Lawrence dealt with manslaughter. They were
        concerned with the statutory offences of arson and reckless driving respectively, defining in each
        case the appropriate test when the statute used the word "reckless." It is important to distinguish
        Reg. v. Seymour [1983] 2 A.C. 493, which decided that the ingredients of the two offences of
        causing death by reckless driving and motor manslaughter were the same. But the observations of
        Lord Roskill (p. 506) that '"Recklessness' should today be given the same meaning in relation to
        all offences which involve 'recklessness' as one of the elements unless Parliament has otherwise
        ordained," was obiter: see the terms of the certified question, at p. 505B. Moreover, recklessness
        in the Sexual Offences Act 1976 has a different meaning, requiring a subjective approach: see
        Reg. v. Pigg [1983] 1 W.L.R. 6 and Reg. v. Satnam S. (1983) 78 Cr.App.R, 149. In Kong Cheuk
        Kwan v. The Queen, 82 Cr.App.R. 18, 25 Lord Roskill limited what he had said in Seymour to the
        status of guidance to prosecutors in considering which charge to bring.
           Gross negligence is a simple concept for the man in the street to understand. It has general
        applicability and acceptability. The Caldwell/Lawrence test is not appropriate in cases of breach of
        duty where a failure is alleged and indeed is unworkable in omission cases and not helpful in
        commission cases. The phrase that should be used to juries is "culpable" or "gross" negligence in
        a direction relating to involuntary manslaughter, the grossness being measured by the defendant's
        reaction to the situation in which he found himself. [Reference was also made to




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                          181
         1 A.C.                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

        Akerele v. The King [1943] A.C. 255; Dabholkar v. The King [1948] A.C. 221; Reg. v. Prentice
        [1994] Q.B. 302, 323 and Reg. v. Yogasakaran [1990] 1 N.Z.L.R. 399.]
          Lord Williams o f Mostyn Q.C. replied.

           Their Lordships took time for consideration.

           30 June. LORD MACKAY OF CLASHFERN L.C. My Lords, this is an appeal brought with the
        leave of your Lordships' House granted on 23 November 1993 from an order of Her Majesty's
        Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) (Lord Taylor of Gosforth C.J., Henry and Blofeld JJ.)
        whereby the appellant's appeal against conviction for manslaughter was dismissed.
           The conviction arose out of the conduct of an eye operation carried out at the Mayday Hospital,
        Croydon on 4 January 1987. The appellant was, during the latter part of that operation, the
        anaesthetist in charge of the patient.
           The operation was carried out by two surgeons supported by a team of five nurses and a theatre
        sister. Anaesthesia commenced at about 9.45 a.m. The patient was paralysed by injection of a drug
        and an endotracheal tube was inserted to enable the patient to breathe by mechanical means. At
        the start of the operation the anaesthetist was Dr. Said, a registrar. An operating department
        assistant was also present to help him. At about 10.30 a.m. there was a changeover of
        anaesthetists. The appellant was called to attend and take Dr. Said's place following which both
        Dr. Said and his assistant departed to deal with another operation elsewhere in the hospital.
        Another assistant was called to attend but did not arrive until later.
           At approximately 11.05 a.m, a disconnection occurred at the endotracheal tube connection. The
        supply of oxygen to the patient ceased and this led to cardiac arrest at 11.14 a.m. During this
        period the appellant failed to notice or remedy the disconnection.
           The appellant first became aware that something was amiss when an alarm sounded on the
        Dinamap machine, which monitors the patient's blood pressure. From the evidence it appears that
        some 4Vi minutes would have elapsed between the disconnection and the sounding of this alarm.
        When this alarm sounded the appellant responded in various ways by checking the equipment and
        by administering atropine to raise the patient's pulse. But at no stage before the cardiac arrest did
        he check the integrity of the endotracheal tube connection. The disconnection itself was not
        discovered until after resuscitation measures had been commenced.
           For the prosecution it was alleged that the appellant was guilty of gross negligence in failing to
        notice or respond appropriately to obvious signs that a disconnection had occurred and that the
        patient had ceased to breathe. In particular the prosecution alleged that the appellant had failed to
        notice at various stages during the period after disconnection and before the arrest either occurred
        or became inevitable that the patient's chest was not moving, the dials on the mechanical
        ventilating machine were not operating, the disconnection in the endotracheal tube, that the




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                            182
         1 A.C.                               Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.»                          Lord Mackay
                                                                                                  of Clashfern
                                                                                                          L.C.

        alarm on the ventilator was not switched on and that the patient was becoming progressively blue.
         Further the prosecution alleged that the appellant had noticed but failed to understand the correct
        significance of the fact that during this period the patient's pulse had dropped and the patient's
        blood pressure had dropped.
           Two expert witnesses gave evidence for the prosecution. Professor Payne described the standard
        of care as "abysmal" while Professor Adams stated that in his view a competent anaesthetist
        should have recognised the signs of disconnection within 15 seconds and that the appellant's
        conduct amounted to "a gross dereliction of care."
           On behalf of the appellant it was conceded at his trial that he had been negligent. The issue
        was therefore whether his conduct was criminal.
           The expert witness called on behalf of the appellant at his trial was Dr. Monks. His evidence
        conceded that the appellant ought to have noticed the disconnection. But in his view there were
        factors which mitigated this failure. He considered that another independent problem either
        occurred or could have occurred before or at the same time as the disconnection which distracted
        the appellant's attention and activities. This problem would in his view have caused the patient's
        blood pressure to drop and may either have been a reaction to the drug being used to paralyse the
        patient or alternatively may have been caused by an ocular cardiac reflex.
           The appellant himself said in evidence that when the alarm sounded on the Dinamap machine
        his first thought was that the machine itself was not working properly. Having carried out checks
        on the machine he then thought that the patient had suffered an ocular cardiac reflex for which he
        administered atropine in two successive doses. Further attempts to administer atropine by
        intravenous drip and to check the patient's blood pressure followed until the cardiac arrest
        occurred. It had never occurred to him that a disconnection had takenplace. He stated in
        evidence that "after things went wrong I think I did panic a bit."
           In relation to the appellant's actions during this period Professor Payne had conceded during
        cross-examination that "given that Dr. Adomako misled himself the efforts he made were not
        unreasonable." The period to which this evidence referred was obviously the period after the
        alarm had sounded on the Dinamap machine which was, as I have said, apparently some 4|minutes
        after the disconnection occurred.
           The jury convicted the appellant of manslaughter by a majority of 11 to 1. The Court of
        Appeal (Criminal Division) dismissed the appellant's appeal against conviction but certified that a
        point of law of general public importance was involved in the decision to dismiss the appeal,
        namely:

             "in cases of manslaughter by criminal negligence not involving driving but involving a breach
             of duty is it a sufficient direction to the jury to adopt the gross negligence test set out by the
             Court of Appeal in the present case following Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and
             Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576, without reference to the test of
             recklessness as defined in Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510 or as adapted to the
             circumstances of the case?"




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                            183
         1 A.C.                               Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                         Lord Mackay
                                                                                                  of Clashfern
                                                                                                          L.C.

            The decision of the Court of Appeal is reported sub nom. Reg. v. Prentice [1994] Q.B. 302
         along with a number of other cases involving similar questions of law. The Court of Appeal held
         that except in cases of motor manslaughter the ingredients which had to be proved to establish an
         offence of involuntary manslaughter by breach of duty were the existence of the duty, a breach of
         the duty which had caused death and gross negligence which the jury considered to justify a
        criminal conviction; the jury might properly find gross negligence on proof of indifference to an
        obvious risk of injury to health or of actual foresight of the risk coupled either with a
        determination nevertheless to run it or with an intention to avoid it but involving such a high
        degree of negligence in the attempted avoidance as the jury considered justified conviction or of
        inattention or failure to advert to a serious risk going beyond mere inadvertence in respect of an
        obvious and important matter which the defendant's duty demanded he should address; and that, in
        the circumstances, the appeals of the two junior doctors and the electrician would be allowed and
        the appeal of the anaesthetist, namely Dr. Adomako, would be dismissed. The reason that the
        Court of Appeal excepted the cases of motor manslaughter and their formulation of the law was
        the decision of this House in Reg. v. Seymour (Edward) [1983] 2 A.C. 493 in which it was held
        that where manslaughter was charged and the circumstances were that the victim was killed as a
        result of the reckless driving of the defendant on a public highway, the trial judge should give the
        jury the direction which had been suggested in Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510 but
        that it was appropriate also to point out that in order to constitute the offence of manslaughter the
        risk of death being caused by the manner of the defendant's driving must be very high.
           In opening his very cogent argument for the appellant before your Lordships, counsel submitted
        that the law in this area should have the characteristics of clarity, certainty, intellectual coherence
        and general applicability and acceptability. For these reasons he said the law applying to
        involuntary manslaughter generally should involve a universal test and that test should be the test
        already applied in this House to motor manslaughter. He criticised the concept of gross
        negligence which was the basis of the judgment of the Court of Appeal submitting that its
        formulation involved circularity, the jury being told in effect to convict of a crime if they thought
        a crime had been committed and that accordingly using gross negligence as the conceptual basis
        for the crime of involuntary manslaughter was unsatisfactory and the court should apply the law
        laid down in Seymour [1983] 2 A.C. 493 generally to all cases of involuntary manslaughter or at
        least use this as the basis for providing general applicability and acceptability.
           Like the Court of Appeal your Lordships were treated to a considerable review of authority. I
        begin with Rex v. Bateman, 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and the opinion of Lord Hewart C.J., where he said,
        at pp. 10-11:

             "In expounding the law to juries on the trial of indictments for manslaughter by negligence,
             judges have often referred to the distinction between civil and criminal liability for death by
             negligence. The law of criminal liability for negligence is conveniently explained in that way.
             If A has caused the death of B by alleged negligence,




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                              184
         1 A.C.                                Reg. v. Adomako (H,L.(E.))                          Lord Mackay
                                                                                                    of Clashfern
                                                                                                            L.C.

             then, in order to establish civil liability, the plaintiff must prove (in addition to pecuniary loss
             caused by the death) that A owed a duty to B to take care, that that duty was not discharged,
             and that the default caused the death of B. To convict A of manslaughter, the prosecution
             must prove the three things above mentioned and must satisfy the jury, in addition, that A's
             negligence amounted to a crime. In the civil action, if it is proved that A fell short of the
             standard of reasonable care required by law, it matters not how far he fell short of that
             standard. The extent of his liability depends not on the degree of negligence, but on the
             amount of damage done. In a criminal court, on the contrary, the amount and degree of
             negligence are the determining question. There must be mens rea."

        Later he said, at pp. 11-12:

                  "In explaining to juries the test which they should apply to determine whether the
             negligence, in the particular case, amounted or did not amount to a crime, judges have used
             many epithets, such as 'culpable,' 'criminal,' 'gross,' 'wicked,' 'clear,' 'complete.' But, whatever
             epithet be used and whether an epithet be used or not, in order to establish criminal liability
             the facts must be such that, in the opinion of the jury, the negligence of the accused went
             beyond a mere matter of compensation between subjects and showed such disregard for the
             life and safety of others as to amount to a crime against the state and conduct deserving
             punishment."

           After dealing with a number of authorities Lord Hewart CJ. went on, at pp. 12-13:

                  "The law as laid down in these cases may be thus summarised: If a person holds himself
             out as possessing special skill and knowledge and he is consulted, as possessing such skill and
             knowledge, by or on behalf of a patient, he owes a duty to the patient to use due caution in
             undertaking the treatment. If he accepts the responsibility and undertakes the treatment and the
             patient submits to his direction and treatment accordingly, he owes a duty to the patient to use
             diligence, care, knowledge, skill and caution in administering the treatment. No contractual
             relation is necessary, nor is it necessary that the service be rendered for reward. It is for the
             judge to direct the jury what standard to apply and for the jury to say whether that standard
             has been reached. The jury should not exact the highest, or a very high, standard, nor should
             they be content with a very low standard. The law requires a fair and reasonable standard of
             care and competence. This standard must be reached in all the matters above mentioned. If
             the patient's death has been caused by the defendant's indolence or carelessness, it will not
             avail to show that he had sufficient knowledge; nor will it avail to prove that he was diligent
             in attendance, if the patient has been killed by his gross ignorance and unskilfulness. No
             further observation need be made with regard to cases where the death is alleged to have been
             caused by indolence or carelessness. As regards cases where incompetence is alleged, it is only
             necessary to say that the unqualified practitioner cannot claim to be measured by




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                           185
         1 A.C,                               Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                        Lord Mackay
                                                                                                 of Clashfern
                                                                                                         L.C.

             any lower standard than that which is applied to a qualified man. As regards cases of alleged
             recklessness, juries are likely to distinguish between the qualified and the unqualified man.
             There may be recklessness in undertaking the treatment and recklessness in the conduct of it.
             It is, no doubt, conceivable that a qualified man may be held liable for recklessly undertaking
             a case which he knew, or should have known, to be beyond his powers, or for making his
             patient the subject of reckless experiment. Such cases are likely to be rare. In the case of
             the quack, where the treatment has been proved to be incompetent and to have caused the
             patient's death, juries are not likely to hesitate in finding liability on the ground that the
             defendant undertook, and continued to treat, a case involving the gravest risk to his patient,
             when he knew he was not competent to deal with it, or would have known if he had paid any
             proper regard to the life and safety of his patient."
                  "The foregoing observations deal with civil liability. To support an indictment for
             manslaughter the prosecution must prove the matters necessary to establish civil liability
             (except pecuniary loss), and, in addition, must satisfy the jury that the negligence or
             incompetence of the accused went beyond a mere matter of compensation and showed such
             disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to a crime against the state and
             conduct deserving punishment."

         Next I turn to Andrews v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576 which was a case of
        manslaughter through the dangerous driving of a motor car. In a speech with which all the other
        members of this House who sat agreed, Lord Atkin said, at pp. 581-582:

             "of all crimes manslaughter appears to afford most difficulties of definition, for it concerns
             homicide in so many and so varying conditions. From the early days when any homicide
             involved penalty the law has gradually evolved 'through successive differentiations and
             integrations' until it recognises murder on the one hand, based mainly, though not exclusively,
             on an intention to kill, and manslaughter on the other hand, based mainly, though not
             exclusively, on the absence of intention to kill but with the presence of an element of
             'unlawfulness' which is the elusive factor. In the present case it is only necessary to consider
             manslaughter from the point of view of an unintentional killing caused by negligence, that is,
             the omission of a duty to take care. I do not propose to discuss the development of this
             branch of the subject as treated in the successive treatises of Coke, Hale, Foster and East and
             in the judgments of the courts to be found either in directions to juries by individual judges or
             in the more considered pronouncements of the body of judges which preceded the formal
             Court of Crown Cases Reserved. Expressions will be found which indicate that to cause death
             by any lack of due care will amount to manslaughter; but as manners softened and the law
             became more humane a narrower criterion appeared. After all, manslaughter is a felony, and
             was capital, and men shrank from attaching the serious consequences of a conviction for
             felony to




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                             186
        1 A.C.                                Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                          Lord Mackay
                                                                                                   of Clashfern
                                                                                                           L.C.

             results produced by mere inadvertence. The stricter view became apparent in prosecutions of
             medical men or men who. professed medical or surgical skill for manslaughter by reason of
             negligence. As an instance I will cite Rex v. Williamson (1807) 3 C. & P. 635 where a man
             who practised as an accoucheur, owing to a mistake in his observation of the actual symptoms,
             inflicted on a patient terrible injuries from which she died. 'To substantiate that charge' -
             namely, manslaughter - Lord Ellenborough said, 'the prisoner must have been guilty of
             criminal misconduct, arising either from the grossest ignorance or the most criminal
             inattention.' The word 'criminal' in any attempt to define a crime is perhaps not the most
             helpful: but it is plain that the Lord Chief Justice meant to indicate to the jury a high degree
             of negligence. So at a much later date in Rex v. Bateman, 19 Cr.App.R. 8 a charge of
             manslaughter was made against a qualified medical practitioner in similar circumstances to
             those of Williamson's case."

          Lord Atkin then referred to the judgment of Lord Hewart C.J. from which I have already quoted
        and went on, at p. 583:

             "Here again I think with respect that the expressions used are not, indeed they were probably
             not intended to be, a precise definition of the crime. I do not myself find the connotations of
             mens rea helpful in distinguishing between degrees of negligence, nor do the ideas of crime
             and punishment in themselves carry a jury much further in deciding whether in a particular
             case the degree of negligence shown is a crime and deserves punishment. But the substance of
             the judgment is most valuable, and in my opinion is correct. In practice it has generally been
             adopted by judges in charging juries in all cases of manslaughter by negligence, whether in
             driving vehicles or otherwise. The principle to be observed is that cases of manslaughter in
             driving motor cars are but instances of a general rule applicable to all charges of homicide by
             negligence. Simple lack of care such as will constitute civil liability is not enough: for
             purposes of the criminal law there are degrees of negligence: and a very high degree of
             negligence is required to be proved before the felony is established. Probably of all the
             epithets that can be applied 'reckless' most nearly covers the case. It is difficult to visualise a
             case of death caused by reckless driving in the connotation of that term in ordinary speech
             which would not justify a conviction for manslaughter: but it is probably not all-embracing,
             for 'reckless' suggests an indifference to risk whereas the accused may have appreciated the
             risk and intended to avoid it and yet shown such a high degree of negligence in the means
             adopted to avoid the risk as would justify a conviction. If the principle of Bateman's case, 19
             Cr.App.R. 8 is observed it will appear that the law of manslaughter has not changed by the
             introduction of motor vehicles on the road. Death caused by their negligent driving, though
             unhappily much more frequent, is to be.treated in law as death caused by any other form of
             negligence: and juries should be directed accordingly."




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                              187
         1 A.C.                               Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                           Lord Mackay
                                                                                                    of Clashfern
                                                                                                            L.C.

           In my opinion the law as stated in these two authorities is satisfactory as providing a proper
        basis for describing the crime of involuntary manslaughter. Since the decision in Andrews was a
        decision of your Lordships' House, it remains the most authoritative statement of the present law
        which I have been able to find and although its relationship to Reg. v. Seymour [1983] 2 A.C. 493
        is a matter to which I shall have to return, it is a decision which has not been departed from. On
        this basis in my opinion the ordinary principles of the law of negligence apply to ascertain
        whether or not the defendant has been in breach of a duty of care towards the victim who has
        died. If such breach of duty is established the next question is whether that breach of duty caused
        the death of the victim. If so, the jury must go on to consider whether that breach of duty should
        be characterised as gross negligence and therefore as a crime. This will depend on the seriousness
        of the breach of duty committed by the defendant in all the circumstances in which the defendant
        was placed when it occurred. The jury will have to consider whether the extent to which the
        defendant's conduct departed from the proper standard of care incumbent upon him, involving as it
        must have done a risk of death to the patient, was such that it should be judged criminal.
           It is true that to a certain extent this involves an element of circularity, but in this branch of the
        law I do not believe that is fatal to its being correct as a test of how far conduct must depart
        from accepted standards to be characterised as criminal. This is necessarily a question of degree
        and an attempt to specify that degree more closely is I think likely to achieve only a spurious
        precision. The essence of the matter which is supremely a jury question is whether having regard
        to the risk of death involved, the conduct of the defendant was so bad in all the circumstances as
        to amount in their judgment to a criminal act or omission.
           My Lords, the view which I have stated of the correct basis in law for the crime of involuntary
        manslaughter accords I consider with the criteria stated by counsel although I have not reached the
        degree of precision in definition which he required, but in my opinion it has been reached so far
        as practicable and with a result which leaves the matter properly stated for a jury's determination.
           My Lords, in my view the law as stated in Reg. v. Seymour [1983] 2 A.C. 493 should no
        longer apply since the underlying statutory provisions on which it rested have now been repealed
        by the Road Traffic Act 1991. It may be that cases of involuntary motor manslaughter will as a
        result become rare but I consider it unsatisfactory that there should be any exception to the
        generality of the statement which I have made, since such exception, in my view, gives rise to
        unnecessary complexity. For example in Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen (1985) 82 Cr.App.R. 18
        it would give rise to unnecessary differences between the law applicable to those navigating
        vessels and the lookouts on the vessels.
           I consider it perfectly appropriate that the word "reckless" should be used in cases of
        involuntary manslaughter, but as Lord Atkin put it "in the ordinary connotation of that word."
        Examples in which this was done, to my mind, with complete accuracy are Reg. v. Stone [1977]
        Q.B. 354 and Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex parte Gray [1988] Q.B. 467.




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
                                                                                                          188
                                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                         Lord Mackay
                                                                                                  of Clashfern
                                                                                                          L.C.

            In my opinion it is quite unnecessary in the context of gross negligence to give the detailed
         directions with regard to the meaning of the word "reckless" associated with Reg. v. Lawrence
         [1982] A.C. 510. The decision of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in the other cases with
         which they were concerned at the same time as they heard the appeal in this case indicates that
         the circumstances in which involuntary manslaughter has to be considered may make the
         somewhat elaborate and rather rigid directions inappropriate. I entirely agree with the view that
         the circumstances to which a charge of involuntary manslaughter may apply are so various that it
         is unwise to attempt to categorise or detail specimen directions. For my part I would not wish to
         go beyond the description of the basis in law which I have already given.
            In my view the summing up of the judge in the present case was a model of clarity in analysis
         of the facts and in setting out the law in a manner which was readily comprehensible by the jury.
          The summing up was criticised in respect of the inclusion of the following passage:

             "Of course you will understand it is not for every humble man of the profession to have all
             that great skill of the great men in Harley Street but, on the other hand, they are not allowed
             to practise medicine in this country unless they have acquired a certain amount of skill. They
             are bound to show a reasonable amount of skill according to the circumstances of the case,
             and you have to judge them on the basis that they are skilled men, but not necessarily so
             skilled as more skilful men in the profession, and you can only convict them criminally if, in
             your judgment, they fall below the standard of skill which is the least qualification which any
             doctor should have. You should only convict a doctor of causing a death by negligence if
             you think he did something which no reasonably skilled doctor should have done."

           The criticism was particularly of the latter part of this quotation in that it was open to the
         meaning that if the defendant did what no reasonably skilled doctor should have done it was open
         to the jury to convict him of causing death by negligence. Strictly speaking this passage is
         concerned with the statement of a necessary condition for a conviction by preventing a conviction
         unless that condition is satisfied. It is incorrect to treat it as stating a sufficient condition for
         conviction. In any event I consider that this passage in the context was making the point
         forcefully that the defendant in this case was not to be judged by the standard of more skilled
         doctors but by the standard of a reasonably competent doctor. There were many other passages in
         the summing up which emphasised the need for a high degree of negligence if the jury were to
         convict and read in that context I consider that the summing up cannot be faulted.
           For these reasons I am of the opinion that this appeal should be dismissed and that the certified
         question should be answered by saying:

             "In cases of manslaughter by criminal negligence involving a breach of duty, it is a sufficient
             direction to the jury to adopt the gross negligence test set out by the Court of Appeal in the
             present case following Rex v. Bateman, 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and Andrews v. Director




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                           189
         1 A.C.                              Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))                         Lord Mackay
                                                                                                 of Clashfern
                                                                                                         L.C.

             o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C, 576 and that it is not necessary to refer to the definition
             of recklessness in Reg. v. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510, although it is perfectly open to the trial
             judge to use the word 'reckless' in its ordinary meaning as part of his exposition of the law if
             he deems it appropriate in the circumstances of the particular case."

           We have been referred to the Consultation Paper by the Law Commission on Criminal Law,
        Involuntary Manslaughter (1994) (Law Com. No. 135), and we have also been referred to a
        number of standard textbooks. I have also had the opportunity of considering the note on Reg. v.
        Prentice by Sir John Smith [1994] Crim.L.R. 292 since the hearing was completed. While I have
        not referred to these in detail I have derived considerable help in seeking to formulate my view as
        a result of studying them.
           I have reached the same conclusion on the basic law to be applied in this case as did the Court
        of Appeal. Personally I would not wish to state the law more elaborately than I have done. In
        particular I think it is difficult to take expressions used in particular cases out of the context of
        the cases in which they were used and enunciate them as if applying generally. This can I think
        lead to ambiguity and perhaps unnecessary complexity. The task of trial judges in setting out for
        the jury the issues of fact and the relevant law in cases of this class is a difficult and demanding
        one. I believe that the supreme test that should be satisfied in such directions is that they are
        comprehensible to an ordinary member of the public who is called to sit on a jury and who has
        no particular prior acquaintance with the law. To make it obligatory on trial judges to give
        directions in law which are so elaborate that the ordinary member of the jury will have great
        difficulty in following them, and even greater difficulty in retaining them in his memory for the
        purpose of application in the jury room, is no service to the cause of justice. The experienced
        counsel who assisted your Lordships in this appeal indicated that as a practical matter there was a
        danger in over elaboration of definition of the word "reckless." While therefore I have said in my
        view it is perfectly open to a trial judge to use the word "reckless" if it appears appropriate in the
        circumstances of a particular case as indicating the extent to which a defendant's conduct must
        deviate from that of a proper standard of care, I do not think it right to require that this should be
        done and certainly not right that it should incorporate the full detail required in Lawrence.

            LORD KEITH OF KINKEL. My Lords, for the reasons given in the speech of my noble and
         learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, which I have read in draft and with which I agree, I, too,
         would dismiss the appeal and answer the certified question as he has proposed.

            LORD GOFF OF CHIEVELEY. My Lords, for the reasons given in the speech of my noble and
         learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, which I have read in draft and with which I agree, I, too,
         would dismiss the appeal and answer the certified question as he has proposed.




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
         [1995]                                                                                         190
         1 A.C.                             Reg. v. Adomako (H.L.(E.))

          LORD BROWNE-WILKINSON. My Lords, for the reasons given in the speech of my noble
        and learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, which I have read in draft and with which I agree, I, too,
        would dismiss the appeal and answer the certified question as he has proposed.

          LORD WOOLF. My Lords, I have had the advantage of reading in draft the speech of my
        noble and learned friend, the Lord Chancellor, and with which I agree, I, too, would dismiss the
        appeal and answer the certified question as he has proposed.

                                                  Appeal dismissed.
                                                  No order as to costs.

           Solicitors: Bindman & Partners; Crown Prosecution Service Headquarters.

                                                                                                   J. A. G.




© An extract from a JUSTIS database
Crim.L.R.                              M anslaughter                                       757'


the road, which was procured by the employer and his requisite mem rea was present
in that he caused the employee to drive the vehicle in that condition, just as in Cogan
and L eak, Leak had caused Cogan to have sexual intercourse with his wife. There was
nothing in the passage referred to nor elsewhere in the opinion of Lord Tucker which,
had it been drawn to the attention of the Court in Millward, would have made the
slightest difference to the approach there adopted.
   It appeared that what had happened in the present case was that the jury were not
satisfied in relation to P that, whatever he did in the form o f actus reus, and clearly he
did commit the actus reus of removing the car from the garage, he had the necessary
dishonest intent for the mental element of burglary. There was nothing whatever
inconsistent or unsatisfactory in the jury having, at the same time, convicted the
appellant, having regard to the quite different evidence in relation to his state of mind.
   As to Ghosh, it was not necessary in the circumstances of the case to give such a
direction. The appellant was not saying that what other people might think was dis­
honest was in his view honest, or anything o f that sort, such as might give rise to the
need to give a Ghosh direction. It was never suggested that if P did as it was alleged the
appellant had told him to do, this did not result in dishonest behaviour so far as the
appellant was concerned.
[Reported by Veronica Cowan, Barrister]


  Commentary. It was not necessary to invoke the controversial decision in Millward to
uphold the conviction in the present case. It is ancient law that burglary may be committed
by an innocent agent. Hale (1736) 1 P.C. 555, wrote;

  “ If A, being a man of full age take a child of seven or eight years old well instructed by
  him in this villainous art, as some such there be, and the child goes in at the window,
  takes goods out, and delivers them to A who carries them away, this is burglary in A, tho
  the child, that made the entry, be not guilty by reason of his infancy.
     So if the wife in the presence of her husband by his threats or coercion breaks and
  enters the house of B in the night, this is burglary in the husband, tho the wife, that is
  the immediate actor, is excused by the coercion of her husband."

  There is no difference in principle between the child and the coerced wife and an adult
person who lacks the mens rea of burglary, It has long been accepted that entry may be
effected by, and burglary committed through, an innocent agent. There is nothing in the Theft
Act 1968 to affect this principle. It is necessary to invoke the Millward principle only where
the crime is one which is incapable of being committed by an innocent agent like rape,
bigamy or a driving offence. W was the principal offender in the present case. [J.C.S.]


                                    Manslaughter
Involuntary manslaughter— involuntary manslaughter by breach o f duty— ingredients o f
offence.
                                       R . v. Adomako

   House of Lords: Lord Mackay of Clashfern L .C ., Lord Keith of Kinkel, Lord Goff
of Chieveley, Lord Browne-Wilkinson and Lord Woolf: June 30. 1994.
   The appellant was the anaesthetist during the latter part of an eye operation on a
758                                  Case and C om m ent                                  [1994J

patient. In the course of the operation the tube from the ventilator supplying the
patient with oxygen became disconnected. The appellant failed to notice the discon­
nection for some six minutes, as a result o f which the patient suffered a cardiac arrest
and died. The appellant was charged with manslaughter. At his trial it was conceded
on his behalf that he had been negligent, and the issue arose whether his conduct was
criminal. Medical evidence called by the Crown showed that the appellant had been
guilty of a gross dereliction of care. The jury were directed that the test to be applied
was whether the appellant had been, guilty of gross negligence. He was convicted and
appealed on the ground that the judge had wrongly directed the jury by applying
the test of gross negligence for manslaughter. The Court of Appeal, in dismissing the
appeal, held, inter alia, that the ingredients which had to be proved to establish the
offence of involuntary manslaughter by breach of duty were the existence of the duty,
a breach of duty which had caused death the gross negligence with the jury considered
sufficient to justify a criminal conviction. On appeal therefrom to the House of Lords:
   Held, dismissing the appeal, that on cases of manslaughter by criminal negligence
involving a breach of duty, it was sufficient direction to the jury to adopt the gross
negligence test set out by the Court of Appeal in the instant case following Bateman
(1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8 and Andrews v. D P P [1937] A.C. 576 and it was not necessary
to refer to the definition of recklessness in Lawrence [1982] A.C. 510, although it was
open to the trial judge to use the word “reckless” in its ordinary meaning as part of his
exposition of the law if he deemed it appropriate in the circumstances of the particular
case. On the facts here the jury had been properly directed.
  Seymour (Edward) (1983) 77 Cr.App.R. 215, [1983] A.C. 493 disapproved. Law­
rence (1981) 73 Cr.App.R. 1, [1982] A.C. 510 not followed. Decision of the Court of
Appeal (1994) 98 Cr.App.R. 262, [1994] Q.B. 402 affirmed.
[Reported by N . P . Metcalfe, Esq., Barrister-at-Law]


Commentary. This welcome decision by the House of Lords removes much unnecessary
complication and injustice from the law of involuntary manslaughter. The short life of the sep­
arate category of “ motor manslaughter,” conceived by the court below, is brought, merci­
fully, to a summary end. So is what may be called "Lawrence r e c k le s s n e s s manslaughter,'
the unlamented progeny of Seymour, It may be surmised-that the reversal of their decision
on these issues will not be unwelcome to the judges of the Court of Appeal who did their best
to rationalise the law within the limits permitted by Seymour, a shackle which the H o u s e had
the advantage of being able to cast off.
   The Lord Chancellor, perhaps out of misplaced kindness to the judges in Seymour, says of
that decision that “ it should no longer apply since the underlying statutory provisions on
which it rested have now been repealed by the Road Traffic Act 2991.” (Commentator's ita­
lics) This suggests that the common law of manslaughter was in some way changed by the
existence of the offence of causing death by reckless driving ["the underlying statutory pfO-
vision" in question] which had existed in our law since 1956, together, until 1977, with the
offence causing death by dangerous driving. With respect, the existence of the statutory
offence had no effect on the common law crime which, as the present case shows, is the
same whether death is caused by driving or any other means. The effect of the prese
decision is that Seymour is overruled and, with respect, it would have been better to say so
It is not a case of its no longer applying—-it never did properly apply and those c a s e s wnie
followed it were wrongly decided.
   The law relating to “ unlawful and dangerous act" (or "constructive" manslaughter is u**\
                                         M anslaughter                                         759
Crim.L.R-

affected by the present decision. So probably is manslaughter by subjective recklessnesss-
a matter considered below.
  Manslaughter by gross negligence. Lord Mackay said;
  •The essence of the matter, which is supremely a jury question, is whether, having
  regard to the risk of death involved, the conduct of the defendant was so bad in all the
  circumstances as to amount in their judgment to a criminal act or omission."

   The duty of care. It is clear that the test is objective; “ . . . the ordinary principles of the
law of negligence apply to ascertain whether or not the defendant has been in breach of a
duty of care towards the victim who has died.” Where a negligent act is alleged the exis­
tence of a duty of care is unlikely to cause a problem; everyone must be .under a duty not to
do acts imperilling the lives of others, in the absence of circumstances of Justification or
 excuse. In the case of omissions, the problems are well-known, difficult and much debated,
 b u t probably not affected by the present decision.



   Breach of duty. The conduct of the defendant causing death m ust-
      (a) have fallen far below the standard to be expected of a reasonable doctor/anaesthe­
      tist/driver/etc.— or the man on the Clapham omnibus, according to the circumstances,

      etc.;
      (b) have involved a risk of death; and
      (c) be so bad in all the circumstances as, in the opinion of the jury, to amount to a
      crime.
    So far as this category of manslaughter is concerned, it seems we can now forget (with
 great relief) about the list of "states of mind” formulated by the Court of APPea' and a,so
 about the relevance of risks to “ health or welfare" referred to in Stone [1977] Q.B. 354. There
  has to be a risk of d e a th -a t least, Lord Mackay refers to nothing le s s -w h ic h is obviously
  appropriate to an offence called manslaughter.                          norQQcaritv
    Recklessness. The unlamented demise of Lawrence recklessness does not necessarily
  mean that we can forget about recklessness altogether. A person who does an act being
  aware that it is highly probable that it will cause serious toddy harm was gu.fty of murder
  (Hyam [1975] A.C. 55)) if his act caused death until the decision in Moloney {1985] A. .
  which required awareness of virtual certainty of serious harm. If Mrs Hyam was aware only of
  high probability, she would not be guilty of murder under the present law but, obvious y, she
  must be guilty of manslaughter. The common law of murder has been P a s s iv e ly ni -
  rowed over centuries and it has always gone without saying that the area vacated by murder
  becomes manslaughter. There is no difficulty about the actual facts of Hyam s case She
  killed (a) by an unlawful and dangerous act (arson) (b) by an act which o b v i o u s ly involved a
   risk of death and which a jury could hardly fail to find was so bad as to amo" t to a' cnm
   She must have been guilty of manslaughter under either head. But ,t is poss.»        ™ e
   cases of subjective recklessness where the fatal- act is not otherwise un a u a
   there is no obvious risk of d e a th -n o t manslaughter under either of the heads cons dered
   above, but murder until Moloney decided otherwise. So we must conclude that there
   third head of manslaughter which at least includes;
      Causing death by an act done being aware that it is highly probable that it will cause
      serious bodily harm.
   Where death is so caused it seems the jury do not have to be asked to decide w h e th e r the
   act is so bad as to amount to a crime. That question is only appropriate when we are con­
   cerned with degrees of negligence, there being no other way of determining the appropriate
760                                  C ase and Com m ent                                  [1994]


degree. The jury are not asked this question in non-fatal offences against the person which
may be committed by recklessness so it would be extraordinary if it applied where death is
caused by reckless conduct.
  The remaining questions are whether this head extends to cases:

      (a) where awareness is of less than high probability, but of an unreasonable risk and
      (b) where the foreseen risk was of bodily harm less than serious bodily harm.

   It is impossible to give positive answers to these questions but it is submitted that the
better view is that the offence includes (a) but not (b). A distinction based only on high, or
less than high, probability is unsatisfactory because the degree of probability is only one of
the factors which should determine whether conduct is properly characterised as "reckless
or not. Sometimes, though rarely, it may be reasonable to take a risk of causing injury, even
where the probability is high (e.g. where a fireman breaks the window of a blazing room
crowded with children) and in other circumstances it may be quite unreasonable to take
such a risk (a trespasser breaking the same window), even if the probability is low. The con­
cept of recklessness, as distinct from mere foresight, brings the judgment of the jury back
into the picture, in that it must be for them to say whether the risk knowingly taken by the
defendant was so unreasonable as to be properly categorised as reckless.
   In Gray v. Barr [1971] 2 All E.R. 949 at 961 (a civil action) Salmon L.X said “ To do a lawful
act which is dangerous with reckless disregard whether it injures another is also manslaugh­
ter"; but the dangerous act in that case was ascending a narrow staircase carrying a loaded
gun with the safety catch off, so any injury caused was likely to be serious— and in fact, of
course, was fatal. By analogy with murder, reckless manslaughter should be limited to cases
where the known risk is of serious bodily harm.
   For proposals for the reform of the law of manslaughter, see Law Commission Consul­
tation Paper No. 135 (summarised [1994] Crim.L.R, 397 and mentioned by Lord Mackay in
the present case together with commentary at [1994] Crim.L.R. 292.) [J.C.S.]


                                        Pollution
Water Resources A ct 1991, s. 85— company vicariously liable for acts or omissions or
employees during activities done for company
           National Rivers Authority v. Alfred McAlpine Homes East Ltd
  Queen’s Bench Divisional Court: Simon Brown I..J. and Morland J.: January 26,
1994.
   The appellant prosecutor appealed by way o f case stated against the dismissal of an
information alleging that the respondent company caused polluted matter (wet
cement) to enter controlled waters, contrary to section 85 of the Water Resources Act
1991. Wet cement was washed into the controlled stream during the construction of a
water feature on the respondent’s building site. On inspection both the site agent and
the site manager accepted responsibility for the pollution. The justices concluded that
the appellant had failed to show that the company itself was liable. They applied the
guidelines in Tesco v. Nam ass [1972] A.C. 153 and found that neither the site manager
nor the site agent were o f sufficient standing within'the company to enable the justices
to find that they were in the category of those whose acts were the acts of the com­
pany. The question for the High Court was whether the justices were correct to con­
clude that an offence under section 85 could only be committed by a company if the
