1 8 - JUN. ’ 9 7 (THU) 1 7 : 4 3   ATTORNEY GENERAL                 TEL■ (                         P. 002
      13 JUH '97 13:15 home OFFICE -F8- 071 2?3 A2Q4                                      P .2 j




         DRAFT:             13 JUNE 1997



         DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT FOR THE HOME SECRETARY



         With permission. Madam Speaker, J would like to make a statement about the
         Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


         2.       It is now more than eight years since the disaster on 15 April 1989. But no
         one who saw the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those
         terrible events. For those who lost loved members of their family, the memories are
         even more painful. We all felt then that we must do all in our power to prevent
         anything like the events of that appalling day happening again.


         3.       A Public Inquiry by Lord Taylor was immediately established. The terms of
         reference of the Inquiry were not only to enquire into the events but to make
         recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events. The Inquiry took
         oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at public hearings during May and June 1989
         and considered many hours of video evidence from different sources. In his interim
         report in August 1989 he found that there were a number of causes for the disaster.
         He did not attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278
         he made clear that:


                   "The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”


        4.        Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January
         1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken
        place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football matches
        have been based largely on those recommendations. Football in this country has
        been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to his wide-
        reaching and soundly based conclusions.



        •1orpnAonidriftjVppO:5
1 8 - JUN. ’ 9 7 (THU) 1 7 : 4 4   ATTORNEY GENERAL               TEL:                               P. 003
      13 JIjN ’37 13‘
                    -16 HOriE OFFICE -F6- 071 273 4284                                    P. 3 / 4




         5.       The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were the subject of inquests
         conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


         6.       An inquest is a fact-finding inquiry to establish answers to four important
         questions. They are:


                   The identity of the deceased


                   The place of death


                   The time and the date of death and


                   How the deceased came by his or her death


         7.       The Coroner's rules require proceedings and evidence to be directed solely at
         finding answers to those questions.


         8.       The jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for those who
         died at Hillsborough was accidental death.


         9.       There was a further investigation conducted by the West Midlands Police,
         supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any
         grounds for criminal proceedings. That investigation also considered whether any
         police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.


         10.      That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the
         scrutiny of all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor
         Inquiry. After that investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public
         Prosecutions, who concluded that no person shoufd be subject to criminal
         proceedings. The Police Complaints Authority decided that the senior officers in
         charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duties. In the
1 8 - JUN. ’ 9 7 (THU) 1 7 : 4 5           ATTORNEY GENERAL                       TEL:                             P. 004
      13 JlJM -97 13:16 HOME OFFICE -F8- 0?1 273 4284                                                   p .j   j




         event. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired due to HI health in advance of a
         ruling by a disciplinary tribunal. The Police Complaints Authority later decided that
         disciplinary proceedings against Mr Duckenfield’s deputy should be withdrawn
         because the retirement of Mr Duckenfield meant that what, in effect, was a joint
         allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
         senior officer,


          11.        It is well known that some of the families of those who died were unhappy
         with the verdict of the inquest. They later applied for judicial review of the coroner’s
         proceedings. During the judicial review proceedings the conduct of the inquest was
         subjected to close and detailed examination.                      The court ruled that none of the
         matters raised in the judicial review proceedings justified intervention by the court in
         the verdict of the inquest. X ^ sl-                  c -o ^ -V   «*-«*                                    s,


         12.        The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to
         exceptionally thorough investigation on several occasions.                        But concerns have
         remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
         Hillsborough victims. I know that they believe passionately that there are unresolved
         issues which should be investigated further.


          13.        Representations have been made to me and my predecessor, to the Attorney
         General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions.                             A Granada television
         programme in December dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues
         which, in the view of the programme makers, presented new evidence about the
         disaster.          Since that time further material has been submitted on behalf of the
         Hillsborough Family Support Group.                         Those representations have related in
         particular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of
         death of the victims.


          14.        My department, the office of the Attorney General and the Crown Prosecution
         Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which has been put forward




         r appu>lici)^dnruioiM )i3:pdd«c
 1 8 - J U N .' 9 7 (THU) 1 7 : 4 5      ATTORNEY GENERAL                                           TEL:                                          P. 005
         13 JUN '97 13=17 HOME: OFFICE -F8- 0?1 273 4284                                                                                 ■j




           in recent months. We have been unable to find anything which we consider would
           have materially affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster.


           15.        Much of the evidence which has been put forward concerns matters which
           were fully addressed by the previous investigations. For example, the Granada
           television programme suggested that there were ten unresolved questions about the
           disaster. I am satisfied that alt those ten questions were fully considered by the
           Taylor Inquiry, and in relation to eight of them specific recommendations were made
           -Si

         * 16.       I have not so far received any evidence which would lead me to conclude that
'x y '     a new public inquiry should be established.                                         Similarly, the Director of Public
           Prosecutions considers that none of the material which has been made available
          .would justify fresh criminal investigations. The Attorney General tntret a lim iln r
          • ;            O-                    Ss.
           view^f»-relation to tae possibility of applying to the High Court for a new inquest-*-r«^>
                                      V A - B k is V io   ^ r© l (\*-*5 r       <4*    J Vi-               v       ,


           17.       However, I want to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and
           that we do not come to a conclusion without a full and independent examination of
           the evidence.                                                 \er                                   A       w      W

                                                                                                V
           18.       The Attorney General, the director of Public Prosecutions and I have
           therefore agreed that tho -roprosont^tiofto which -have- been put forward should be
           oubjcot to independent scrutinv/w e are therefore appointing Lord Justice Stuart -
           e ...                                                         VV»«A- pw >j s^Jk .
           bmith. a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal.                 fa ■ ^ „nilnfrlt
           evujpnrt* and tn rppnrt .tn- i-fe                   His terms of reference are: [frt                            inmrttvri nftrr
                                                                  /N r      ^


           agreement botwooa Minictorat                                     j^ p ^ ,                                                         ^   'k.G.'v


           19.      We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
          evidence which has been submitted.                                He will also consider any further material
          which interested parties wish to submit. There will be an opportunity for interested
          parties to make representations to him if he considers that necessary to enable him
          to form a view. His task will be fo provide advice on the basis of his Independent




          >'cwiKhou'dn/wppyjjiBitoe
1 8 - J U N . ' 9 7 (THU) 1 7 : 4 6         ATTORNEY GENERAL                                TEL:                                  P. 006
      1 3 JIJN     -9 7    13= 1 7 HOME O F F IC E - F 0 - 0 ? l    273 4284
                                                                                                                           •°K
                                                               S>■ -vc              (                                   'O <0. JV»-.VU
                                        ^     <3_» 'cS                    J&Uf                            C^_
                                                         J
                                                          -v                   *
          consid©ration of the evidsncsx This will not^be a Public Inquiry.                                         However;""I
          undertake to make public the advice which he                                             tKrtf ♦f?mr nf


          20.         I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively thal no
          material evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the disaster.




                                                                                   tvW6*^
       V \^          C K f
                                                                   / f




        r:-.iOTu■hoiv'dra!WypO;.'’jxl Jac
19-Feb-98 12:03A CPS CENTRAL                   CASEWORKCCP                0171   273       8050               p.oi
  18/Q? ’98 12:35 Ol?l 273 4284                 Home Office OPPlI — >92738450                        ECM Pg. 01/05
 i
                                              C c.   ~) u it A * 4

                                                                                                  £ 2 ^
                                                     L               Ww
                                                                                               DRAFT 3
                                                                                    18 February 1998 10:13



                                    H O M E SECRETARY’S STATEMENT O N

                                          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                                        W EDNESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1998




            W ith permission Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statemenc about the
           H illsborough Stadium disaster.



           2       Few events in recent years have touched the lives o f so many people. The kmil.Vc
           and friends o f the 96 Liverpool fans who died on 15 April 1989 have suffered
           immeasurably. The whole nation was profoundly disturbed by what occurred that day.

       -                *s now ^ most        Y * n su*c* that fateful da^ maiiy o f the families and others
                        ,evidence was available which would cast new j e t t o n these events. A s H om e
           Secretary, I was determined to do all I could to establish if that was indeed the case.


           3      O n com ing into office in May I gave this question intense consideration, an<J on

           30 June 1 9 9 7 ,1 announced to the House that the Attorney General and I had decided to

           appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal to conduct
           an independent scrutiny o f this matter. His terms of reference were:



                  To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
                  Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:



                  (a)    to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                  (b)    to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the purpose
                         o f discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
19-F e b -98   12:03A CPS          CENTRAL       CASEWORKCCP             0171     273 805 0                  P. 02
 18/02,'98 12:36     0171 273 4284               Home Office OPPU      -->92738450                   ECM Pg. 02/05




                     (c)    to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                            disciplinary matters;


                            and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available

                            is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary o f State for
                            the Hom e Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b)
                            and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by
                            them which may be relevant to their respective duties;             and to advise
                            whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
                            interest.



           4        Lord Justice Smart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
           today.



           5        H is scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and detailed examinations o f the

        : v ^ f ^ c e in this case. The public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered
      - -. ' fully the causes o f the disaster and made wide-ranging recommendations about crowd
           control and safety at sports events- These have had a profound effect on both crowd safety
           at football grounds and on the policing o f football matches.



          6         The deaths which occurred were also the subject o f inquests w hich were conducted
          by the Coroner for the Western District o f South Yorkshire in two parts in April and May
           1990 and between Novem ber 1990 and March 1991. They involved over 80 day* o f public
          hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised
          by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for

          criminal or disciplinary proceedings/ That investigation involved the taking o f more than
          5000 statements. At      a later   stage in November 1993, there was     a judicial review of   the
          coroner’s proceedings, which upheld the inquest verdict o f accidental death and the
          conduct o f those proceedings. We have now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior
          Lord Justice o f Appeal.




                                                           2
-90 12:0 3 A CPS CENTRAL CASEWORKCCP                          0171 273 805 0                       P.03
98 12*36    0171 273 4284             Home Office OPPU     -” >9273845D                EUH Hg. UJ/U3




   7       The main causes o f the disaster hive long been dear.     They were identified by

   Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to a
   single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that “the main reason for the
   disaster w « the failure o f police control".    The South Yorkshire police have in turn
   accepted the main share of responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield Wednesday Football
   Club and the Local Authority were also criticised by Lord Taylor.



   8       W ith any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that over the course o f tim e some
   n e w inform ation may become available.      But that does not necessarily mean that the
   outcom e o f any previous inquiries would have been different had this information been
. available. What is crucial is not just whether the Information is new, but also whether it is

   o f such significance • to use the phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new
   inquiry.



  9        Lord Justice Scuart-Smith considered in great detail all the evidence w hich has been
   put to him . This included all the relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and

  inquest. H e has looked equally rigorously at all the information presented to him , by

  individuals and official bodies including those representing the families o f those w ho died,
  and others w ho have acted is support of them.           H e has produced a thorough and
  comprehensive report. H is clear conclusion, however, is that there is n o basis on which
  there should be a further public inquiry. H e also Ends no basis for a renewed application

  to quash the verdict of the inquest, or any material which should be put before the
  Director o f Public Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to

  re-consider ihe decisions they have already taken. He concludes that none o f the evidence
  w hich he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence w hich was
  available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.


  10       I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s

  report very carefully. We have no reason to believe that his conclusions are wrong. This
  w ill, I know , be deeply disappointing for the families of those w ho died at Hillsborough
  and many w ho have campaigned on their behalf.




                                                3
           .1 1        I fully understand chit those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough may feel betrayed

             by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state o f the
             ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which resulced from the Taylor
             Inquiry should mean that such a disaster w ill never be repeated.


             12        But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough families.

             A s Lord Justice Scuart-Smith says in chapter 7 o f his report,



                       “1 understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held
                       to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent
                       o f losing their job*.



             13        There are serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system.        The H om e
            Affairs Com m ittee produced a report earlier this year which makes recommendations for
            chaage.        1 w ill be responding fully to that report soon.       But whac happened after
            Hillsborough is a prime example of why w e have to improve the current arrangements.


            14        Lord Justice Snurt-Smith also comments on the coroner’s proceedings after a major

            disaster, which has been subject to a public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation o f a
            H om e Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests, published in March 1997, that the

            role o f the coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.


             15       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally difficult task
            which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I

            think, unnecessary burden on him when the Taylor Report had covered substantially the
            same ground. Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its present
            form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind. If no inquest had been
            necessary, the Taylor inquiry, which all have accepted as an excellent report, w ould then

            have remained unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.




             SlaWTwntrltttltt                                   4

                            0508    e/LZ    T/LTO     d O O * * O I« 3 S X O           SdO    ^ 0   =2 1   86-q ® J   61
■frO * d
             I therefore agree La principle with Lord Justice Scuart-Smith’s recommendations
    that there should rarely be the need for an inquest following a judicial inquiry into a major
_ * disaster.


    17      When I established the scrutiny I said that 1 would do my best to ensure that the

    evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart*Smith was published.            Most o f the main
    material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report. Much of
   the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain, consisting of
   transcripts o f public hearings or material considered by the Taylor Inquiry. I am arranging

   for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuarc-Smith to be placed in the Library of
   the H ouse.


    18      A ll Honourable Members w ill have the most profound sympathy w ith the families

   and friends o f those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend
  . what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


 *' ' v     * I realise that my report and advice w ill come as a disappointment to them ,
             especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could be
             done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look

            dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of

            the evidence which had previously been considered*.


   19       I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions must consider
   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report, in the same light. I recognise that it w ill be difficult and

   painful for the families o f those w ho died to accept the conclusions o f this report. But

   having established this rigorous judicial scrutiny I must accept its conclusions.




   Stm m sntftfiis                                 5


                0 5 0 8 SZ.2 IZ.IO       d0 3> RJ O M 3 S \ 0 "1V*J.LN30 S d O Vt/O-ZT 8 6
       \ '9? 13=15 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                 P. 1 4




                Paul Pugh                      cc: Tim Middleton LAB
                Head of Operational Policing       Ed Owen
                Policy Unit                        Peter Edmundson
                Room 539                           Stephen Wooler (LSLO - by fax)
                Queen Anne’s Gate
                « 0171-273-3141
                13 June 1997




Julian Walker

HILLSBOROUGH

Here is a first draft of an oral statement for you to work on. On present plans I would
like to get a draft to the Home secretary for next weekend. I am out of the office
Monday - Wednesday, but Peter Edmundson should be able to field any comments
in my absence.




                                          PAUL PUGH




t':\oppu\liciu\rmsc\pp0236pil doc
13 JIJH '97 13:15 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                           -                  F'.2 -i




  DRAFT:               13 JUNE 1997




  DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT FOR THE HOME SECRETARY




  With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
  Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


  2.         It is now more than eight years since the disaster on 15 April 1989. But no
  one who saw the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those
  terrible events. For those who lost loved members of their family, the memories are
  even more painful.                  We all felt then that we must do all in our power to prevent
  anything like the events of that appalling day happening again.


  3.         A Public Inquiry by Lord Taylor was immediately established. The terms of
  reference of the Inquiry were not only to enquire into the events but to make
  recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events. The Inquiry took
  oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at public hearings during May and June 1989
  and considered many hours of video evidence from different sources. In his interim
  report in August 1989 he found that there were a number of causes for the disaster.
  He did not attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278
  he made clear that:


              "The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”


  4.         Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January
  1990 made a further 76 recommendations.                    The developments which have taken
  place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football matches
  have been based largely on those recommendations. Football in this country has
  been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to his wide-
  reaching and soundly based conclusions.




  * 'opp u\ho \ndrafts\pp0272pd.doc
•13 JIJN '97 13:iS HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                           P .3-'4




  5.           The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were the subject of inquests
  conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


  6.           An inquest is a fact-finding inquiry to establish answers to four important
  questions. They are:


               The identity of the deceased


              The place of death


               The time and the date of death and


               How the deceased came by his or her death


  7.          The Coroner’s rules require proceedings and evidence to be directed solely at
  finding answers to those questions.


  8.           The jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for those who
  died at Hillsborough was accidental death.


  9.           There was a further investigation conducted by the West Midlands Police,
  supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any
  grounds for criminal proceedings. That investigation also considered whether any
  police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.


   10.         That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the
  scrutiny of all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor
   Inquiry.         After that investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public
   Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
   proceedings.               The Police Complaints Authority decided that the senior officers in
   charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duties.               In the



   f 'Oppa\h<W,tlrj<Vipp0232pd.dot:
13 JIJN '97 13=18 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284
                                                                                      P .44




  event. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired due to ill health in advance of a
  ruling by a disciplinary tribunal. The Police Complaints Authority later decided that
  disciplinary proceedings against Mr Duckenfield’s deputy should be withdrawn
  because the retirement of Mr Duckenfield meant that what, in effect, was a joint
  allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
  senior officer.


  11.          It is well known that some of the families of those who died were unhappy
  with the verdict of the inquest. They later applied for judicial review of the coroner's
  proceedings. During the judicial review proceedings the conduct of the inquest was
  subjected to close and detailed examination.            The court ruled that none of the
  matters raised in the judicial review proceedings justified intervention by the court in
 the verdict of the inquest.


  12.         The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to
 exceptionally thorough investigation on several occasions.            But concerns have
 remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
 Hillsborough victims. I know that they believe passionately that there are unresolved
 issues which should be investigated further.


 13.          Representations have been made to me and my predecessor, to the Attorney
 General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions.                A Granada television
 programme in December dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues
 which, in the view of the programme makers, presented new evidence about the
 disaster.            Since that time further material has been submitted on behalf of the
 Hillsborough Family Support Group.               Those representations have related in
 particular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of
 death of the victims.


 14.         My department, the office of the Attorney General and the Crown Prosecution
 Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which has been put forward




 !''.oppu\hou\drafLi\pp023_pd.doc
13 JUN ’97 13:17 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                           P .5 -'4




  in recent months. We have been unable to find anything which we consider would
  have materially affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster.


  15.          Much of the evidence which has been put forward concerns matters which
  were fully addressed by the previous investigations. For example, the Granada
  television programme suggested that there were ten unresolved questions about the
  disaster.           I am satisfied that all those ten questions were fully considered by the
  Taylor Inquiry, and in relation to eight of them specific recommendations were made.


  16.          I have not so far received any evidence which would lead me to conclude that
 a new public inquiry should be established.                Similarly, the Director of Public
 Prosecutions considers that none of the material which has been made available
 would justify fresh criminal investigations.           The Attorney General takes a similar
 view in relation to the possibility of applying to the High Court for a new inquest.


 17.          However, I want to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and
 that we do not come to a conclusion without a full and independent examination of
 the evidence.


 18.          The Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have
 therefore agreed that the representations which have been put forward should be
 subject to independent scrutiny. We are therefore appointing Lord Justice Stuart -
 Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, to consider all the available
 evidence and to report to us.              His terms of reference are: [to be inserted after
 agreement between Ministers.]


 19.          We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
 evidence which has been submitted.                He will also consider any further material
 which interested parties wish to submit. There will be an opportunity for interested
 parties to make representations to him if he considers that necessary to enable him
 to form a view. His task will be to provide advice on the basis of his independent




 i '''oppmhomdnittsVppO jH 2pd.doc
3 JUN ’97 13:l<" HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4234




  consideration of the evidence.         This will not be a Public Inquiry.    However, I
  undertake to make public the advice which he gives under this terms of reference.


 20.          I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively that no
 material evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the disaster.




W DDu.ho»'drafu'.pp02J2pd.doc
                                                                      C.P-S. HEADQUARTB85
                                                                          PRIVATE OFFICE
                                                                     ^ .     RECEIVED:
 C L A S S IF IC A T IO N , if any
                                                                         13 m      1997

                                                                   COPIES TO:
 To:           Private Secretary to the Director o f Public P r o se c u tio n s/^ ^ -

 From:         Stephen W ooler, LSLO


 Our Ref:

                                                                              CPS CENTRAL CASEWORK
 Please find attached copy letter/fiSte-dated     (.       Z.                         CCP
                                                                                   U 1UN 1997

To:                                                                              r e c e iv e d


From                                                                            h<r


                                                                                              <
                                                                                            •3 .6
The following distribution within CPS/SFO is suggested:

                                                                       CPS CENTRAL CASEWORK
                                                                               CCP
                                                                          13 J U N 19 9 7
Please also distribute to others known to have an interest              RECEIVED




No other copies o f this letter have gone to CPS/SFO




Special instructions/comments:
                           The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP

                                                                 9 B U C K I N G H A M GA T E

                                                                    L O N D O N S W 1 E 6 JP




 The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
 Secretary of State for the Home Department
 Home Office
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 LONDON SW1H9AT

  10 Ju n e 1997




THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Thank you for your letter of 5 Ju n e 1997 outlining the considerations which
have led you to conclude that we should initiate an independent examination
of the alleged new evidence because this appears to be the only way to allay
public concern.

I have no difficulty in principle with your approach. There undoubtedly
remains deep rooted dissatisfaction amongst the relatives of those who died as
well as some of the survivors and their relatives about the manner in which the
public authorities conducted themselves at the material time. They have
manifested themselves in calls for official action which, even if acceded to.
would in all probability not then address the concerns. For example, a further
inquest - which can only be ordered by the High Court - would have to
consider the statutory issues prescribed by the Coroners Act 1988 and could
not properly become a wide ranging or generalised enquiry.

But I do have difficulty with the draft Terms of Reference. They do not
distinguish adequately between the question of a further public enquiry which
is properly a matter of political judgment and the questions of a further
inquest or possible prosecution which have to be addressed on a quasi-judicial
basis and according to established criteria. We start from a position where
there is nothing to suggest that the Director of Public Prosecutions and my
predecessor have failed properly to consider, in accordance with the relevant
tests, all the evidence which has been made available to them. The sole issue
therefore in relation to questions about further inquests or prosecution is
whether there is any evidence which has not already been considered.
Moreover, consideration of that further evidence would be a m atter for the DPP
or myself as appropriate. It would for a number of reasons be wrong for a
public enquiry to express a view, for example, on possible criminal charges.
Ar./OtXJH/ 1
Statutory responsibility for these decisions rests with myself and the DPP. We
m ust not let our discretion be fettered or pre-empted. Any recommendation
of a public enquiry would create an almost irresistible pressure: this scenario
could not properly be compared with the taking of private legal advice from
counsel. In relation to the prosecution issue the publicly expressed views of
a High Court judge about prosecution would be likely to cany such weight that
they might be regarded as making a fair trial impossible.

In these circumstances, I enclose a suggested revised wording for the Terms
of Reference. If you are intending to proceed as envisaged. I would be content
for Lord Justice Stewart Smith to be appointed.




                               JOHN MORRIS




AC./WKW/ 1
     -UGGESTED TERMS OF REFERENCE


   To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
   Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


   (a)       to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor: or


   (b)        to the Director of Public Prosecution or the Attorney General for the
             purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities:


  (c)        to the chief officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
             discipline matter:


  and in relation to (a) above to advise whether any evidence not previously
  available is of such significance as to justify establishment of a further public
 inquiry and. in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence
 not previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
 duties.




SW/JKMMS/5
lo-MAl 97ITUE) 16:14               ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                                                                          P. 002

                                                      THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                        ATTORNEY GENERALS CHAMBERS

                                                                                     9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

 Ganeral anqulries 0171-826 715S                                                        LONDON SW1E 6JP
 Direct line       cn 7 i-s2 S

                                                                         A -tV 'ss S A c x r p /z /T ^
      Dame Barbara Mills QC
      Director of Public Prosecutions                                    t o Q'/SCX^SS               «
      Crown Prosecution Service                                                  y ..Q - • « - a . .p . ^      .

      Headquarters                                             C.P.S. HEADQUARTERS
                                                                  PRIVATE OFFICE
      50 Ludgate Hill                                                 RECEIVED:
      LONDON EC4M7EX                                          :.V f
                                                               - ■■ 4   13 MAY 1997
       13 May 1997                                                                         |ven   AV/-
                                                            COPES TO:




      H IL L SB O R O U G H

      The Attorney General has asked me to thank you for your letter of 9 May 1997
      which, together with its enclosures, outlined and explained your view that you
      should now advise the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that the further
      information provided by the Hillsborough Families Support Group does not
      justify reopening the police investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.
      The Attorney General is content to endorse that view. He has, however, asked
      me to pass on some points relating to the proposed handling.
     The first point relates to the relationship between your decision and questions
     relating to the inquest. The position in relation to the latter is that there is no
     outstanding decision so far as the Attorney General is concerned. Applications
     under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 have been considered in the past
     and refused. There was also, as you are aware, an unsuccessful application
     for judicial review of the coroners decision. There has been no formal
     application under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 since the ITV
     documentary drama "Hillsborough" was broadcast. The previous Attorney
     General undertook in correspondence with interested members of Parliament
     that there would be liaison with the Home Office to ascertain whether any of
     the material generated in response to the inquiries which the Home Secretary
     had initiated would in any way have influenced his earlier decisions. That was
     done and the then Attorney General concluded in March that there was no
     such material. My letter of 14 March 1997 to Dm Sharpling refers. The
     Attorney General was able to reach a conclusion more quickly than the Home
     Office or the CPS because the issues which fall properly to be considered in
     relation to the inquest are much narrower.

      SW /1305M
13-MAY.’ 9 7 (TUE) 1 6 : 1 5   ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                          TEL:                            P. 0 03




       The question of announcements and handling therefore needs to take account
       only of the position of the CPS and the Home Office. Your decision has rightly
       been taken independently of Home Office consideration of the request for a
       further public inquiry but the communicating of that decision will need to take
       account of the position which has been reached. My understanding is that the
       Home Secretary received a submission from his officials in his last weekend
       box and (as of yesterday) had not responded. Advice from officials within the
       Home Office remains unchanged but it may be that the new Home Secretary
       is more sympathetic than his predecessor. In the event that he were minded
       to announce a public inquiry, it might be sensible to let that go first and for
       you then to say that you did not consider there to be any grounds for a further
       criminal investigation at this stage but the position could, if appropriate, be
       considered further in the light of any further evidence emerging as the result
       of the inquiry. On the other hand, if it appears that the Home Secretary is
       unlikely to make a decision in the near future, or that the decision is to be
       against the holding of a public inquiry, then it would be right for you to
       proceed with an announcement which ought, in the circumstances, to be quite
       low key.

       Finally, you raised the possibility of a joint meeting between the HFSG. Home
       Office, e r e and this office. Whilst the Attorney General has every sympathy
       for those who lost relatives in the disaster, the point has now been reached
       where careful explanations have been given over the years and, certainty so far
       as the inquest is concerned, there has been full ventilation of the issue before
       the Divisional Court. Given that there is no prospect of any good coming out
       of such a meeting, let alone the HFSG now accepting explanations which they
       had previously rejected, the Attorney General would not welcome the
       involvement of his office in a meeting which might serve only as a gratuitous
       invitation to reopen the question of a further application to the High Court
       under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. He accepts, of course, that the
       Home Office and the CPS must be free to handle the issue as they think fit.
       If I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.

           o
               I o




       S J WOOLER
I T - J U N . ' 9 7 (WED) 1 0 : 5 4     ATTORNEY GENERAL                TEL: 0                                   P. 001

                                                                                            2 SY§




                                                                                                 M sS

                                                                                                 h   t r




                                      FAX TRANSMISSION                                          “f a r c J j u k / h a . c jl
                                                                                                            fX    ,
                                                                                                           c *o < ^
                                      Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
                 Attorney General’s Chambers, 9 Buckingham Gate
                                                   London SW1E 6JP

                                         TEL:
                                         FA X :


         TO:

         ORGANISATION:                         J3SL
         FACSIM ILE NO:

         FROM:                           S T E PH E N W OOLER

         SUPPLEM ENTARY M ESSAGE:




        PATE:          m A ?              TIM E:      //- S T   No. OF P A C E S :      3_______
                                                                                     (including this one)
        Hard copy to follow:               Y I^ N O
l l - JUN. ’ 9 7 (WED) 1 0 : 5 4   ATTORNEY GENERAL                  TEL                     P. 002



                                              The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP

                                                                             9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                              LONDON SW1E 6JP


            0171-828 1884

            The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
            Secretaiy of State for the Home Department
            Home Office
            50 Queen Anne's Gate
            LONDON SWIH9AT
             10 June 1997




            T H E H IL L SB O R O U G H STA D IU M D ISA ST E R

           Thank you for your letter of 5 June 1997 outlining the considerations which
           have led you to conclude that we should initiate an independent examination
           of the alleged new evidence because this appears to be the only way to allay
           public concern.

           I have no difficulty in principle with your approach. There undoubtedly
           remains deep rooted dissatisfaction amongst the relatives of those who died as
           well as some of the survivors and their relatives about the manner in which the
           public authorities conducted themselves at the material time. They have
           manifested themselves in calls for official action which, even if acceded to,
           would in all probability not then address the concerns. For example, a further
           inquest - which can only be ordered by the High Court - would have to
           consider the statutoiy issues prescribed by the Coroners Act 1988 and could
           not properly become a wide ranging or generalised enquiry.

          But I do have difficulty with the draft Terms of Reference. They do not
          distinguish adequately between the question of a further public enquiry which
          is properly a matter of political judgment and the questions of a further
          inquest or possible prosecution which have to be addressed on a quasi-judicial
          basis and according to established criteria. We start from a position where
          there is nothing to suggest that the Director of Public Prosecutions and my
          predecessor have failed properly to consider, in accordance with the relevant
          tests, all the evidence which has been made available to them. The sole issue
          therefore in relation to questions about further in     quests or prosecution
          is whether there is any evidence which has not already been considered.
          Moreover, consideration of that further evidence would be a matter for the DPP
          or myself as appropriate. It would for a number of reasons be wrong for a
          public enquiry to express a view, for example, on possible criminal charges.
          AG/0906/1
H - J U N . ' 9 7 (WED) 1 0 : 5 5   ATTORNEY GENERAL             TEL:                         P. 0 03




            Statutory responsibility for these decisions rests with myself and the DPP. We
            must not let our discretion be fettered or pre-empted. Any recommendation
            of a public enquiry would create an almost irresistible pressure: this scenario
            could not properly be compared with the taking of private legal advice from
            counsel. In relation to the prosecution issue the publicly expressed views of
            a High Courtjudge about prosecution would be likely to cany such weight that
            they might be regarded as making a fair trial impossible.

            In these circumstances, I enclose a suggested revised wording for the Terms
            of Reference. If you are intending to proceed as envisaged. I would be content
            for Lord Justice Stewart Smith to be appointed.




                                                   JOHN MORRIS




          A 0/0 !i0 6/1
y U N .'9 7 (T H (j) 12:16         ATTORNEY GENERAL
         •9 7   12:28        FAX
                                                                                TEL
 12>                                                                                                                              p. 001

                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                    1
                                                                                              C.P.S. KfiADQUAfTTEnw
                                                                                                  PRIVATE OFFICE
                                                                                                     RHCE i VED:


                                                       2-4 Cocbpur Sweec                           12   m mi
                                                       London SW1Y 5DH
                                                    Telephone: 0171-211 6301
                                                                                          com
                                                     Facsimile: 0171-211 6249
                                           From (he Secretary 0/ Statefor National Heritage



          C 97/05352/02861


          The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP                                                                             / - t , r £ jl ^ - ^   u   Ax [
          Home Secretary
          Home Office
          Queen Anne's Gate
          London                                                                                                    <■
          SW 1H 9A T                                                                                     i£ J u n e 1 9 9 7


                                     x

          THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

          Thank you for copying me your letter of 5 June to the Attorney General setting out
          your proposals for an independent examination into the alleged new evidence
          concerning the Hillsborough disaster.

          Such an examination would seem to be a sensible way of addressing continuing
          public concern. I have no objections either to your proposed terms of reference or
          to your preference for a judge to lead the examination.

  >        Copies of this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Lord
           Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister Without Portfolio, the
           Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and Sir Robin 8utier.




                                                                                         (     U

                                                                                THE RT HON CHRIS SMITH MP




                                                                               CCP
                                                                           12 JIM 1997

                                                                        RECEIVED
1 8 - J U N . ' 9 7 (THU) 1 7 : 4 3   ATTORNEY GENERAL                                          P. 001




                                 FAX TRANSMISSION
                       Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
                Attorney General’s Chambers, 9 Buckingham Gate
                                London SW1E 6JP

                                      TE L:
                                      FAX:

        TO:

        ORGANISATION:

        FACSIMILE NO:                              27$

        FROM:                         STEPHEN W OOLER

        SUPPLEMENTARY MESSAGE:




       DATE:_                          TIME: _           No. OF PAGES:         (&        __
                                                                         (including this one)
       Hard copy to follow:             YES/NO
                                                 THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                              ATTORNEY GENERALS CHAMBERS

                                                                          9   BUCKINGHAM GATE

General enquiries 0 1 7 1 -8 2 8 7155
                                                                              LONDON SW1E 6JP
Direct line          0 1 7 1 -8 2 8


        Miss Dru Sharpling
        CPS Central Casework
        Crown Prosecution Service
        Headquarters                                              CCP
        50 Ludgate Hill                                        IB JUN ^
        LONDON EC4M7EX
                                                             r e c e iv e d
         13 June 1997




        H ILLSBO R O U G H

        Since we spoke this morning, I have received the attached note from Paul Pugh
        covering the first draft of an oral statement which the Home Secretary would
        wish to make. It is clear that nothing will happen next week but possibly the
        week after.
         My first impression is that the draft statement is close to the mark but
         paragraphs 17 to the end will need some revision to make it clear that, so far
         as the Attorney General and the DPP are concerned, the purpose of the
         exercise will not be to review decisions already taken but to ascertain whether
         there is any further evidence which has not already been considered by the
         appropriate decision-maker.
         I would welcome a word. I would hope that we can agree a joint
         response/commentary on the draft speech.




         S W / 1 3 0 6/7
You will note that the point relating to the terms of reference is left open.

A copy of this letter goes to Amanda Illing (CPS Private Office).



        \




             \
            J
S J WOOLER




S W / 1 3 0 6/7
                                           H IL L S B O R O U G H


                            Q U E S TIO N S A N D A N S W E R S U M M A R Y


Following the Home Secretary’s announcement on Hillsborough given in the House of
Commons on the 1st July 1997, there were a number of members questions which were
answered as summarised below:-


1              Question:   Given the urgency (re families/police) what is the timetable and start
                           date of the enquiry?       *


               A nsw er:   S ubject to a C o u rt o f A ppea l case, L o rd Justice S tu a rt-S m ith w ill
                           read papers be fo re th e end o f J u ly and w ill s ta rt th e e n q u iry in
                           Septem ber.


2              Question:   Will the Home Secretary publish all the evidence which Lord Justice
                           Stuart-Smith’s advice is based?


               A nsw er:   W ill do best to so ensure, b u t some evidence cannot be p u b lish ed
                           a t th e same tim e as th e advice.


3              Question:   Re further material, will it be examinable in public and can those
                           affected respond to it before the enquiry results are made known?


               A nsw er:   A response can be m ade b u t L o rd Justice S tu a rt-S m ith is to decide
                           procedure.


               Question:   Can Parliamentary Debate take place after Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
                           investigation?


               A nsw er:   The m a tte r o f a debate w ill be discussed w ith th e Shadow Hom e
                           S ecretary.




M M S /3 5 0 .9 7
                 oral
Question:   Will     representations be allowed to the enquiry and will there be
            financial assistance for the Hillsborough Family Support Group?


A nsw er:   T he costs o f tra v e l o f witnesses w ill be m et, th e m a tte r o f legal
            re p re se n ta tio n has n o t been discussed w ith th e fa m ilie s?


Question:   Will the Home Secretary confirm that the re-opening of police
            disciplinary proceedings is unlikely?


A nsw er:   T h a t is a n tic ip a tin g L o rd Justice S tu a rt-S m ith ’ s e n q u iry , I w ill n o t
            do th a t.


Question:   Will Lord Justice Stuart-Smith consider in detail the lessons to be
            learnt re policing etc.


A nsw er:   I do n o t a n tic ip a te th a t th e y can be, th is is th e s c ru tin y o f new
            evidence o n ly, th e re has been no c ritic is m o f th e w id e r issues
            fo llo w in g the T a y lo r E n q u iry .


Question:   The DPP has concluded that there will be no criminal prosecution, is
            Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to make clear what new evidence he is
            considering and why it was not available earlier?


A nsw er:   T he DPP takes th e above view , L o rd Justice S tu a rt-S m ith m ay
            come to a d iffe re n t view , th is is n o t to c ritic is e th e CPS.


Question:   Will the Enquiry consider the Coroner’s Court Procedures and the
            fresh evidence that should have been seen being made available now?


A nsw er:   C om m ent m ade on th e W o rk in g P a rty R e p o rt to C o ro n e r’ s C o u rts
            and th a t L o rd Justice S tu a rt-S m ith w ill lo o k a t th e new allegations
            th a t w ere n o t before th e In q u e st, in c lu d in g tim e o f deaths.


Question:   Will the Home Secretary undertake to consider re-examination of the
            Police Disciplinary Code re officers retiring medically unfit and thus
            avoiding disciplinary proceedings?
A nsw er:     C h ie f C onstables are advised n o t to p e rm it re tire m e n t on i l l h e a lth
              to avoid d is c ip lin a ry proceedings.


Question:     Assurance required that the Home Secretary will keep in mind the
              deep feelings of the families?


A n sw e r:   Yes, th e feelings w ere considered in com ing to th e decision
              reference th e s c ru tin y .


Question:     If the matter goes to public enquiry, we are to consider wider issues?


A nsw er:     C om m ent m ade on th e re being a p ro fo u n d im pro vem e nt in th e fans
              b e h a vio u r since th e T a y lo r E n q u iry , b u t cannot estim ate fu tu re
              term s o f reference, th is s c ru tin y concerns new evidence o n ly .


Question:     Will Terms of Reference extend to past/future governmental support
              for families in their grief, and to consider the disgraceful allegations
              made by others?


A nsw er:     Term s o f R eference are o n ly re new evidence and L o rd Justice
              T a y lo r dism issed those allegations m ade by new spapers, it was th e
              fa ilu re o f the police c o n tro l th a t was th e m a in reason fo r the
              in c id e n t.


Question:     Will new witnesses come forward?


A nsw er:     The H om e S ecretary appeals to these witnesses to come fo rw a rd .


Question:     Will evidence be given on oath?


A nsw er:     N o, b u t L o rd Justice S tu a rt-S m ith ’ s representatio ns w ill be
              considered on th is p o in t.


Question:     Will the Government pay the cost of the Enquiry and pay the costs of
              others?
               A nsw er:   T he C ost o f th e E n q u iry its e lf w ill be p a id as w e ll as witnesses
                           tra v e l costs. T here has been no c a ll so fa r con cerning L egal A id .


17            Question:    Will the question of compensation be re-opened?


              A nsw er:    T he m a tte r o f com pensation does n o t arise re th is s c ru tin y .


18            Question:    Will the enquiry look at events after 15.15 hrs.


              A nsw er:    Yes.


The above is a brief summary only of the question and answer statement, and some questions
which were repetitive have been omitted.




G. Croston
Central Casework
1st July 1997




M M S /3 5 0 .9 7
                                                                                       sm
                                                                                       CPS
                                                                                     Central Casework
                                                                                        United House
  Facsimile,                                                                                Piccadilly
                                                                                       York YOI IPQ

                                                                            Direct Line: I          I

                                                                           Switchboard; VW04-45007Q
                                                                             Facsimile: <|
                                                                                DX No. 65204 York 6
Attention of:   D>Rj         S - ^ u ^ c ,

Address:        C C .P         c S jr e ^ v -    zr& £'*JO Rj<

Fax No:              0171          173           £ 0 5 0

From:            Q       R . C P o s y O ts ]

CPS Division:            f t o c C o T\OnJ >     Kj OPiM

Date;      2 .{ in           Time:        [Si$

This fax transmission consists of this page plus | 0 others

Please acknowledge receipt:


If transmission is not properly received please call 01904-




                     ^        l-W          S tcdbu O             CXK^cW c ^ u ^ u y ^ J c
  piUs\         SuhhOA^ c f Q                   osa   A, a
  DRAFT:              26 JUNE 1997



 DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT FOR THE HOME SECRETARY



 With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
 Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


 2.          96 people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster which
 happened on 15 April 1989. That was more than eight years ago but no one who
 saw the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those terrible
 events. For those who lost loved members of their family, the pain is ever-present.
 Following Hillsborough, members of this House were united in our determination to
do all in our power to prevent anything like that ever happening again.


(i)        Public Inquiry


3.         Madam Speaker, following the Hillsborough disaster a number ofinquiries
and investigations took place, looking at aspects of the tragedy. Perhaps the most
thorough and wide-ranging was the Public Inquiry led by Lord Taylor. The terms of
reference of that Inquiry encompassed not only inquiring into the events but also
making recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.


4.         Lord Taylor’s inquiry took oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at     public
hearings during May and June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence
from different sources. In his interim report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that
the disaster had a number of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to a single
cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made clear that:


            “The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”




f:\oppu\hou\dnfts\pp0232pd. doc
  I«\ I           LfiigAM. tyteffc
5. ^        Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January
1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken
place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football matches
have been based largely on those recommendations. Football in this country has
been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to his wide-
reaching and soundly based conclusions.


(ii)      Coroner’s Inquest


6.        The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were the subject of inquests
conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


7.         Madam Speaker, as hon Members will know, an inquest is a fact-finding
inquiry, conducted by a Coroner in front of a jury, and aimed at establishing the
answers to four important questions, namely:


           The identity of the deceased


           The place of death


           The time and the date of death and


           How the deceased came by his or her death.


8.        The Coroner’s rules require proceedings and evidence to be directed solely at
finding answers to those questions.


9.        The jury at the Coroner’s inquest after examining     the evidence, found in
March 1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was
accidental death.




f:\oppu\hou\drans\pp0232pd.doc
 (iii)       West Midlands Police Investigation


 10.         A further investigation was           conducted by the      West Midlands Police,
 supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any
 grounds for criminal proceedings and to consider whether any police officer should
 be subject to disciplinary proceedings.


 11.         That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the
scrutiny of all thematerial which had previously been                  examined by the Taylor
Inquiry.          After that       investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public
Prosecutions, who                  concluded that no person shouldbe subject to criminal
proceedings.

                                                   dxcK
12.         The Police Complaints Authority/.decide^ that the chief superintendent and
superintendent in charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of
duty. In the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a
ruling by a disciplinary tribunal. A disciplinary hearing cannot proceed when a police
officer retires before the hearing takes place. The Police Complaints Authority later
decided that disciplinary proceedings against the superintendent should be
withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent meant that what, in
effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the
absence of the more senior officer.


(*v)        Continued calls for further investigations


13.         Madam Speaker, hon Members will know that some of the families of those
who died were unhappy with the 5©«5et% the inquest.                      They later applied for
judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings. During the judicial review proceedings
the conduct of the inquest was subjected to close and detailed examination.                  In
November 1993 the Divisional Court ruled that none of the matters raised in the
judicial review proceedings justified intervention by the court in the verdict of the
inquest jury.



f:\oppu\hou\dra fts\pp0232p<Ldoc
 inquest, if ordered would ce^Dlt in <
 (he process would h e j^ ry harrowini


 14.         The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to
 exceptionally thorough investigation on several occasions.               But concerns have
 remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
 Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated by their belief that there are
unresolved issues which should be investigated further.


15.          Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me,
to the Attorney General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions.               A Granada
television programme in December last year dramatised the disaster and raised a
number of issues which, in the view of the programme makers, represented new
evide nce^ Since then further material has been submitted on behalf of the
Hills^0fough Family Support Group.                Those representations have related in
   micular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of
death of the victims.
                                  ckb o Je eJc
16.         Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and the
Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which
has been put forward in recent months.


17 - A I boveyKbwevpfK to telMFte H ous^lhat I h ^v^not s o ia r ideptified evidenpe
w l^b lw o u lc fle a d jite tocdr^ludeHhat a new-public inquiryshWfcJbeWteblWhed
                 the Director of Public Prosecutions takes the review that the material so far
presented to her would not justify fresh criminal investigations.              The/Attorney
General also takes the view that, again on the material so far presented to him, any
application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect
of succeeding.


18.         Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families ojjjfo fh e of those who
died at Hillsborough and many others are very concerned that unresolved issues



f:\oppu\hou\drafts\pp0232pd.doc
   remain.          I am determined to go as far as I can to ensure that no matter of
  significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a full
  and independent examination of the evidence.


  19.        I can therefore tell the H o ^ ^ ^ A g o ^ G e r ^ r a y h e Director of
  Public Prosecutions and I have agreed tha^there should be an independent scrutiny
 to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence relating to thedisaster
 which         was not previously available. We are appointingLord Justice Stuart-Smith, a
 senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose.                    His full terms of
 reference are:


            To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
             Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


                        (a)     To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                        (b)     To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                                for the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
                                responsibilities; or


                       (c)      To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                                police disciplinary matters;


           And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
            is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
           the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
           (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
           which may be relevant to their respective duties; and to advise whether there
           is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.


I am today placing a copy of these terms of reference in the Library.




f:\oppu\hou\dnfts\pp0232pddoc
 20.         We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
 evidence which has been submitted.                 He will also consider any further material
which interested parties wish to submit.J~o                ,


21.          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s task will be twofold. First to advise me whether
any evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify a further full
public inquiry.               His advice to me will be available to the House and the public.
Secondly, he will identify for the Attorney General and the Director of Public
Prosecutions and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence which
might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.


22.         I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively tf^ V io
material                                                       Hillsborough disaster has been
overlooked a n d t a k e action if it has.             For the families of those who died at
Hillsborough the grief will never end. I hope that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s work
will help to allay some of their grief by removing any remaining doubts about the
circumstances in which their loved ones died so tragically.




f:\oppu\hou\drafts\pp0232pd.doc
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                        CPS
                                                                                                        CPS Centred Casework
                                                                                                        50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                        London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                             Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
 r                                                        i                                      jox No: 300850 Ludgate EC4


                                                                              Facsimile: 0171-273    8050

                                                                            Direct Line: 0171- 273   1225

                                                                          Our Reference:


 L                                                        J

                                                                                                30 June 1997




  HILLSBOROUGH

     A lthough we have not corresponded personally in the past, m ay I take this o pportunity to
     express m y deepest sym pathy fo r your tra g ic loss in the H illsborough D isaster.

     O n 9 January 1997 you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills
     Q C , enclosing a copy o f a le tte r you had sent to the then Hom e Secretary, M r H ow ar . n
     the le tte r to M r H ow ard, you asked that the tra g ic events at H illsborough m 1989 be re­
     exam ined because o f the m any unanswered questions you feel are outstanding.

     As you w ill know , the C row n Prosecution Service has been considering very ca re fu lly papers
     and tapes in re la tio n to the disaster. In addition, we examined m aterial supplied by the
     H illsbo roug h F a m ily Support G roup.

     I expect you have heard the announcement by the new Home Secretary that there is to be an
     independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there now exists any evidence w hich was not
     previously available relating to the H illsborough D isaster. The term s o f reference are.

             To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsboro ugh
             Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                       (a)   To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r, o r

                       (b)   To the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney G eneral fo r the
                             purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities; o r

                       (c)    To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                              d iscip lin a ry m atters;




                              Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
         A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is o f
         such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
         D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in re la tio n to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
         th e ir respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action w hich should
         be taken in the p ub lic interest.

I t m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the role o f the CPS in re la tio n to the H illsborough D isaster to
help you put this announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll crim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m in o r offences). The p olice are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding whether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsborough disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a c rim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was su fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
individua ls.

A t th is stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scrutiny, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in w hatever w ay it ean and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
finding s before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope that you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider whether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that this le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




D ru S h a rp lin g (M iss)
C h ie f C row n Prosecutor
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                         CPS
                                                                                                         CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                         50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                         London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                              Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
 r                                                       1                                        DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4

 M r J W Saunders
                                                                             Facsimile: 0171- 273     8050

                                                                           Direct Line: 0171- 2 7 3   1225

                                                                         Our Reference:

 L                                                       J              Your Reference:



                                                                                              30 June 1997




  H IL L S B O R O U G H

  Although we have not corresponded personally in the past, m ay I take the opportunity to
  express m y deepest sym pathy fo r your tragic loss in the H illsborough D isaster.

  In January this year you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills
  Q C , asking that the enquiry in to the tragic events at H illsborough in 1989 be re-opened to
  brin g out the tru th about w hat happened on that day.

  The question w hether there should be another enquiry is a m atter fo r the Hom e Secretary and
  not the C row n Prosecution Service. I expect, however, that you have heard the
  announcement by the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an independent scrutiny to ascertain
  whether there now exists any evidence w hich was not previously available relating to the
  H illsborough D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

           To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsborou gh
           Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                    (a)    To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                    (b)    To the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney General fo r the
                           purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities; o r

                    (c)    To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                           d iscip lin a ry m atters;

           A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is o f
           such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
           D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in rela tion to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir




                            Croum Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
         th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
         be taken in the p u b lic interest.

It m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the role o f the CPS in relation to the H illsboro ugh D isaster to
help you pu t this announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll crim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m in or offences). The police are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding whether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have examined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsbo roug h disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was su fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
individuals.

A t this stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scrutiny, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in w hatever w ay it can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
findings before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope that you w ill be encouraged by the announcem eift made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider whether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that this le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




D ru S h a rp lin g (M iss)
C h ie f C row n Prosecutor
                                                                                                         ram
                                                                                                         CPS
        FAC SMILE
                                                                           Central Casework
                                                                           50 Ludgatc Hill
                                                                           London F.C4M 7F.X
        Attention of

        Address           cfe        c c, \ ( m                            Sw itchboard: 0171-273 8000
                                                                          Facsimile: 0171-273 8050
                                                                          DX No: 300850 Ludgatc EC4
        I;ax No


        From            Dru Sharpling
                        Chief Crown Prosecutor
                        Central Casework


        Dale             2.3.1k                     Time      C l.V \A


        This fax transmission consists o f this page plus    (0          others

        If transmission is not properly received please call 0171- 273 1225



        MESSAGE




                  9             Q>Af l f f^ \




IO *d                  OSOS         UIO         d3 3> iaOM3SV3   “IVyjLN33 S d O        d S O :6 0   i6-un['-ZE
         DRAFT:         23 JUNE 1997




         DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT FOR THE HOME SECRETARY



         With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
         Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


         2.    96 people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster which
         happened on 15 April 1989. That was more than eight years ago but no one who
         saw the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those terrible
         events. For those who lost ioved members of their family, the pain is ever-present.
         Following Hillsborough, members of this House were united in our determination to
         do all in our power to prevent anything like that ever happening again.


         (0    PubHc_lnau>ry



         3.    Madam Speaker, following the Hillsborough disaster anumber of inquiries
         and investigations took place, looking at aspects of the tragedy. Perhaps the most
         thorough and wide-ranging was the Public Inquiry led by Lord Taylor. The terms of
         reference of that Inquiry encompassed not only inquiring into the events but also
         making recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events.


         4.    Lord Taylor's Inquiry took oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at public
         hearings during May and June 1989 and considered many hours of video evidence
         from different sources. In his interim report in August 1989, Lord Taylor found that
         the disaster had a number of causes. He did not attribute all the blame to a single
         cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made clear that:


                "The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control"




                         O
                  fLOppO 232 f»J. Jo e



9 Q ’d           OSOS                    UIO   d33> iy OM 3S V3 “IX/yjLN33 S d 3   d 6 0 :6 0   Z.6-un V ~ LZ.
        5.                Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January
        1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The improvements which have taken
        place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football matches
        have been based largely on those recommendations. Football in this country has
        been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to his wide-
        reaching and soundly based conclusions.


        (ii)            Coroner’s I n q u e s t


        6.                The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were also the subject of inquests
        conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


        7.             Madam Speaker, as hon Members will know, an inquest is a fact-finding
        inquiry, conducted by a Coroner in front of a jury, and aimed at establishing the
        answers to four important questions, namely:


                         the identity of the deceased:


                         the place of death;


                         the time and ihe dale of death; and


                          how the deceased came by his or her death


        8.             7he Coroner’s rules require proceedings and evidence to be directed solely at
        finding answers to these four questions.


        9.             The jury at the Coroner's inquest after examining the evidence, found                 in
        March 1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was
        accidental death.




                                   u
        l';v0jip!i’-hou'>drjf b \ p p o ; 3 : pd, Juc



TO *d                        0508                       TZ.TO   d33>ftdOM3SV3 "IVyj-NSD S d D   dll^SO   Z.6 - u n r - z.2
              (iii)     West Midlands Police investigation


              10.       A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands Police,
              supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any
              grounds for criminal proceedings and to consider whether any police officer should
              be subject to disciplinary proceedings.


              11.       That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the
              scrutiny of all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor
              Inquiry.         After that investigation evidence was sent to the Director of Public
              Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
              proceedings.


              12.       The Police Complaints Authority decided that the chief superintendent and
              superintendent in charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of
              duty. In the event, the chief superintendent retired due to ill health in advance of a
              ruling by a disciplinary tribunal. A disciplinary hearing cannot proceed when a police
              officer retires before the hearing takes place. The Police Complaints Authority later
              decided that disciplinary proceedings against the superintendent should be
              withdrawn because the retirement of the chief superintendent meant that what, in
              effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the
              absence of the more senior officer.




              13.        Madam Speaker, hon members will know that some of the families of those
              who died were unhappy with the verdict of the inquest. They later applied for judicial
              review of the coroner's proceedings.           During the judicial review proceedings the
              conduct of the inquest was subjected to close and detailed examination,                in
              November 1993 the divisional court ruled that none of the matters raised in the
              judicial review proceedings justified intervention by the court in the verdict of the

                                u

              f .oppu\*»©u'4n[U\ppQ2J2pd dec


     z o *d                OSOS         E/.Z I/1IO   d33>i aO M3 SV 3            SdO   dll^SO     £6-unr-£Z
k.
       inquest jury.                 The court also expressed strong doubts as to whether a further
       inquest, if ordered, would result in anything further being learned and observed that
       the process would be very harrowing.


       14.          The events surrounding the Hillsborough disaster have therefore been subject
       to exceptionally thorough investigation on several occasions.               But concerns have
       remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
       Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated by their belief that there are
       unresolved issues which should be investigated further.


       15.          Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to me,
       to the Attorney General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions.                   A Granada
       television programme in December last year dramatised the disaster and raised a
       number of issues which, in the view of the programme makers, represented new
       evidence.               Since then further material has been submitted on behalf of the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group.                   Those representations have related in
       particular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of
       death of the victims.


       16.          Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and the
       Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully ail the evidence which
       has been put forward in recent months.


       17.          I have, however, to tell the House that i have not so far identified evidence
       which would lead me to conclude that a new public inquiry snculd be established.
       Similarly, the Director of Public Prosecutions takes the view that the material so far
       presented to her would not justify fresh criminal investigations.                  The^Attorney
       General also takes the view that, again on the material so far presented to him. any
       application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect
       of succeeding.




                           O
       f.'^ppu\houvdJufLjs\psi0232pd,doc


EO'd                  0308          EZ.Z   IZ .IO   d33>m O M 3SV3   ~lV*dJLN33 S d D   d l l : 60   Z .6 - u n c '-,£ Z
         18.          Nonetheless. I am acutely conscious that the families of some of those who
         died at Hillsborough and many others are very concerned that unresolved issues
         remain.             I am determined to go as far as' I can to ensure that no matter of
         significance is overlooked and that we do not reach a final conclusion without a full
         and independent examination of the evidence.


         19.          I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the Director of
         Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that there should be an independent scrutiny
         to ascertain whether there now exists any new evidence relating to the disaster
         which was not previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart -Smith, a
         senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose.                           His full terms of
         reference are:


               ^T o           ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
                      Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


                                   (a)         To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                                   (b)         To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                                   for         the   purpose   of   discharging    their   respective    statutory
                                   responsibilities; or


                                   (c)          To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                                   police disciplinary matters;


                      And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
                      is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State
                      for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry; and m relation to (b) and
                      (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
                      which which may be relevant to their respective duties: and to advise
                      whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public in te re s t.^ '



                             O
         f:'-oppu'4iuu\<jn>ris\ppQ232pd.di>~


•frO’d                 OSOS           EZ.Z TZ.TO           d3 0> iy0M3SV0                  SdD   d l l :6 0   Z.6 - u n r - Z.Z
             I am today placing a copy of these terms of reference in the Library.


            20.         We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smifh to examine all the written and other
            evidence which has been submitted.                   He w.H also consider any further material
          p i^ in t e r e s t e d parties wish to submit.




            21.        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s task will be twofold. First to advise me whether
           any evidence not previously available is of such significance as to justify a further full
           public inquiry.                His advice to me will be available to the House and the public.
           Secondly, he will identify for the Attorney General and the Director of Public
           Prosecutions and the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police any evidence which
           might be relevant to their decisions which has not previously been considered.


           22.         I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively whether
           any material evidence about the causes of the Hillsborough disaster has been
          overlooked and to take action if it has.                 For the families o f those who died at
          Hillsborough the grief will never end. I hope that Lord Justice Stuart Smith's work will
          help to allay some of their grief by removing any remaining doubts about the
          circumstances in which their loved ones died so tragically.




                               i...)


         C'appuJwavilraftjVppOiJIpd.doc

S O *d                      0508          E/12 U I O     d33> ra aM aSV 3 I V U i N a a   Sd3   dZI=60   /.6-unc-ZZ
        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

        CPS QUESTION AND ANSWER BRIEFING

        LINE TO TAKE:

        The CPS considers that the m ateria) so fa r presented to it w ould not ju s tify fresh c rim in a l
        investigation. H ow ever the CPS w ill reconsider the position i f the scrutiny id e n tifie s any
        evidence that m ight be relevant w hich has not previously been considered.

        Question
        W hat is the CPS ro le in the H illsborough case?

        A jisw e r
        T o ascertain w hether, on the m aterial available, there appears to be any evidence against any
        individua ls w hich m ight be s u fficie n t fo r crim in a l proceedings to be com m enced. I f , on
        exam ination o f the m aterial, su fficie n t evidence is found, the CPS w ill advise the p olice to
        commence a fo rm a l crim in a l investigation, ("m a te ria l" - ie . papers and video tapes).

        Question
        Have you decided w hether there is evidence o f a crim inal nature?

        Answer
        On the m aterial so fa r presented the CPS takes the view that fresh c rim in a l investigations are
        not ju s tifie d but w ill reconsider the position in the lig h t o f the independent scrutin y.

        Question
        when w ill you announce your decision?

        Answ er
        It depends on the outcom e o f the independent scrutiny. I f there is m aterial id e n tifie d to us,
        we w ill, o f course, consider it. It is d iffic u lt to estimate how long this m ig h t take.

        Q uestion
        W ill you re-open the inquest and/or the public enquiry?

        A nsw er
        These are not m atters fo r the CPS. ( If pressed: legal moves to require a second inquest to
        be held d id not succeed. It w ill be fo r the Home Secretary to decide w hether to hold a
        fu rth e r p u b lic enquiry - as outlined in the terms o f reference fo r the independent scru tin y).

        Q uestion
        I f there has not been a crim in a l investigation, how can you be sure you have seen a ll the
        relevant m aterial?




        Louise\H ill.s




frO'd                 OSOS     £ LZ   TZ.TO        d 3 3> ia OM 3S V3 nVblXN33 S d O           d 6 0 :6 0   i6-unV-CZ
         Answer
         W e know w hat m aterial has been subm itted in recent months and w hat m aterial we have seen
         in the past. The independent scrutiny w ill draw to o ur attention any m aterial w hich we have
         not considered and w hich may be relevant to CPS decisions.

         Question
         W hy w ill you not meet the relatives o f the deceased?

         Answ er
         I f the relatives o f the deceased w ould welcom e a separate discussion w ith the CPS at the
         conclusion o f the scrutiny then we w ill meet them .

         Q uestion
         S urely it m ust be in the p u b lic interest to prosecute somebody?

         Answ er
         There are tw o stages in the decision to prosecute. F irs t, we must be satisfied that there is
         enough evidence to provide a “ re a listic prospect o f c o n victio n ". I f the case does not pass
         this e vidential test, it m ust not go ahead, no m atter how im portant o r serious it may be. I f
         a case does pass the evidential test, the C row n Prosecutor m ust then consider the second
         stage test to decide i f a prosecution is in the pu b lic interest. In cases o f any seriousness, a
         prosecution w ill usually take place unless there are pu b lic interest factors tending against
         prosecution w hich clearly outw eigh those tending in favour. The C row n Prosecution S ervice
         w ill o n ly start o r continue a prosecution when the case has passed both tests.

         Q uestion
         W hat allegations have you been considering?

         A nsw er
         It w ould be inappropriate to discuss in d ivid u a l cases o r allegations. S u ffice it to say we are
         keeping the m atter under review .

         Q uestion
         Has the DPP h erself been involved in considering the case?

         A nsw er
         The DPP has been kept inform ed o f key developm ents.




          L o u is e \H ills



                               O



S O ’d                     0508    EZIZ I Z I O     d33»yQW3SV3           -|VfcLLN30 S d 3      d6Q.’6 0     Z:6~un V~LZ.
        Q U E S T IO N A N D A N S W E R B R IE F IN G FO R H O M E O F F IC E

        L IN E T O T A K E :

        The CPS considers that the m aterial so fa r presented to it w ould not ju s tify fresh crim in a l
        investigation. H ow ever the CPS w ill reconsider the position if the scrutiny id e n tifie s any
        evidence that m ight be relevant w hich has not previously been considered.

        Question
        W ill the independent scrutiny be able to advise the CPS to commence crim in a l proceedings?

        A nsw er
        N o, decisions on c rim in a l proceedings are m atters fo r the CPS. The scru tiny w ill draw to
        the attention o f the CPS any evidence not previously considered w hich may be relevant to
        th e ir duties.

        Q uestion
        W hat w ill the CPS do if the scrutiny iden tifies relevant m aterial?

        Answer
        That is a m atter fo r the CPS, and it w ould be w rong to speculate at this stage.

        Q uestion
        W ill you te ll the CPS to prosecute?

        A nsw er
        N o. D ecisions on prosecutions are e n tire ly fo r the prosecuting authorities. It w ould be q uite
        im proper fo r the Hom e Secretary to try to influence prosecution decisions in in d iv id u a l cases.

        Q uestion
        I f the scrutiny finds no fresh evidence, but concludes that m aterial so fa r subm itted ju s tifie s
        c rim in a l proceedings o r fu rth e r enquiry what w ill the CPS do?

        Answ er
        The CPS w ill o f course ca re fu lly consider any view s expressed by the independent scru tin y,
        and take them in to account before reaching a fin a l decision.

        Question
        Is the CPS going to make a separate announcement o f its conclusions?

        A nsw er                                                                           .
        I  am aware that a ll those persons w ho have recently w ritte n to the D ire c to r o f P u blic
        Prosecutions o r the CPS are being sent letters today by the C row n Prosecution Service
        e xp laining m ore fu lly th e ir conclusions at this stage and the assistance they w ill be p ro vid in g
        to the independent scrutiny.




         L o u is e U iills


                              UO



ZO'td                     OSOS     EZ.Z TZ.TO       d3 3 >i aOM3SV3 ~IVyj_N33 S d 3              d 8 0 :60    Z.S-unc'-Z.Z
    p
     4


         Q uestion
         W hy has the CPS w aited u n til now to announce its p re lim in a ry conclusions?

         A nsw er
         I t w ould have been inappropriate to announce the view o f the CPS w h ile the Hom e Secretary
         was considering requests fo r a fu rth e r public enquiry. T o do so m ight have given the
         im pression that no fu rth e r action was contem plated.




         L o u is e \H ills




S O *d                    0308   EZ.2 TZ.TO       d33>ft)OM3SV3 -|V«_LN33 S d 3               d S O -6 0   Z.e-^nc'-Z.Z
                                                                                         fox' C*Uf

From:              Dru Sharpling
To:                dcas.duffg
Date:              26 June 1997 11:32am
Subject:           Hillsborough

Meeting wwith Home Sec.

30 June expected between 10am-midday

Cast of thousands attending.

Home Sec,4 junior ministers, 2 special advisors, 2 press officers, 1 speech writer and the workers- Paul Pugh
(G5 HO) and his HEO and someone from the legal advisers possibly Juliet Wheldon and SWooler invited.

The junior Ministers include Lord Williams, Alun Michael, George Howeth and Mike O'Brien.

The assembled mass will go through the Home Secs announcement, prepare him for interventions on the
constitutional position of the DPP and the chronology of events. If there is room someone will need to go in the
box- suggest you\me and George Croston.

CC:                dcas.harrist, cpshqy.csd2.enzorc
                                              Wome Office
                                              50 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1W 9AT
                                              Telephone: 0171-273 3141
                                              Fax:        0171-273 2703



Police Policy Directorate
Operational P olicin g Policy U n it (OPPU)




With the Compliments o f Paul Pugh
Head o f U n it
  From: Peter Edmundson
                                                        cc     Mr Michael
        Room 527
                                                               Mr O’Brien
         Operational Policing Policy Unit
                                                               Lord Williams
         Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                               Mr Howarth
         0171 273 2621
                                                               Sir Richard W ilson
                                                               HMCIC
         27 June 1997
                                                               Miss Weldon
                                                               Mr Halliday
                                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                                               Mr Granatt
                                                               Mr Middleton
                                                               Miss Loudon
                                                               Mr R Evans
                                                               Mr Edmundson
                                                               Ms Walker
                                                               Ms Clifford
                                                               Mr Warner
                                                               Mr Owen
 M r M ichael        )
                     ) simultaneously
 Home Secretary      )




HILLSBOROUGH: Q & A BRIEFING FROM THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL’S OFFICE: LETTER FROM THE HILLSBOROUGH FAM ILY
SUPPORT GROUP

Further to Paul Pugh’s submission o f 26 June covering the draft announcement and Q
& A briefing, I attach the Q & A material from the Attorney General’s office received
today.



2.    I also attach a copy o f a letter from the Hillsborough Family Support Group
covering a summary o f the matters which the families feel ought to be considered in
any new inquiry, which I undertook to bring to your attention. The reference to an
inquiry is speculation on their part as we have not given them any details o f what w ill
be contained in the announcement on Monday.

3.     There is nothing new in the concerns set out in the attached summary from the
families. Although they w ill be disappointed that you are not, at this stage,
establishing a new public enquiry, they should at least be reassured that there w ill be
an independent scrutiny by a senior judicial figure.




                                                        PETER EDMUNDSON


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PE0021MA.DOC
     HILLSBOROUGH: INQUEST - (ATTORNEY GENERAL INTEREST/ROLE)


     Ling to takfi


     I« is act open to the Attorney Genera! to order a fresh inquest By statute his consent
     is pre-requisite to an application to the High Court for an order directing a fresh

  inquest. He has considered several applications relating to the Hillsborough inquest in
  accordance with the relevant legal criteria. In no case did he consider that an
  application to the High Court would be likely to succeed.




  Q'        ^     w     CrtT n by WhlCh * e Attorney General considers applications
            under Section 13 Coroners A ct 1988.



 A.        The criteria remains that set out by the then Attorney General in a Written
           Answer on 2 May 1989 (Col 39): ie whether an application to the High Court
           would have a reasonable prospect o f establishing that it is necessary or
           desirable in the interests o f justice for a fresh inquest to be held.



 Q.        W hat does the Attorney General take into account in considering w hether
           the criteria is m et



 A.        He considers the factors set out in Section 13 o f the Coroners Act 1988 (eg
           whether there was iiTegularity or insufficiency o f inquiry) in the context o f the
           statutory purposes o f an inquest to which I have referred.



Q.        Did the Attorney General not understand the need for a w ide-ranem e
          inquiry.                                                            6

A.        An inquest serves very specific purposes. Many o f the concerns o f the
          relatives o f the deceased were not matters for an inquest.


Q.       W as not the inquest was full o f irregularities?

A.       The main planks o f the applications under Section 13 o f the Coroners Act
          1988 were the ‘mini inquest’ procedure adopted by the coroner and his
         decision not to leave ‘lack o f care’ to the jury as a possible verdict. Both
         issues were in fact considered by the Divisional Court (in unsuccessful judicial
         review proceedings) and rejected.



F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO2 1MA.DOC
   Q.      There was also fresh evidence in some cases.

   A.
          lh^f^S  tSUf that thenAttorney General took the view that it d id n ot a ffe ct
          the issues fo r consideration b y the inquest.



  Q'      ITV documentary?*1'             “ aW ,lic!,,to'“ b“ » ™"»"*ered since the

  A.
          ■ understand fla t no further fonnal application under the Coroners Act has
          been made to the Attorney General (before or after election) since the
                               ~          Atton^ <3—      -P la in ed in correspondence *
         evidence*^             that the ITV documentary did not o f itself constitute
         Z ™ ? ; f S,15romlse(! 110conslder " V         evidence placed before him as
         the result o f the research undertaken. N o such material was supplied to him.

         The material supplied to the Home O ffice by the Hillsborough Family Support
                     “ ade available to the then Attorney General in March but he
         concluded that nothing in it had any bearing on the issues raised in the
         applications which had previously been made and considered. N othinghas
         occurred to alter or cast doubt upon the validity o f that decision.




F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO2 iMA.DOC
-Ob-w,            PPOf1:SOLr':iTOPS Bui IJMIT 01?l32S23?S             01‘i12^52356                  Ph <5£:02




                           HfltaboMMigh Family Support Group




          26 June 1997
                                                           21 Rosemont Road
                                                           Liverpool
                                                           L17 6XB

          ^   P Edm undson
          O PPU
          Room 527
          Home Office



         Dear




         SuP P M t   ^ s^gs^ — as?.“atsaS'             »

         w S w 'ih L h liS I u .I      £ « ? f o S a h t r ^ hj;0 h * e t ? o u t * “ “ - “ y o f
         enquiry. The paper also sLll*         +t?e COn®t ®red in an¥ new
         such enquiry should be set u d    i             fJiona under which
         decision can encompass such Sitter*      t x         H°me Secr«tary's
         c o u ld u t t h . B» J d   i t s   v      s » g j ^    r t8 fu i i 7 * ° *                    ii
         I thank you for your assistance.
         Yours sincerely



     Ann Mari* AdlingtoiT
     Solicitor




 CHAIRMAN
                                       VtCt>CRAllMAN/|R(ri«nRV               TUAMWKN
                                                                             MttJ.TNtTMr
Any new enquiry into the Hillsborough disaster of 15th April 1989
must consider the impact of the new evidence upon the findings of
the Taylor Enquiry and of the inquests held in 1989-90 when formal
verdicts of accidental death were returned. This evidence was
recently submitted to the Home Office and Crown Prosecution
Service.

A summary of this evidence is as follows:

1.     Video evidence and the evidence of Roger Houldsworth show
       that crucial evidence available on the day of the disaster
       was suppressed. This evidence reveals that the police were
       aware in their control box that the terraces were
       overcrowded, and that subsequent police assertions that
       cameras were faulty were untrue.

2.     New evidence from, for example. Dr. Ed Walker shows that the
       very simple explanation presented to the jury at the inquests
       that death followed very soon upon unconsciousness to all or
       almost all victims was wrong. Contrary indications to this
       simplistic analysis were improperly withheld from the jury.

3.     Further evidence shows failures on the part of the police in
       that they refused access to the injured and dying by
       paramedics.
4.     Cumulatively, these failings raise deeply disturbing
       questions about the way in which evidence was selected by the
       West Midlands Police for presentation to the jury.

5.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group continues to argue that
       perjury was committed, and the course of justice at the
       inquest and Taylor Enquiry was perverted.
In order that the truth be established finally, a new enquiry
should be set up under the following conditionss
 (A)   It should be chaired by a Lord Justice of Appeal, or other
       senior judge.
 (B)   Lay assessors of genuine and obvious independence should sit
       with the judge.
 (C)   Witnesses ought to give evidence under oath.

 (D)   The Support Group must, in the overwhelming interests of
       justice, be allowed legal representation.

 (Ei    Full disclosure of relevant documents ought to be made in
        advance to interested parties, in contrast to the inadequate
        provision for disclosure that prevailed at the inquests.

 bc/solicitors/a.adlingto/statement/260697
15:03   FPai:SOLl'*tTGPS BUS *>*IT   01512252356   01512252356   PAGE:04




 (F)    The Enquiry must have the power to recommend the quashing of
        the verdicta at the inquest*.

 (0)    It is accepted that the Enquiry cannot be as detailed or time
        consuming as the original Enquiry and inquests. Nonetheless
        it is imperative that the new evidence be comprehensively
        examined.




  bc/solicitors/a.adlingto/statement/260697
Question
W hy has the CPS w aited u n til now to announce its p re lim in a ry conclusions?

Answer
 It w ould have been inappropriate to announce the vie w o f the CPS w h ile the Hom e Secretary
was considering requests fo r a fu rth e r p u b lic e n quiry. T o do so m ig h t have g iven the
im pression that no fu rth e r action was contem plated.




L o u ise \H ills



                    O
BACKGROUND

The T a vlo r In q u iry

• The term s o f reference fo r the In q u iry were:

    To in q u ire in to the events at S heffield W ednesday fo o tb a ll ground on 15 A p ril
    1989 and to m ake recom m endations about the needs o f crow d control and safety at
    sports events.

•   174 witnesses gave oral evidence to the In q u iry.

• 71 hours o f film was provided b y the police, S heffield W ednesday F o otb all C lub
  and the B B C .

    In te rim R eport

• The in te rim report, published in A ugust 1989, was concerned w ith the events at the
  stadium on the day o f the disaster.

• The report addressed a ll aspects o f the disaster. T his included the pre-m atch
  arrangem ents, such as access from Leppings Lane in to the ground, S heffield
  W ednesday’ s arrangements and the po lice arrangements and com m unications. It
  also considered the b u ild -u p o f supporters at the turnstiles and the m o n ito rin g o f
  the terraces.

• Events during and after the disaster w ere also exam ined, in clu d in g rescue attem pts,
  events in the po lice control room , in fo rm a tio n given to those in the ground, fo r
  exam ple tannoy announcements, and the pro visio n and access fo r the em ergency
  services.

• A num ber o f causes o f the disaster were id e n tifie d :

    -   The fa ilu re to cut o ff access to the central pens w hich w ere already o v e rfu ll.
    -   There w ere no m axim um safe capacities fo r the pens.
    -   There was no e ffe ctive visua l m onitoring o f crow d density.
    -   The p ro tection afforded b y the layout o f barriers in the pens was inadequate.
    -   Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
    -   A n u n ru ly, drunken m in o rity aggravated the problem .
    -   S heffield W ednesday’s signs and ticke tin g w ere inadequate and confused.

• O n balance, the in q u iry found that, although there w ere other causes, the m ain
  reason fo r the disaster was the fa ilu re o f po lice control.

• The report was c ritic a l o f the actions o f C h ie f Superintendent D u ckenfield and
  statements attributed to him in the im m ediate afterm ath o f the disaster.
• In the vie w o f South Y orkshire P olice, a ll o f the ten “ unresolved questions” raised
  in the Granada program m e were addressed at the tim e o f the in q u iry , w ith specific
  recom m endations being made in respect o f eight o f them .

• In his in te rim report, L o rd Justice T a ylo r made 43 recom m endations w h ich he
  considered to be the m inim um required to ensure existing fo o tb a ll grounds could
  be safely used in the short term . A large num ber o f those recom m endations w ere to
  be carried out w ith im m ediate effect.

   F in a l R eport

• The fin a l report o f the T a ylo r in q u iry was published in January 1990. It
  concentrated on the lessons to be learnt fro m H illsborough, proposed a range o f
  measures to im prove safety at sports grounds.

• The fin a l report contained 76 recom m endations, these included the establishm ent
  o f a ll seated stadia b y the 1999/2000 season, w h ich has been achieved in respect o f
  the top d ivisio n s in the country. A nother recom m endation was the rem oval o f
  spikes and overhanging o r inw ard-turning sections on the perim eter fences.

• W here terraces rem ain, the report recommended that the m axim um num ber o f
  spectators to be adm itted to each pen should be specified on the ground’ s S afety
  C e rtificate. There was a fu rth er recom m endation that a ll Safety C ertificates should
  be review ed.

• The report recom m ended a w ritte n statement o f inte nt be agreed between the club
  and the p o lice, setting out th e ir respective functions as to crow d safety and control,
  w ith p a rticu la r reference to the fillin g o f each pen.

• There w ere a num ber o f recom m endations relatin g sp e cifica lly to the ro le o f the
  po lice and the responsibilities o f senior o fficers.

• The co-ordination o f the emergency services and the pro visio n o f firs t aid, m edical
  fa c ilitie s and ambulances was also addressed in the recom m endations o f the fin a l
  report.

• The F o o tb all (O ffences) A c t 1991 created new offences recommended b y Lo rd
  Justice T a y lo r to regulate behaviour at fo o tb a ll matches; th row ing any object at o r
  tow ards the p itc h o r spectator areas; taking part in indecent o r racist chanting; and
  going on to the p itc h w ith o u t la w fu l au th o rity o r excuse.


The 10 U nresolved Q uestion

The press release accom panying the Granada dram a docum entary “ H illsb o ro u g h ” last
Decem ber id e n tifie d w hat it claim ed were ten unresolved questions. These w ere:
1.     W hy was Ch. Supt. D uckenfield put in charge o f a m ajor se m i-fin a l o n ly 21
days before the game, when he was re la tiv e ly inexperienced in p o lic in g matches?

2.      W hy w ere there no barriers o r cordons to filte r the crow d and prevent a b u ild
up outside the Leppings Lane end o f the ground if, as the fans in sist, there w ere the
previous year?

3.         W hy was the game not delayed, as a num ber o f po lice o ffice rs thought it
should have been, w hen it became obvious that it w ould not be possible to get a ll the
L iv e rp o o l fans safely in to the ground before the 3pm k ic k -o ff?

4.      W hy d id n ’t po lice recognise overcrow ding on the Leppings Lane terrace w hen
eye witnesses, in clu d in g fo o tb a ll com m entator John M otson, w ere aware o f the
problem s fifte e n m inutes before k ic k -o ff?

5.        W hy w asn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became
fu ll, the procedure adopted at the previous year’ s Sem i-Final?

6.        W hy d id Ch. Supt. D uckenfield m islead the Secretary o f the F A b y te llin g h im
that fans had forced open Gate C, w hen the o ffic e r knew that he had given the order
fo r it to be opened?

7.        W hy d id it take h a lf an hour after the firs t crushing began to p u ll dow n the 10
fo o t spiked fence w h ich trapped the fans, and w hy w ere the gates w hich led on to the
p itc h too sm all to be effe ctive in an emergency.

8.      W hy was no p u b lic address announcement made - either in fo rm in g the fans as
to w hat was happening, asking fo r th e ir help o r fo r any m edical personnel at the
ground to help - u n til 3.30pm?

9.       W hy, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, d id m ore not get on to the
p itc h where the d ying and severely injured were in urgent need o f trained m edical
help?

10.     W hy d id o n ly 14 o f those w ho died go to hospital?

The C h ie f C onstable has responded to each o f these questions and pointed to the
recom m endations w h ich T a ylo r made in respect o f each one. W e are satisfied that
none o f the evidence raised is new and that a ll ten questions were addressed at the
tim e o f the T a ylo r in q u iry. In eight cases T a ylo r not o n ly considered the questions but
made specific recom m endations as a result.

The video evidence

Granada suggested that South Y orkshire P olice held tapes w hich represented new
evidence not seen b y the T a ylo r in q u iry. The fa m ilie s have alleged that video m aterial
was deliberately w ith h e ld from the in q u iry and inquest because it w ou ld underm ine
po lice testim ony that the camera (N o. 5) show ing the overcrowded pens was not
w o rkin g properly. R oger H ouldsw orth, the clu b ’ s technician, has provided an a ffid a v it
in d ica tin g that the camera was w o rkin g properly.

The fu ll set o f tapes cover m any hours leading up to, during and after the disaster. F or
the purposes o f the in q u iry and inquest, W est M idlands P olice com piled a tape o f
selected h ig h lig h ts from the C C TV and also fro m the te le visio n coverage o f the
disaster. It is clear, though, that the fu ll video evidence, in clu d in g a detailed transcript
o f its contents, was available to the in q u iry.

W e have view ed the South Y orkshire P olice tapes and have confirm ed that fo r the
m ost part they are o f no consequence, show ing general view s o f the stadium and
surroundings. In the fin a l h a lf hour leading up to the disaster, they are alm ost e n tire ly
taken up w ith the tu rm o il outside the stadium .

The Tapes do include some m aterial from camera 5 and w e found it d iffic u lt to
conclude that th is camera was less clear than the other cameras. The extent to w h ich it
was claim ed that the camera was not w o rking properly, though, is a m atter o f
interpretation. The fa m ilie s believe o ffice rs m isled the in q u iry and inquest, but our
reading o f the transcripts suggests that it was claim ed the camera was not w o rkin g
ve ry w e ll. T his is s till the p olice view . W e do not consider th is divergence o f opin ion
to be sig n ifica n t.

T w o video tapes were stolen from the club con tro l room on the n ig h t o f the disaster,
the th e ft was reported and an inconclusive investigation was carried out b y W est
M idlands P olice. The tapes d id not contain any s ig n ifica n t m aterial b u t it has been
alleged that they w ere stolen by the po lice as part o f a cover up.

M edical evidence/inauest verdict



D r Ed W alker, w ho reported to hospital fo llo w in g the disaster, claim ed in a recent
a rticle that he tended P h ilip Ham m ond w hom he says was a live a fter 3 .15pm - the cut
o ff tim e established b y the coroner at the inquest.

D r W alker gave a statem ent at the tim e o f the disaster. T his does not name P h ilip
Ham m ond and is arguably am biguous because it is not clear w hether there was any
heart beat w hen the boy he treated arrived in casualty. It d id not appear to contradict
the fin d in g s o f the Hom e O ffice pathologist that the victim s w ere e ffe ctive ly dead b y
3.15pm and D r W alker was not called to give evidence to the inquest because the
consultant in charge, D r James W ardrobe, presented a com posite picture.

U nder the C oroner’ s A c t 1988 the A ttorney-G eneral m ust give his consent to an
application to the courts fo r a fresh inquest. A t the 1993 ju d ic ia l review o f the
coroner’s inquest, L o rd Justice M cG ow an accepted that one o f the v ictim s m ay have
been a live a fte r 3.15 bu t concluded that there was 'n o good reason fo r ordering a new
inquest o r m erely quashing the existing v e rd ict’ .
Police discipline: medical retirement

The d iscip lin e regulations say that i f “ good reason” is given fo r an accused o ffic e r
being unable to appear before his C h ie f Constable on a d iscip lin e charge, the hearing
shall be postponed o r adjourned. Interpretation o f the law is a m atter fo r the courts,
bu t it seems reasonable to conclude that “ good reason” w ould include severe illn ess. I f
a doctor c e rtifie s that an accused o ffic e r has no prospect o f s u fficie n t recovery in the
foreseeable future (e.g., is suffe ring a term inal illness, o r such a severe psychiatric
co n d itio n that the stress o f d iscip lin e could w e ll lead to suicide), there is little op tio n
bu t to discontinue the d iscip lin e proceedings and a llo w a m edical retirem ent.

It should be rem em bered that d iscip lin e proceedings are stressful in them selves and
m ay exacerbate a pre-existing m edical condition. It w ould not be fa ir to assume that
a ll o ffice rs w ho avoid d iscip lin e proceedings have exaggerated th e ir sym ptom s to a
doctor fo r the necessary m edical report.

W e are sure that some forces are m ore robust than others in deferring m edical
retirem ent u n til outstanding d iscip lin a ry proceedings have been com pleted. A fte r a ll,
even i f an accused o ffic e r is unable to carry out norm al duties, it does not fo llo w that
he cannot attend a d iscip lin e hearing. H ow ever, i f there is evidence o f an accused
being so i l l that he cannot even attend a hearing, the force’ s hands are tie d and the
proceedings w ill be dropped.

The future o f p o lice d iscip lin e

A range o f p o lice personnel m atters are liv e issues at the m om ent and proposals have
been subm itted b y PPTU. Proposed new procedures fo r d iscip lin e have been under
review fo r some tim e and agreement reached w ith the s ta ff associations in
considerable d eta il, though there is contention about the standard o f p ro o f and “ fast-
track” dism issal w h ich need to be resolved.

The proposed new regulations should im prove the a b ility o f c h ie f constables to deal
w ith d iscip lin e proceedings against office rs w ho m ay q u a lify fo r m edical retirem ent,
since they w ill provide fo r the exercise o f discretion to proceed in an o ffic e r’ s
absence. The d ra ft new regulation, w hich has been seen and accepted b y the p olice
s ta ff associations, says that, in the unavoidable absence o f the accused o ffic e r at the
hearing, the hearing may be adjourned (the present regulations say shall). It rem ains to
be seen w hether th is makes an effective difference to present practice.
DRAFT LETTER TO RELATIVES FOR HOME SECRETARY’S SIGNATURE


As you know, I continue to be deeply moved by the Hillsborough stadium disaster. I
am sure that concerns felt by those most closely affected and others that a number
of issues relating to the disaster remain unresolved can only make the process of
dealing with your grief all the more difficult.


I have had the opportunity to consider fully the many representations which have
been made calling for a new public inquiry, and the matters raised by the Granada
television programme broadcast last December. I have decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no
matter of significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. That is why I
have announced in the House today that there will be an independent scrutiny by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. I enclose for
your information a copy of my statement to the House, which includes Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s terms of reference. You will see that I have undertaken to make
public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.


It is my earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
 Relatives

Miss Donna Carlile,
Ms M Carlile,
Mr & Mrs K Clark,
Mr & Mrs S Edwards


Mr & Mrs L Jones,

Mr & Mrs J P Joynes,

Mrs J McBrien,

Mr and Mrs S Roberts & Familv.r

J W Saunders Esq,
Mr & Mrs L Steele, [
Ms Sandra Stringer,
Mrs Joan Traynor.f

Mr & Mrs W Whelan




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA. DOC
             0*W *               }

            1 0p€HU^ I
                             j
                             1
                             j

                        --— „J




-y'^ruxl.i A i   lv..
DRAFT LETTER TO INTERESTED PARTIES FOR HOME SECRETARY’S
SIGNATURE



As you know, I have been considering whether there is a case for a further public
inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster in the light of the many representations which
have been received. Concerns that a number of issues relating to the disaster
remain unresolved received renewed attention following the Granada television
documentary drama “Hillsborough” last December.


I have had the opportunity to consider fully the material which has been put forward,
calling for a new public inquiry. I have decided, in all the circumstances, that there
should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no matter of significance is
overlooked before a final decision is taken. I have, therefore, announced in the
House today that there will be an independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. I enclose for your information a copy of
my statement to the House, which includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms of
reference. You will see that I have undertaken to make public the advice which Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith gives me.


It is my earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
Interested parties

Councillor F Doran, The Town Hall, Liverpool, L2 3SW (former Lord Mayor)
Councillor Margaret Clarke, The Lord Mayor of Liverpool, The Town Hall, Liverpool
L2 3SW
Rodney Bickerstaffe Esq, General Secretary, UNISON, 1 Mabledon Place, London,
WC1H9AJ
Councillor G Howard, The Mayor of Knowsley, Municipal Buildings, Archway Road,
Huyton, Knowsley, Merseyside L36 9YU
(Mrs C A Hudson), Chief Executive, St Helens Metropolitan Council, Town Hall,
Corporation Street, St Helens, Merseyside WA10 1HP
R H G Kelly Esq, Chief Executive, The Football Association Limited, 16 Lancaster
Gate, London W2 3LW
David Moores Esq, Chairman, Liverpool Football Club, Anfield Road, Liverpool L4
OTH
The Right Reverend David Sheppard, The Bishop of Liverpool, Church House, 1
Hanover Street, Liverpool L1 3DW
Dr Ed Walker,




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA-D0c
  From : Peter Edmundson
                                                              cc      M r M ichael
         Room 527
                                                                      M r O ’ B rien
         O perational P o licin g P o licy U n it
                                                                      Lord W illia m s
         Queen A nne’s Gate
                                                                      M r H ow arth
         0171 273 2621
                                                                      S ir R ichard W ilson
                                                                     H M C IC
          27 June 1997
                                                                     M iss W eldon
                                                                     M r H a llid a y
                                                                     M r Boys S m ith
                                                                     M r G ranatt
                                                                     M r M iddleton
                                                                     M iss Loudon
                                                                     M r R Evans
                                                                     M r Edm undson
                                                                     M s W alker
                                                                     M s C liffo rd
                                                                     M r W arner
                                                                     M r Owen
 Mr Michael             )
                       ) sim ultaneously
 H om e Sftcratflfy    )




 HILLSBOROUGH: Q & A BRIEFING FROM THE ATTORNEY
 s w o M o m ® l e t t e r f r o m t h e h il l s b o r o u g h f a m il y


F urther to Paul Pugh’ s subm ission o f 26 June covering the d ra ft announcem ent and Q
   A b n e fin g , I attach the Q & A m aterial fro m the A tto rn e y General’s o ffic e received
today.



2.        I also attach a copy o f a le tte r from the H illsb o ro u g h F a m ily Support G roup
covering a sum m ary o f the m atters w hich the fa m ilie s feel ought to be considered in
any new in q u iry , w h ich I undertook to b rin g to yo u r attention. The reference to an
in q u iry is speculation on th e ir part as w e have n ot given them any details o f w hat w ill
be contained in the announcement on M onday.

3.       There is nothing new in the concerns set out in the attached sum m ary fro m the
fam ilie s. A lth o u g h they w ill be disappointed that you are not, at th is stage,
establishing a new p u b lic enquiry, they should at least be reassured that there w ill be
an independent scru tin y b y a senior ju d ic ia l fig u re .



                                                                        £ a~— *        —

                                                              PETER E D M U N D S O N


F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO2 1MA.DOC
HILLSBOROUGH: INQUEST - (ATTORNEY GENERAL INTEREST/ROLE)


L in e to take

It is not open to the A ttorney General to order a fresh inquest. B y statute his consent
is pre-requisite to an application to the H ig h C ourt fo r an order dire ctin g a fresh
inquest. He has considered several applications re la tin g to the H illsborough inquest in

accordance w ith the relevant legal crite ria . In no case d id he consider that an
application to the H ig h C ourt w ould be lik e ly to succeed.




Q.       W h a t is th e c rite ria b y w h ich th e A tto rn e y G e neral considers a p p lic a tio n s
         u n d e r S ection 13 C oroners A c t 1988.


A.       The c rite ria rem ains that set out b y the then A tto rn e y General in a W ritte n
         A nsw er on 2 M a y 1989 (C o l 39): ie w hether an application to the H ig h C ourt
         w o u ld have a reasonable prospect o f establishing that it is necessary o r
         desirable in the interests o f ju s tic e fo r a fresh inquest to be held.


Q.       W h a t does th e A tto rn e y G eneral ta ke in to account in co n sid e rin g w h e th e r
         th e c rite ria is m e t


A.       He considers the factors set out in Section 13 o f the Coroners A c t 1988 (eg
         w hether there was irre g u la rity o r in su fficie n cy o f in q u iry ) in the context o f the
         statutory purposes o f an inquest to w h ich I have referred.


Q.       D id th e A tto rn e y G eneral n o t u n d e rsta n d th e need fo r a w id e -ra n g in g
         in q u iry .

A.       A n inquest serves very specific purposes. M any o f the concerns o f the
         relatives o f the deceased were n ot m atters fo r an inquest.


 Q.      W as n o t th e in q u e st was fu ll o f irre g u la ritie s ?

 A.      The m ain planks o f the applications under S ection 13 o f the Coroners A c t
          1988 w ere the ‘ m in i inquest’ procedure adopted by the coroner and his
          decision n ot to leave ‘ lack o f care’ to the ju ry as a possible ve rdict. B o th
          issues w ere in fact considered b y the D iv is io n a l C ourt (in unsuccessful ju d ic ia l
          review proceedings) and rejected.



 F:\OPPU\COMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PEOO2 iMA.DOC
Q.    T h e re was also fresh evidence in some cases.

A.    I understand that the then A ttorney G eneral to ok the vie w that it d id n o t affect
       the issues fo r consideration b y the inquest.



Q.    H as th e re fu s a l o f th e S ection 13 a p p lic a tio n s been considered since th e
      IT V docum entary?

A.    I understand that no furthe r form al app lication under the C oroners A c t has
       been made to the A ttorney General (before o r a fte r election) since the
       docum entary. The previous A tto rn e y General explained in correspondence to
       some H on M em bers that the IT V docum entary d id not o f its e lf constitute
       evidence. H e prom ised to consider any fresh evidence placed before h im as
       the result o f the research undertaken. N o such m aterial was supplied to h im .

       The m aterial supplied to the H om e O ffice b y the H illsb o ro u g h F a m ily Support
       G roup was made available to the then A tto rn e y General in M arch b u t he
       concluded that nothing in it had any bearing on the issues raised in the
       applications w h ich had p re viously been made and considered. N o th in g has
       occurred to a lte r o r cast doubt upon the v a lid ity o f that decision.




 F:\OPPIACOMPLNTS\SHORTSUB\PE0021MA.DOC
     l ff:0 3   FPOM: SOL I'!! TOPS BUS UNIT    0l5l225535<5          0151.2.252356            PAGE*. 02




                .v




                           Hlllaborotigh Family Support Group




        26 June 1997                                           21 Rosemont Road
                                                               Liverpool
                                                               LI? 6XB

        Mr P Edmund8on
        OPPU
        Room 527
        Home Office



        Dear P^/sr

        Firstly may I thank you for taking the trouble to contact me
        yesterday regarding the Home Secretary's announcement on Monday.
        Your courtesy meant that all members of the Hillsborough Family
        Support Group were notified prior to today's media speculation.

        Please find enclosed a brief paper which sets out a summary of
        matters which families feel ought to be considered in any new
        enquiry. The paper also spells out the conditions under which
        such enquiry should be set up. I hope that the Home Secretary's
        decision can encompass such matters. I should be grateful if you
        could let the Home Secretary have sight of the same.

         I thank you for your assistance.

        Yours sincerely


         fin a
        Ann Marie Adlington
        Solicitor




CHAIRMAN                                       vicumtBMAM/mcvmRv                  TftlAfUMM
I.   M et'                                     KHfflMMM                           MwJ.lHjiwr
3   *   \ ?: QZ         11' ■ 1T° P^ Bl JS   UN   IT   OlT-l 3&37S6




                                  B m fli» o 8 0 ,w g .yim i^ y gju p ra ra .q.»<wg
         Any new enquiry into the Hillsborough disaster of 15th April 1989
         must consider the impact of the new evidence upon the findings of
         the Taylor Enquiry and of the inquests held in 1989-90 when formal
         verdicts of accidental death were returned. This evidence was
         recently submitted to the Home Office and Crown Prosecution
         Service.

         A summary of this evidence is as follows:

          1.      Video evidence and the evidence of Roger Houldsworth show
                  that crucial evidence available on the day of the disaster
                  was suppressed. This evidence reveals that the police were
                  aware in their control box that the terraces were
                  overcrowded, and that subsequent police assertions that
                  cameras were faulty were untrue.

          2.      Mew evidence from, for example. Dr. Ed Walker shows that the
                  very simple explanation presented to the jury at the inquests
                  that death followed very soon upon unconsciousness to all or
                  almost all victims was wrong. Contrary indications to this
                  simplistic analysis were improperly withheld from the jury.
          3.      Further evidence shows failures on the part of the police in
                  that they refused access to the injured and dying by
                  paramedics.

          4.      Cumulatively, these failings raise deeply disturbing
                  questions about the way in which evidence was selected by the
                  West Midlands Police for presentation to the jury.

           5.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group continues to argue that
                  perjury was committed, and the course of justice at the
                  inquest and Taylor Enquiry was perverted.
           Inorder that the truth be established finally, a                           new enquiry
           should be set up under the following conditions*
           (A)    It should be chaired by a Lord Justice of Appeal, or other
                  senior judge.
           (B)    Lay assessors of genuine and obvious independence should sit
                  with the judge.
           (C)    Witnesses ought to give evidence under oath.
           (D)    The Support Group must, in the overwhelming interests of
                  justice, be allowed legal representation.
            (E)   Full disclosure of relevant documents ought to be made in
                  advance to interested parties, in contrast to the inadequate
                  provision for disclosure that prevailed at the inquests.


           bc/solicitors/a.adlingto/s t a t e m ent/260697
l ? : 0 3 ■ FPOI1: SOL I'". [TOPS BUS UNIT   0lSl225<235<5   01 51 2252350   PAGE:04




 (F)     The Enquiry mutt have the power to recommend the quashing of
         the verdicts at the inquest*.

 (G)     It is accepted that the Enquiry cannot be as detailed or time
         consuming as the original Enquiry and Inquests* Nonetheless
         it is imperative that the new evidence be comprehensively
         examined.




  bc/solicitors/a.adlingto/statement/260697
3/06 '97     14:10          © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                                   UNITED HOUSE        @




                    CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE
                                 C E N T R A L CASEW ORK - PRO SECUTIO NS,
                                 IN T E R N A T IO N A L C IV IL A N D A P P E LLA T E
                                                  50 LU D G A T E H IL L
                                                 LO N D O N EC 4M 7EX
                                                  F A X : 0171 273 8450


                                              F A C S IM IL E TR AN SM ISSIO N



    F o r the attention




     Fax N o:

     F ro m :....... 3 ^ 0 . 0 . - - -



     T h is F A X transm ission consists o f this page +                                  Z-

     Message..................................................................................




      O rig in a l (s) to fo llo w Y /N
      Please acknowledge receipt Y /N

      I f Y ou do not receive a ll pages o r cannot read
      a ll the te x t please contact the sender o f:   0171
                                                       0]   273 + ext                              (D ire ct Line)



    PORM'FAX
/06 '97   14:11     © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                                              UNITED HOUSE         @002/003




                                                       QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON SWlH 9AT
                                                                                               16 JON 1S$7


                                                               C.P.S. HEAOC/JA&TEEtS
  The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP                 PRIVATE C”‘FfCE
                                                 fiJ£ C tl'/£ D ;
  Attorney General
  9 Buckingham Gate                                        IJBJUHjaSD'
                                                                  §
  LONDON                                                 ~2uiCiL
                              EK1RALCASEVV W p W t c F V!         !
  SW1E 6JP                                                                            ■


                                                           UfiGSNT:
                                    Jo:
                               i!

                                                                   \ G a m p , iio o fe
                               | igf
                                                'S 3un 133/' 1

                               i^         by.
                                &
                                i
                                E                                        r'1
                                                                      •i ,                II
                                                  j Acuon                                                    U .-v
                                                  10c3'{.£■.          I Do«©:              ®



  THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

  Thank you for your letter of 10 June about the proposed independent
  examination of the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.

   I am grateful to you for your agreement in principle with what 1 proposed.
   I understand your concerns about the terms of reference and the statutory
   responsibilities which rest with you and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
   Although I would prefer terms of reference which invited more explicit
   recommendations, J am broadly content with the amended terms which you
   proposed. I would, however, like to suggest some small changes to refer
   explicitly to my rote as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to
   advise on any other action which should be taken in the public interest. I
   suggest therefore terms of reference along the following lines:

          To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
          Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

          (a)     To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

          (b)     To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for
                  the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
                  responsibilities; or

          (c)     To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                  police disciplinary matters;
/06 '97   14:11   © 0 1 7 1 273 8450                          — ^ UNITED HOUSE          @




           And in relation to {a} to advise whether any evidence not previously
           available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
           Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;
           and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
           previously considered by them which which may be relevant to their
           respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which
           should be taken in the public interest.

    I would be grateful if you would confirm that you are happy with the slightly
    amended version.

   I am grateful to Derry Irvine for proposing that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might
   take on this task. He seems to me very suitable for what we have in mind. If
   Derry is able to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is willing to take on the
   task, I suggest the next step might be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet
   officials to discuss his requirements. The appropriate official is Paul Pugh,
   Head of the Operational Policing Policy Unit here (0171-273 3141).

   I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
   Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister without Portfolio, the
   Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
   to Sir Robin Butler.




                                       JACK STRAW
1 9 - Jur1-97 0 8 : 2 1 P             CPS          CENTRAL                      CASEWORKCCP                        0171   273   8050                  P.Ol


                                                                                        PAVILION

                                                              HOLIDAY VILLA
                                                                                        Ii o I i i
                                           i , y,           ___„                _ LONDON
                           *               IM        m       t n                  i




0 TI/iaS )<, iOc^^r ir e ^ n n a '^                                                                                 fi&u'dj V o s
       O       tu \G (M             ' o ^n Q - k v                                    t t       t^      We        t y y s i> p i^                       ,
       7k>         cu-uaX                                 »av                               Ci^Q £%pwL^ ujoo fi*vj
       If        I N i.        fa y             C U - ir 's               .




4) w € ~ d o                                                        jb                                      £)' Jjo s" v
      6& V Z JC U M I k !                          K K D ^A                                                               O JU ^S * ^        k   .y

      Kq    i b r ^ £tm
                      >jjL&-~-                  IU V,
                                               /b^Q             » ’»^r%. * V I'M-'Vi
                                                                         l^-b  r • I Q i v J^X x— ^ - 6—-yr
                                                                                                          ir—
                                                                                                            A^>                                   —

                  ^ \j£                y ^ O ^ r^ T             l^ C X .
  Qj^d (
       aft v^\^Cr                                                                               OK/ U-i^>                    fo
  ^        O     W        ^                                                                 .




                                 I wit.




                     n r i W T ' I ' . n p n C T W C 61 C A r & f t r o       COD l A / m n i M ^ C   i^ jtic p        »»ir\ Aii«MTVD/CHTf
19-Jun- 9 7       08: 2 2 P    CPS    CENTRAL        CASEWORKCCP        0171   273   8050                 P .02
      ’ 97 (THU j 1 7 : 4 3   .ATTORNEY   GENERAL              TEL: I          H                 P. 001




                         FAX TRANSMISSION
                 Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
          Attorney General’s Chambers, 9 Buckingham Gate
                          London SW1E 6JP

                               TEL:
                               FAX:

    TO:                       ________        Q ru

    ORGANISATION: ________

    FACSIMILE NO:             __ _____        jg Z L

    FROM:                     STEPHEN WOOLER

    S U P P L E M E N T A R Y M E S S a CE:




    DATE:_                      TIM E: _                 No. OF PACES:         C?_________
                                                                          (including this one)
    Hard copy to follow;         V'ES/NO
19-Juro-97 0 8 : 2 2 P                CPS     CENTRAL        CASEWORKCCP        0171     273   8050                 P .03
i 8 - JUN. ’ 9 ? (THUI 1 7 : 4 3    ATTORNEY GENERAL                    TEL:                             P, 0 0 2
      13                  13; IZ HOfC Of- f- ICS. -r e - 071 273 4284                           F,c -I




           DRAFT:             13 JUNE 1997



           DRAFT ORAL STATEMENT FOR THE HOME SECRETARY



           With permission. Madam Speaker, l would like to make a statement about the
           Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


           2.        It is now more than eight years since the disaster on 15 April 1989. But no
           one who saw the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten those
           terrible events. For those who lost loved members of their family, the memories are
           even more painful            We all felt then that we must do all in our power to prevent
           anything like the events of that appalling day happening again.


           3.        A Public inquiry by Lord Taylor was immediately established. The terms of
           reference of the Inquiry were not only to enquire into the events but to make
           recommendations about crowd control and safety at sports events. The inquiry took
           oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at public hearings during May and June 1989
           and considered many hours of video evidence from different sources. In his interim
           report in August 1989 he found that there were a number of causes for the disaster.
           He did not attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278
         he made clear that;


                      "The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control''


         4.           Lord Taylor made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January
           1990 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken
         place since then in safety at football grounds and in the policing of football matches
         have been based largely on those recommendations. Football in this country has
         been transformed since the Taylor Report. To a large extent that is due to his wide-
         reaching ana soundly based conclusions.




            oppnjlcu>dr>fti^ppc
19-Ji_m-97         08: 2 2 P       CPS      CENTRAL            CASEWORKCCP                 0171   273   8050                 P -04
18-JUS.
    ♦
        ' 9 ? (THU) 17:44       ATTORNEY GENERAL                                  TEL £f                            P. 003
    13 J i j r u - s r 13: i e HOriE OFFICE - F 0 - 0 7 1 2 7 3 d284                                      P. 3.-1




       5.      The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were the subject of inquests
       conducted by the Coroner of the western district of South Yorkshire.


       6.      An inquest is a fact-finding inquiry to establish answers to four important
       questions. They are:


                The identity of the deceased


                The place of death


                The time and the date of death and


                H o w t h e d e c e a s e d c a m e b y his o r h e r d e a t h



       7.      The Coroner's rules require proceedings and evidence to be directed solely at
       finding answers to those questions.


       8.      The jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for those who
       died at Hillsborough was accidental death.


       9.      There was a further investigation conducted by the West Midlands Police,
       supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any
       grounds for criminal proceedings. That investigation also considered whether any
       police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.


       10.     That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the
       scrutiny of all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor
       Inquiry.     After that investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public
       Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
       proceedings. The Police Complaints Authority decided that the senior officers in
       charge on the day should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duties.                         In the
1 9 - Juro-97 08: 2 2 P         CPS   CENTRAL        CASEWORKCCP         0171   273   8050                    .05
18-JUN. ‘ 9 7 ( THU I 1?; 45   ATTORNEY   GENERAL                 TEL:                             P. 0 0 4
     13 J U ^ 9 7 13U6 HOME: OFFICE -F9- 071 Z73 -a2&4                                    P.J J




        event. Chief Supenntendent Duckenfield retired due to il* health in advance of a
        ruling by a disciplinary tribunal. The Police Complaints Authority ialer decided that
        disciplinary proceedings against Mr Duckenfield’s deputy should be withdrawn
        because the retirement of Mr Duckenfieid meant that what, in effect, was a joint
        allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
        senior officer.


         11.     It is well known that some of the families of those who died were unhappy
        with the verdict of the inquest. They later applied for judicial review of the coroner's
        proceedings. During the judicial review proceedings the conduct of the inquest was
        subjected to close and detailed examination.           The court ruled that none of the
        matters raised in the judicial review proceedings justified intervention by the court in
        the verdict of the inquest,
-x                  o- V>—                          vV                     —— W- —                 V —^

         12.     The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to
        exceptionally thorough investigation on several occasions.          But concerns have
         remained about whether the full facts have yet emerged. I have met relatives of the
         Hillsborough victims. I know that they believe passionately that there are unresolved
         issues which should be investigated further.


         13.      Representations have been made to me and my predecessor, to the Attorney
         General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions.             A Granada television
         programme in December dramatised the disaster and raised a number of issues
        which, in the view of the programme makers, presented new evidence about the
         disaster.     Since that time further material has been submitted on behalf of the
         Hillsborough Family Support Group.              Those representations have related in
         particular to video evidence of the disaster and medical evidence about the time of
         death of the victims.


         14.      M y department, the office of the Attorney General and the Crown Prosecution

         Service have considered very carefully all the evidence which has been put forward




         1*
1 9 - Jura-97          08:22 P CPS               CENTRAL           CASEWORKCCP                    0171      273      8050                            -06
18-Jl'N. ’ 9 ' (THU) 1 7 : 4 5          ATTORNEY GENERAL                                TEL-'fl                                         P. 005
        13 JUhJ'<=C 13:17 HOHE: rjFFICE - F 8 - 07J 273 42QC                                                           P.S -J




          in recent months. W c have been unable to find anything which we consider would

              have materially affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster



              15.    Much of the evidence which has been put forward concerns matters which

          were fully addressed by the previous investigations. For example, the Granada

          television programme suggested that there were ten unresolved questions about the

          disaster.      I am satisfied that all those ten questions were fully considered by the

          Taylor Inquiry, and in relation to eight of them specific recommendations were made.



* * *         16-   I have not 30 far received any evidence which would lead me to conclude that

          a new public inquiry should b© established.                           Similarly, the Director of Public

          Prosecutions considers that none of the material which has been made available

         .would justify fresh criminal investigations.                   The Attorney General ta k « -* r w n ita f*
                          a .—                            Vs*
          view tn Eolation to-fflfr possibility of applying to the High Court for a new in q u e s t^ v ^ « 'j^                        w jV




          17        However. I want to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and

          that we do not come to a conclusion without a full and independent examination of

          the evidence.                                            W    o- a                                                      ' ~ av>* 0
                                                                                                  ^      \ . V' -1- Vsr VW                   ^Kf-.

          18.       The Attorney General, the director of Public Prosecutions and I have

          therefore agreed that tha re precontaftiono which-have been put fonward should be                                         cs- >-

          aubjeot *© independent s c r u tin ^ w e are therefore appointing Lord Justice Stuart -
                                                     '                                                VWV    p^»n<        .
          Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Apr^ai r                                         ,-|[| fjn   mmi   h   ,

          evtd en rfi and to rannrt tn- w«;                His terms of reference are: p tr-h r :rigertori aftnr

          agreement frotwoonMinictofiEt                                        S'-*1"       V \___ _                 vjlsW             U .U as J


          19.       W e have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and other
          evidence which has been submitted.                        He will also consider any further materia!
          which interested parties wish to submit. There will be an opportunity for interested

          parties to make representations to him if he considers that necessary to enable him
          to form a view.              His task will be    to   provide advice on the basis of his independent




          1                      Joe
19-Ouisi-97            0 8 :2 3 P          CPS    CENTRAL      CASEWORKCCP                0171    273      8050                      p .07
18-JUT971THU) l /: 46                     ATTORNEY GENERAL                    TEL -                                          P 006
   *13 JIJM 'S T 1 3 :1? H O rt OFFICE - r e - 0?1 273 <XZQA                          -                        p.       J
                                                                    ~-V - f                                  *o      'Q -     ^
                                                  ^   J      V_Va                     —v- ^

                                                  ""X
      consideration of the evidenced This will not^be a Public Inquiry.                               Howevcr,-i
      undertake to make public the advice which he 3 ' " ^                        tk;s ♦ i r r ^ nf ro!° '° n '- f



      20.          I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively that n o

      material evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the disaster.




                                                                                           b*-

                                                                                                                            .'ik-HrO j




     (:*.'0tn«Jiouxttai’uH>6O~-V±Pk)Joe
     Lctt«rtoW ()-



                                                                - H * * " * " ' ">•
                                       l . f « *         < **- *        c* ^   "       '




 ^                                          teM                                    v

                    w<a       «A <w j % Am £ \             -

                       * wJU ca*^)Ltj awcoL^ *j
                                                                                   ^               O t f if c N *




 i.           Kl.                                                          «** *'a^                           ^
              £ A ,)      uaM iiNCt^x C^fi <4-i                ^ l c •f     ~~ (A* ^




 I      I^VVATv r s w w v j             '   ’   ------

                       U e    Su   j   S .iM        c M a ru f         * • } A* “ w '      M                        •

tfpsoi                 nr                       _        /i^iu J m M *-                    01“-■
 IrH c li —            Aufrilj O il *

                                                    OU^lW Ajl/oUuAA _ f lf f G l.

      U $ )*« f “7 ^ 3 1           ??

     H u ta     - X L iL u l feuAyJJUl * 3 / Y *                   -               *• I C i / U W f £ + £ 4 *
                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                        CPS


                                                                                                           Headquarters
                                                                                                           United House
   F a c s im ile                                                                                              Piccadilly
                                                                                                          York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                Direct Line: i
                                                                                               Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                                 Facsimile: i      __
                                                                                                   DX No. 65204 York 6
A tte n tio n o f:      D ru S h a rp lin g

Address:                C e n tra l C asew ork

Fax N o:                0171-273 8050

F rom :                 C h ris E n zo r

CPS D iv is io n :      C asew ork S ervices D iv is io n

D ate: 15 M a y 1997      T im e: 1050

T his fa x transm ission consists o f th is page. + 3

Please acknow ledge receipt:           No


If transmission is not properly received please call



C O N F ID E N T IA L




                              Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests ofjustice
                            H ills b o ro u g h In te re ste d P arties



M rs J. M cB rien


M r and M rs L . Jones




M r S. Edwards

M r and M rs K . C la rk




M r and M rs J.P .
Joynes______________

M r and M rs S. Roberts
and M iss S. Roberts

J.W . Saunders


M r G . W rig h t

M r T . H icks
(C hairm an o f H FSG )

M s A .M . A d lin g to n
(S o lic ito r to H FSG )
                               Hillsborough Interested Parties
               ’
               / Mrs .J .McBrien    ^       ^

               /L, D and M Jones                                                Hi^UJuT^liZia t t y i ■

                   Mr and Mrs O'Neill                                                 QAfQtok —
                   Mr S .Edwards        >/» cV -               KJ2*J

                   Mr and Mrs Clark                               — - •» — -

                                         %/• c.V     _        OU*>

                                                         ^                C/J /^yui /<Y UWM*/^, .
                   Mr and Mrs. S Roberts and Miss S Roberts                             v-cV
                                                                                                  N (jW ltfU o A
<>(1”^-            J W Saunders             ~

                   Mr G.W. Wright               ~

               S Mr T. Hicks                    ^

                   Hillsborough Family Action Support Group (HFASG)

               ^Solicitor representing HFASG

           ^       Claire
                   L         Curtis-Thomas mf
                     i d n e turtis-rnomas   MP   (NEW MP                         for CORBY NEVER      BEEN
           ^       WRITTEN TO BEFORE) 3) ref  DQC
                                              DC 186/97
                                      V*,            \       <"t <■; A.«_vV/
                                    \    (jjQ jJ i                     f*       (o^W^U|&Xwod> -    a & ji
          o, 4 *
                                                         OMdlcMJ            .
             Hillsborough Interested Parties
M r s .J.McBrien

L, D and M Jones

Mr and Mrs O'Neill

Mr S.Edwards

Mr and Mrs Clark



Mr and Mrs J P Joynes

Mr and Mrs. S Roberts and Miss S Roberts
J W Saunders

Mr G.W. Wright

Mr T.Hicks

Hillsborough Family Action Support Group (HFASG)

Solicitor representing HFASG

Claire Curtis-Thomas MP    (NEW MP   for CORBY NEVER
WRITTEN TO BEFORE) ref DQC 186/97
Lorna Dawkins
PS. to CCP



Hillsborough Incident

Further to our recent telephone conversation.

In anticipation of forthcoming developments I attach a complete
list of persons who have been written to by this office in
connection with this matter.

Please could I ask you to check this list with any copy
correspondence that might be held separately by the CCP on this
matter, in order to confirm that this is a complete list of all
known interested parties.

A copy has also been sent up to the Private Office so that they
may undertake a similar verification check.

Many thanks.



P .Jennings
Central Casework
York

19 June 1997
Jane Gill
Private Office
Ludgate Hill



Hillsborouah

I attach a list of the "interested parties" in this matter who
over the last few months have either been written to by ourselves
(Central Casework) in all our guizes or by the Director herself.

Please could I ask you to arrange for this list to be checked
against any composite Private Office file that might be held on
this matter in order that I may ensure that no-one has been
missed off as I understand that there are likely to be
developments in connection with this matter shortly.

I regret that I have been unable to identify any actual file
number on the copy correspondence that we have received save for
the most recent reference assigned to Claire Curtis-Thomas MP.

Many thanks.



P .Jennings
Central Casework
York

19 June 1997
                     Ouwudri. (tow
                         H uJi




                 w U .     w L       t°       y t c f u ^ - it t '



       ^ ftfk    i ${[$-




                                                               fiJ L d U * .




a .] h H -lK U V f * w f o                                                               uM w       /U w .

^     ue*XA C 4 W ^ (a > e f^ )                                           *


9                    7                                               f&       u tJ i i              ■

       '     ,                                                            AAs




                                              A i/                    _       jk    &o   ^      -




                          A w       S a s      -          j< * k * * M > A

                                -   ) t a i$ » « 4 « < * ^ t k u t p u t ]



                                    a     —                   o


                          « • « < <■ ^                 l ' f > X * 4' M
                                                                      '       ^
                      0




     lb ^ L S t O \ X i      M r.
                            y '       T r ^ w f?           ME'S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                                                            16 JON 1997



                                                           lADQUARTERS
The Rt Hon John                                            \TE 0 :-FtC£
                                  ~J /                     ■CEIVED^
Attorney General
9 Buckingham G<
LONDON                 n ty o o c n
SW1E 6JP




                                                   ra u m f M s s i m
                                                         L P

                                                     16 JUN 1997
                                                   M C E lV F n         I
THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Thank you for your fetter of 10 June about the proposed independent
examination of the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.

I am grateful to you for your agreement in principle w ith what I proposed.
I understand your concerns about the terms of reference and the statutory
responsibilities which rest w ith you and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Although I would prefer terms of reference which invited more explicit
recommendations, I am broadly content w ith the amended terms which you
proposed. I would, however, like to suggest some small changes to refer
explicitly to my role as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to
advise on any other action which should be taken in the public interest. I
suggest therefore terms of reference along the following lines:

      To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
      Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

      (a)    To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

      (b)    To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for
             the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
             responsibilities; or

      (c)    To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
             police disciplinary matters;
0 / ^




             J t-      U o c A jj


\f   -j o u ^ ^ y ^
Q j^ r ^ ^ S ^ J Z     .




          cj a r J l       (S.L
       And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
       available is of such significance as to ju stify establishment by the
       Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;
       and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
       previously considered by them which which may be relevant to their
       respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which
       should be taken in the public interest.

I would be grateful if you would confirm that you are happy w ith the slightly
amended version.

 I am grateful to Derry Irvine for proposing that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might
take on this task. He seems to me very suitable for what we have in mind. If
Derry is able to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is willing to take on the
task, I suggest the next step might be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet
officials to discuss his requirements. The appropriate official is Paul Pugh,
Head of the Operational Policing Policy Unit here (0171-273 3141).

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister w ithout Portfolio, the
Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
to Sir Robin Butler.



                                             f




                                  JACK STRAW
I V - J O N . 9 7 (FR1) 10:37                 ATTORNEY GENERAL           TEL:                             P. 00]



                                                                 THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                                ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                                         9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

   G aneral en q u irie s 0 1 7 1 -8 2 6 7 1 5 5                                            LONDON SW1E 6JP
   D ireci |in«            0 1 7 1 -6 3 6


            Paul Pugh Esq
            Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit
            Room 539
            Home Office
            50 Queen Anne's Gate
            LONDON SW1H9AT
            19 June 1997




            HILLSBOROUGH
           You kindly copied to this office an initial draft of the oral statement which
           might be made by the Home Secretary about the Hillsborough case.
           I have discussed the draft with Dru Sharpling because of the CPS interest. We
           are broadly content. I would suggest an additional point being made at
           paragraph 11 and paragraph 16 onwards needs revision to take account of the
           slightly changed approach to the Terms of Reference. I should mention that
           we have informed the Home Secretary’s office that the Attorney General is
           content with the proposal contained in the Home Secretary's letter of 16 June.
           The Attorney General is not intending to respond to that letter.
           For convenience, I enclose a retyped version of paragraph 16 onwards with our
           proposed amendments in bold type.
           A copy of this letter goes to Dm Sharpling, I leave copying to Home Office
           colleagues to your discretion.
                  O




           S J WOOLER

           SW/190K/1
1?-JU N .'97(FR I)    10=37   ATTORNEY GENERAL                 TEL                              P. 0 0 2




          SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL SENTENCE FOR PARAGRAPH 11:

         At the end add:


                     'The court also expressed strong doubts as to whether a further Inquest,
                     if ordered, would result In anything further being learned and observed
                     that the process would be a very harrowing one."




        sw/iaofi/i
15 - J U N . ' 9 7 ( F R I ) 1 0 : 3 7   ATTORNEY GENERAL           TEL :                           P. 003




              16.         I have not so far received any evidence which would lead me to conclude
              that a new public inquiry should be established. Similarly, the Director of
             tpublic Prosecutions considers that none of the material which has been made
             available would justify fresh criminal investigations. The Attorney General
             takes the view on the material so far presented to        that an application
             to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect
             of succeeding.


             17. However, I want to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked
             and that we do not come to a conclusion without a full and independent
             examination of the evidence.


             18. The Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have
            therefore agreed that there should be an independent scrutiny to ascertain
            whether there now exists any evidence which was not previously available
            relating to the disaster. We are therefore appointing Lord Justice Stuart-
            Smith. a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal for that purpose. His full
            terms of reference are:


             19.   We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and
            other evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider any further
            material which interested parties wish to submit. There will be an opportunity
            for interested parties to make representations to him if he considers that
            necessary to enable him to form a view. His task will be twofold: first to
           provide me with advice on the basis of his independent consideration of the
           evidence whether any evidence not previously available is of such
           significance as to justify establishment of a further public inquiry. This
           will not itself be a Public Inquiry. However. I undertake to make public the
           advice which he gives. Secondly, he win identify for the Attorney General

           SW/IHCIfi/l
    1 9-JUN. ’ 9 7 ( F R I ) 1 0 : 3 8   ATTORNEY GENERAL       TEL:                             P. 0 04




                and the DPP any evidence which might be relevant to their decisions
                which has not previously been considered.


                20. I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively that
                no material evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the
                disaster.




              SW/1906/1
i
                                                THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                            ATTORNEY GENERALS CHAMBERS

                                                                       9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                         LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 -8 2 8 715 5
Direct line         0 1 7 1 -8 2 8



        Paul Pugh Esq
        Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit
        Room 539
        Home Office
        50 Queen Anne's Gate
        LONDON SW1H 9AT                                           CPSCENTRW0^ ®
                                                                          CCP
        19 June 1997                                                  2 0 )UN 1991

                                                                  I RECEIVE,


       l ) s ,        ^


        HILLSBOROUGH
        You kindly copied to this office an initial draft of the oral statement which
        might be made by the Home Secretary about the Hillsborough case.
        I have discussed the draft with Dru Sharpling because of the CPS interest. We
        are broadly content. I would suggest an additional point being made at
        paragraph 11 and paragraph 16 onwards needs revision to take account of the
        slightly changed approach to the Terms of Reference. I should mention that
        we have informed the Home Secretary’s office that the Attorney General is
        content with the proposal contained in the Home Secretary’s letter of 16 June.
        The Attorney General is not intending to respond to that letter.
        For convenience, I enclose a retyped version of paragraph 16 onwards with our
        proposed amendments in bold type.
        A copy of this letter goes ta D e u Sharpling. I leave copying to Home Office
        colleagues to your discretion.

                             r~>




         S J WOOLER

         SW/190R/1
                       RESTRICTED - SENIOR MANAGEMENT




Director


CC     Graham Duff
       Lyn Salisbury


HILLSBOROUGH


1     The Home Secretary will announce an independent scrutiny into the the Hillsborough
      disaster in the afternoon of 30 June (Monday). The terms of reference and the text
      of the announcement are enclosed.

2     The Home Secretary will be meeting representatives of the Hillsborough Family
       Support Group that day. The CPS has been asked to provide a question and answer
      briefing for the Home Secretary and attend an oral briefing at the Home Office prior
      to the meeting and the announcement.

3     I have attached a Q&A briefing for the HO and one for internal purposes. If approved
       then we will liaise with LSLO for clearance.

4     Responses are outstanding on a number of letters seeking a formal revival of
      proceedings as a result of the material submitted in the last few months and the
      Granada documentary. I will respond personally to all the correspondents on the day
      of the announcement. Drafts are available.

5     Graham Duff, George Croston and myself will attend the oral briefing with the Home
      Secretary.




       Dru Sharpling

     2 £ (>
                                                                                                          CPS
FACSMILE                             kC M ^T
                                                                              Central Casework
                                                                              50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                              London EC4M 7EX
Attention of      Sfqgua*.

Address                 usuo                                                 Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
                                                                             Facsimile: 0171-273 8050

Fax No                     cm                                                 X No: 300850 Ludgate EC4




From            D ru S h a rp lin g
                C h ie f C row n P rosecutor
                C e n tra l C asew ork


Date              3 b    H o                     Time       2          IS

This fax transmission consists of this page plus              w             others

If transmission is not properly received please call 0171- 273 1225



MESSAGE



 I O A z *CIa           Q u i / r t f t y /XiA/i           Ai/iSUei
 f t ,                                                                               > |v iy
          -r- jJZ           ■-            ^                                     "----- 1
          ( A     JvC b C sy^kJL

 ^        CM                                  "W v                      A K c iT

                                   " iW         < b \ > r e C lf f v    K tk x v

           /W     w x f t e _ i*      ~ fe >     a - p f & v s v > € , IV a Q
                0 < ? V U ^V v^4 A > 7               * *                             i           o

                                 _____________
                                                                                                 615
                                                                                                 CPS
FACSMILE
                                                                    Central Casework
                                                                    50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                    London EC4M 7EX
Attention of
                                                                    Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
Address                                                             Facsimile: 0171-273 8050
                        b h o
                                                                    DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4
Fax No                  O ni s its            V T oR

From           D ru S h a rp lin g
               C h ie f C row n P rosecutor
               C e n tra l C asew ork


Date                         la.              Time


This fax transmission consists of this page plus     Z.       others

If transmission is not properly received please call 0171- 273 1225



MESSAGE




          ?r -A          rvv            tfowvfl
   2fck

                                                                -    —




                    u
26/06   '97   16:56       ©0171    273   8450                                                 @001


                                            $•$ * * * * * &$ • * * &* * $ • * t i:%
                                                 ACTIVITY REPORT
                                            * $ * * * $ * & * * * * * * * *   :J: * * 3 : *




                      TRANSMISSION OK

                      TX/RX NO.                           9684

                      CONNECTION TEL                                      901712732703
                      CONNECTION ID
                      START TIME                        26/06         16:54

                      USAGE TIME                        01'15
                      PAGES                                   3
                      RESULT                            OK
      From: Paul Pugh                              cc: Mr Michael
            Head of Operational Policing               Mr O’Brien
             Policy Unit                               Lord Williams
            Room 539                                   Mr Howarth
            Queen Anne’s Gate                          Sir Richard Wilson
            » 273 3141                                 HMCIC
             26 June 1997                              Miss Weldon
                                                       Mr Halliday
                                                       Mr Boys Smith
                                                       Mr Granatt
 CPS CENTRAL CASEWORK PROSECUTIONS                     Mr Middleton
To:                             URGENT:                Miss Loudon
                                                       Mr R Evans
                                                       Mr Edmundson
Discuss:                              Comp, book
                   30 1U N 1997                        Ms Walker
                                                       Ms Clifford
Seen oy:       K                 2.                    Mr Warner
                                                       Mr Owen
Action                 Action         lActcoai
                       Date:          | Dower;

  Home Secretary



  HILLSBOROUGH: ORAL STATEMENT, MONDAY 30 JUNE


  Here are the draft oral statement and supporting briefing for the Hillsborough
  announcement on Monday.

  2.    We have taken forward the handling arrangements which you agreed in Peter
  Edmundson s submission of 24 June. When I explained the position to Richard
  Wells, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, he said that, while he remained of the
  view that there was no new evidence, he fully understood the reasons for
  commissioning a further judicial examination. When the announcement is made he
  will make clear that South Yorkshire Police will give the fullest possible co-operation
  to Lord Justice Stuart Smith. He will reflect over the next few days on what else he
  might say publicly, but he may go so far as to welcome the examination as a means
  of resolving matters conclusively.

  3.       I attach:

           A        Draft oral statement. Lord Justice Stuart Smith has seen and is
                    happy with the draft. He asked for only one change from the previous
                    draft: in paragraph 20 he did not want to give any commitment at this
                    stage to hearing oral representations.




  F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
        B      Chronology of events.


        C      Question and Answer briefing on:

               i.     The new judicial examination and why it is being established.

               ii.    Inquests.

               iii.   Police disciplinary issues.

               iv.    The role of the CPS.

               v.     The role of the Attorney General. ( V * fa t


       D       Background on the issues covered in the Question and Answer
               briefing.


       E       Draft letters for you to send on Monday after the announcement to

                      Relatives who have written in the past.

                      Other interested parties.


              i let us know if you require anything further before the weekend.




                                                      PAUL PUGH




F:\OPPU\HOU\SHORTSUB\PP0257MA.DOC
 H I L L S B O R O U G H DISASTER: C H R O N O L O G Y



15 A p r il 1989: D isaster at H illsb o ro u g h resulting in the deaths o f 96 L ive rp o o l fans

17 A p r il 1989: L o rd Justice T a ylo r appointed to carry out a p u b lic in q u iry

24 A p ril 1989: W est M idlands P olice Investigation began

I A u g u st 1989: In te rim R eport} L o rd Justice T a ylo r’ s In q u iry
J a n u a ry 1990: F in a l R eport }

A p r il - M a y 1990: C oroner’ s Inquest opens - m in-inquests to id e n tify each o f the
deceased and when and where they died - adjourned on 4 M ay 1990 so as not to ris k
p re ju d icin g p o lice in q u irie s

15 M a y - 29 June 1989: o ra l evidence presented to the T a ylo r Inqu iry b y 174
witnesses at a p u b lic hearing

15 A u g u s t 1990: PC A co n firm that the investigation carried out (under th e ir
supervision) b y W est M idlands P olice is satisfactory. C opy o f report subsequently
passed to DPP

S eptem ber 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to crim in a l
proceedings

N ovem ber 1990 - M a rc h 1991: C oroner’ s Inquest resumed, w hen evidence rela tin g
to the in cid e n t as a w hole was heard - ve rd ict o f “ accidental death” reached

I I J u ly 1991: P C A directed that charges o f neglect o f duty be preferred against C h ie f
Supt. D uckenfield and Supt. M urray

10 N ovem ber 1991: C h ie f Supt D uckenfield retires on m edical grounds and is no
longer subject to the P olice D iscip lin e Code

13 J a n u a ry 1992: P C A announces that charges against Supt. M u rra y have been
dropped because the jo in t allegation o f neglect o f duty could not be heard in the
absence o f the m ore senior o ffic e r

N ovem ber 1993: A p p lica tio n refused fo r Judicial R eview o f the C oroner’ s
proceedings

5 D ecem ber 1996: Granada T elevision Dram a

17 D ecem ber 1996: House o f Commons A djournm ent Debate - M ichael H ow ard
prom ised to consider any “ new” evidence

7 M a rc h 1997: D ossier o f evidence from Fam ilies presented to the Hom e O ffic e
                              H I L L S B O R O U G H Q & A BRIEFING



T h e inde p e n d e n t s c ru tin y

D id th e T a y lo r in q u iry get it w rong?

I don’t believe so. LJ T a ylo r carried out a fu ll and through in q u iry w h ich id e n tifie d
the causes o f the disaster at H illsb o ro u g h and made im portant recom m endations to
prevent such a tragedy happening again.



Why have you ordered this independent scrutiny if you are not prepared to
order a new inquiry?

A s I explained in m y statem ent, we need to establish conclusively that no m aterial
evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes o f the H illsb o ro u g h disaster.
T his is w hat LJ S tuart-S m ith’ s scru tin y w ill do.



What are your reasons for not ordering a public inquiry?

W e have exam ined closely the m aterial subm itted to us but we have been unable to
id e n tify any sig n ifica n t new evidence w hich was not available to LJ T a ylo r’ s o rig in a l
in q u iry.



What about the new evidence uncovered by the Granada
programme/Hillsborough Family Support Group?

LJ S tuart-S m ith w ill be exam ining the m aterial subm itted to determ ine w hether it
constitutes new and sig n ifica n t evidence.



Why have you selected LJ Stuart-Smith?

LJ S tuart-S m ith is a senior and respected fig u re from the C ourt o f A ppeal whose
experience w ill be invaluable in assessing the evidence presented.


When will the LJ Stuart-Smith begin work?
                                                                                                        o
I expect LJ S tuart-S m ith to begin w o rk in September when he has fu lfille d his current
com m itm ents. T his w ill a llo w those w ho w ish to make representations tim e to prepare               °
*hem-                                                                                          wcfe:
 How long will the scrutiny last?

I hope L J S tuart-S m ith w ill report b y the end o f the year.


What will the scrutiny be examining?

LJ S tuart-S m ith w ill lo o k at a ll the w ritte n evidence and other m aterial w hich has
been subm itted to us. He w ill also be able to consider fu rth e r m aterial w hich
interested parties w ish to submit



Will the scrutiny take evidence in person?

That w ill be fo r LJ S tuart-S m ith to decide.



Will former Ch Supt Duckenfield or any other officers be required to give
evidence?

T his is not an investigative body. N o-one w ill be required to give evidence.


F u rth e r a ctio n

What action will you take if the review finds that there is new and significant
evidence?

I f L J S tuart-S m ith fin d s that there is new and sig n ifica n t evidence not available to LJ
T a ylo r’ s in q u iry w hich brings the findings o f the o rig in a l in q u iry in to question, I shall
order a new p u b lic in q u iry. The A ttorney-G eneral and the D ire cto r o f P ublic
Prosecutions w ill consider the relevance o f that evidence to th e ir statutory
responsibilities.



Could Duckenfield or any other police officers face prosecution?

That w ill be a decision fo r the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions in the lig h t o f LJ
S tuart-S m ith’ s fin d in g s.
 Disciplinary action

 Why was no disciplinary action taken against two senior officers, as
 recommended by the PCA?

Charges o f neglect o f duty were preferred, on the d irection o f the P C A , against tw o
o ffice rs [C h. Supt. D uckenfield and Superintendent M u rra y] in respect o f th e ir
handling o f p o lice operations at H illsborough.

The senior o f the tw o o ffice rs retired fro m the force on m edical grounds on 10
N ovem ber 1991 w ith the consequence that he was no longer subject to police
d iscip lin e .

In January 1992, the P C A agreed to an application from the force to w ithdraw the
charge against the other o ffic e r because the case against him was dependent on th e ir
being jo in tly neglectful.



Do you think it is fair that an officer can avoid discipline by obtaining medical
retirement?

H om e O ffic e guidance to C h ie f Constables is clear that every e ffo rt should be made to
determ ine the d is cip lin a ry charges before m edical retirem ent.

I f d iscip lin e action is to be taken, m edical retirem ent m ay be deferred u n til it has been
concluded. H ow ever, i f an in d iv id u a l is so ill, and lik e ly to rem ain so, that he is
unable to attend a d iscip lin e hearing, the C h ie f Constable m ay conclude that there is
little choice but to abandon the proceedings. T his is a decision fo r the force
concerned.



Will any officers be disciplined now?

That is a m atter fo r the C h ie f Constable in the lig h t o f the evidence found. A c tio n can
o n ly be taken against o ffice rs s till serving in the force.
The inquest

Do you believe a fresh inquest should be held

That is a m atter fo r the A tto rn e y G eneral. A s I have explained, the A tto rn e y General
takes the vie w that, on the m aterial so fa r presented, any application to the H ig h C ourt
fo r a new inquest w ould not have any re a listic prospect o f succeeding.



What about the recent medical evidence that victims were alive after 3.15?

W hether it was appropriate to regard 3.15 as the p o in t at w hich a ll victim s were lik e ly
to have died was an issue thorough ly exam ined during the ju d ic ia l review o f the
inquest. The D iv is io n a l C ourt was satisfied that there were in s u ffic ie n t grounds to
reopen the inquest.



Was it right for the coroner to select witnesses, with the help of the police, when
the police were so closely involved with the disaster?

A coroner is the independent investigator in to the circum stances o f a death. A n
inquest is his in q u iry and it is fo r h im to decide w hat evidence to adm it and w hich
w itnesses to ca ll. H e m ust discharge his responsibilities ju d ic ia lly and at no tim e show
bias tow ards any o f those in vo lve d w ith the death.



Inquests: general

What are the procedures for coroners’ inquests?

A n inquest is a ju d ic ia l in q u iry conducted b y a coroner in order to establish the
answers to a lim ite d range o f questions surrounding a death w hich has been reported
to him . It is n o rm a lly held in p u b lic according to procedures set dow n in the Coroners
A c t 1988 and the Coroners Rules 1984.



What is the role of the jury?

The ro le o f the ju ry at an inquest is to determ ine the verdict. In m ost cases, a ju ry is
n o t required, but in certain circum stances, such as a death in custody, a ju ry is
m andatory. A coroner m ay decide to convene a ju ry in other cases i f he considers it
appropriate to do so.
Inquests: verdicts

Does an a c cid e n ta l death v e rd ic t m ean th a t no one was to blam e?

It is not the fu n ctio n o f a coroner’s inquest to determ ine questions o f blam e. A n
accidental death does not necessarily mean that no-one was to blam e fo r it, and the
inquest ve rd ict does not deprive any person o f any c iv il rem edy w hich otherw ise
m ig h t be available.



W h y do inquests n o t re tu rn m ore v e rd ic ts o f u n la w fu l k illin g ?

The ve rd ict o f u n la w fu l k illin g is reserved fo r cases o f hom icide (except where the
k illin g was ju s tifie d ). To return such a verdict, the court m ust be satisfied to the
c rim in a l standard o f proof.

The norm al standard o f p ro o f in the coroner’s court is on the balance o f p ro b a b ilitie s.

There were 169 verdicts o f u n la w fu l k illin g returned in 1996 out o f a to ta l o f nearly
20,000 inquests. [19,855 inquests]



W h a t a b o u t la c k o f care?

Lack o f care in the coroner’ s court has nothing to do w ith c iv il negligence and dojea
not indicate a breach o f duty. To return such a ve rd ict there m ust be a clear ^asual ^
connection between a fa ilu re to provide physical care and the death.            V


In q u e sts and disasters

Is th e in q u e st system equipped to deal w ith deaths a ris in g fro m disasters?

On the w hole the e xisting arrangements w o rk w e ll. H ow ever, where a p u b lic in q u iry
has been established b y the G overnm ent, there can be an overlap between the inquest
and the in q u iry . In these circum stances, the R eport o f the W orking P arty on D isasters
and Inquests, w hich was published e arlier th is year, recommended that the inquest
should n o rm a lly be adjourned pending the conclusion o f the in q u iry, and should not
n o rm a lly be resumed. T his w ould relieve relatives from the need to g ive evidence
tw ice over.



W h a t a ctio n is being taken to im p le m e n t these recom m endations?

The m ain change proposed is to relieve coroners o f the need to resume th e ir inquest
after the in q u iry has been com pleted. There is no im m ediate prospect o f a suitable
le g isla tive o p p o rtu n ity to amend the Coroners A c t 1988 but the G overnm ent intends
to pursue the m atter w hen such an opportun ity arises.
It is already open to coroners to adjourn inquests pending an in q u iry i f they feel it
appropriate to do so.



What would have happened if the recommendations had been in place at the
time of the Hillsborough disaster?

Subject to a ce rtifica te fro m the L o rd C hancellor, there w ould have been no need to
resum e the inquest unless the coroner had decided that there was some exceptional
reason fo r doing so.

The fa m ilie s o f those w ho died w ould have been spared some a d ditional distress.
             10.0 •■>     '£}'U i i i   ^ , o 0 4 00
                                                                                     U l?l   £ 7 3 6-450       l<fl UU2




  QUESTION AND ANSWER BRIEFING FOR HOME OFFICE

  LINE TO TAKE:

 The CPS considers that the m aterial so fa r presented to it w ould not ju s tify fresh crim in a l
 investigation. H ow ever the CPS w ill reconsider the position i f the scrutiny id e n tifie s any
 evidence that m ight be relevant w hich has not pre vio u sly been considered.

 Question
 W ill the independent scru tin y be able to advise the CPS to commence c rim in a l proceedings?

 A nsw er
 N o, decisions on c rim in a l proceedings are m atters fo r the CPS. The scru tin y w ill draw to
 the attention o f the CPS any evidence not previously considered w hich m ay be relevant to
 th e ir duties.

 Q uestion
 W hat w ill the CPS do i f the scrutiny id e n tifie s relevant m aterial?

A nsw er
That is a m atter fo r the CPS, and it w ould be w rong to speculate at th is stage.

Q uestion
W ill you te ll the CPS to prosecute?

Answ er
N o. D ecisions on prosecutions are e n tire ly fo r the prosecuting authorities. I t w o u ld be qu ite
im proper fo r the Hom e Secretary to try to influence prosecution decisions in in d iv id u a l c a s e s .

Q uestion
I f the scru tin y fin d s no fresh evidence, but concludes that m aterial so fa r subm itted ju s tifie s
c rim in a l proceedings o r fu rth e r enquiry w hat w ill the CPS do?

Answer
The CPS w ill o f course ca re fu lly consider any view s expressed b y the independent scru tin y,
and take them in to account before reaching a fin a l decision.

Question
Is the CPS going to make a separate announcement o f its conclusions?

Answer
I am aware that a ll those persons w ho have recently w ritte n to the D ire c to r o f P ublic
Prosecutions o r the CPS are being sent letters today by the C row n P rosecution Service
explaining m ore fu lly th e ir conclusions at th is stage and the assistance they w ill be p ro v id in g
to the independent scru tin y.




L o u is e \H ills



                     'J
W           \k a a A       f e iv           r f         IT jP

                                                                                                        fa M A J L                             (^    I

                                                    c u s & ie k U                                      c W             h p                h a &



                           PvV              It, ' Ait^J & /
                           C tu t^ k J l                        O ik 'S                        b ^ o U . C r\                           p &         to    -   k   o        lu   jr f



    ®          U c l/                          (M        jh ^ n .                c e U t, C u d                                  -



    4                                 fc > & i$ h y b a Q lu i                                          fu u U




Q       ’Q $ \a a U             to         b u fM               s \           it x

        ^                       W     - ( b - y k                    C d tc f-                  l^          ia               \       < = ic L ^                        ^



        (§ \A ti ® £ Q hjM ttfro. tot

A       (K )           U    )              b       it     m     M               ty tw                   > k f                    ^             £ '• *    ttftts & fc M            # -,

                 t* * U              { P       j                                                        •   L fy &                     tf t Q j s t        u f a b s i? - )



                                                         i *        f o                  i l

        rc )       C < H fi                c t& ~ ,             a         /      & W                        R       -            M      -n          s t n * J u ,< ,       •




         £& vm S *?'                                                           a ju P f c t o d * > * * * >

               h d b k o              r f          a * x fi                   h f              u ic M                   ti           f f if         p X i~ ^          h &       u S    i

              fy tf        c d        » *          h Q aU             (              t          *



    Q                           tw     u            (A      S ttU A A y                             -           K        ' d lo J



    0           U //U            i/        W (            c1}         Q ^K p )                          o /k ,                       ( f i \

    A            Vfcv
      ' L u ll                                                                               C ju k
          r fttU .       do    ( if O ^ f - s      U       t C & tK            f a   *   J -0 2 *    , h u * * j
        h z fy COJOulA f\W o '

        (k        u u b f it ^ ,       h     f a                                         £     'i    c h     .
        i3 j - i u ' t l /             U zk & S              4 ttJ           < M A & r tU u 4

          to ffa                                       sc                      S '              U •


      ^              6 iM & fa h to (m m cU                                              tbgu M ^ aM * < f
      fh 4 c c i P       c p f     ( ic 4 f t               ( f /t f M          U & L        f t f a jv y

       a j/M       d u j         c h jv u t f           p /o c s         ■




                              adhAOu C l) jo t & j& tu b
                 (y\                                            &> < W U et c iM a j,                                -
      U iM M tX ^ Js& jk-


       h y / t M & h                                   $       M U btyiA ^
       (M p / k i ^ i s f                                                *

f t       't n     >     B M ^ S           c p iit e t f t d             c *     b h i,c        £>    c k o ^ u ^
          t t J q u J u \Z j .

Q       If ^lUd,                                G fu tiU t                                   , ow U V
          c W      )th    \M    fa t       i s r f u t , '



 (\        PflifoMt Q\y\p4WTKi ^                                         fa** bt(*C4MM                             L j T.
             duA (uU ccmicL cj - turf f c ’f'&\khsJ^ (id u tt jO M sufrtf.
             ~^U/\ SO/ldiU (                  IP '/few)        60 '       c /v tu .
6 )    C tv fr u /? h O i ( it fa n x k * , IfU u c i) u M tt K m
         b J d t o ck s to J fla S t

(5p      IAaAJ Ifopu4giLi/^hO^A.t*J                                                         l~Ji
         C tftu a L       W   M fc J     '




Q )    (k fu X H & hcU fcA o) -     U * U cjh h*
          ^ P ^ b k c - Q% fh t f Q ffto h J l tC jfiC ^eL £ U -
         p & C n c p /J /^ i& tkt& P ■

&        CCa       Q k k o J t fc tt#                      tflt,            t- 3              in tZ tfo fiJ it* ?


H i &        p w -

(?) Su^pU -to’& j c frtf,                        L J 5-5                           w ccfot
      S h u t ^ c p jP j U\             &P •

®      W \lA jk >                        & &> f i j ^ s t ,                 b & t S cA ^ & J
      <#/ V >»     &      p u J b k h p f       <W    Jc   h i t ih     *     ^     Q 0 U i( £



Q       & ip ( r t s /l    C C ->   4*       b<% &         b   ( - jt       L J    S 'S

      c fe u o tl p K X S d u jt '

@        U   i U       c U a .c m a a        d e fo a M    t* $     \                     t f t   •
    6h         Q ol
               r                       k                  j           ks               /tR

          Gn b
          ^        (^       a    d    fy    ,   / t / C U ^ )(J M a .O s L             u^yL             rP h tA J tS L ^




          M &U>lucrta '&r tvckJi&i ftvffufrfxJnM^ k&.
         H     q m      ,                                                 u Z x        M       ia   &         -                 *   *   ■ ’



4    '                                                    id        S~~>          B r tjfU J ^ j                      ftJ h




£p 1AM tJ J-3 cyuitBU.<*tf&kkiU ^)<>xn £> ^
    faltit [pcttii^C4t )
A                              U                                                ty x                      *

              ^ C C u J t \\ ) jf                         (tM d & K u

                                                                                                        A JU ouA^, .
               T Z k jic r L d '

Q WcwUfim fb jc/u-j.pm                                                                     .                      . . . . . .
         id's. $ to t-yaXt ch4 / ^JaJ nuo to lw ^ CttsyrfOby
         CV?{                              rt>h QjJCLtsf

^                               f o '& 't       Q JsM M s      l/\6 * V     ■                                              __

               U3                    *^V, ctKx. fi>            C^Jfc^h ui<
                                                                         u*j t rtSl (
                                                                                    t> cJhUp^t
                cp\                         '
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                                  CPS
                                                                                                                  CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                  50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                  London EC4M TEX


                                                                                                  Switchboard.:   0171-273 8000
 r                                                                                                     DX No:     300850 Ludgate EC4

  M r G W rig h t
                                                                               Facsimile: 0171-   273 8050

                                                                            Direct Line: 0171-


                                                                          Our Reference:


 L                                                        J               Your Reference:



                                                                                                   30 June 1997




     H IL L S B O R O U G H

     A lth o u g h we have not corresponded personally in the past, m ay I take this opportun ity
     to express m y deepest sym pathy fo r yo u r tra g ic loss in the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster.

     In January this year you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills
     Q C , asking her to seriously consider a ll aspects o f therH illsborough inquests together w ith
     the issues brought to lig h t by the Granada T V program m e, to ensure that the tru th is know n.

     The CPS does not have the pow er to set up another inquest. A s you w ill be aw are, legal
     moves to require another inquest to be held d id not succeed.

     The question w hether there should be another p u b lic enquiry is a m atter fo r the Hom e
     Secretary and not the C row n Prosecution Service. I expect, how ever, that you have heard
     the announcem ent by the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an independent scrutiny to
     ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was no t previously available rela tin g
     to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

             To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsb o ro u g h
             Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                       (a)    To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                       (b )   To the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions o r the A tto rn e y G eneral fo r the
                              purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities; o r

                       (c)    To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                              d iscip lin a ry m atters;




                              Crown Prosecution Service * Working in the interests of justice
         A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not previously available is o f
         such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
         D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in rela tio n to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
         th e ir respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action w hich should
         be taken in the p u b lic interest.

I t m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the role o f the CPS in re la tio n to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster to
help you p u t th is announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll crim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The p o lice are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsb o ro u g h disaster. The purpose o f considering th is m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was su fficie n t, the CPS w ould in vite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
in d ividuals.

A t th is stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the p o lice to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scru tin y, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in whatever way it can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
findings before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope that you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider whether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that this le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




Dru Sharpling (Miss)
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Miss D. H. Sharpling                                                                                           m
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                         CPS
                                                                                                               CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                               London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                              Switdtboard:     0171-273 8000
 r                                                        1                                       DX No:       300850 Ludgate EC4
 M r & M rs K C la rk
                                                                              Facsimile: 0171- 273   8050

                                                                            Direct Line: 0171- 2 7 3 1 2 2 5


                                                                          Our Reference:

L                                                        J               Your Reference:



                                                                                              30 June 1997




 H IL L S B O R O U G H

 A lthough we have not corresponded personally in the past, m ay I take th is opp o rtu n ity to
 express m y deepest sym pathy to you fo r your tra g ic loss in the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster.

 On 9 January 1997 you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills
 Q C, asking that the tra g ic events at H illsb o ro u g h in 1989 be re-exam ined to b rin g out the
 tru th about w hat happened on that day.

 A s you know , the C row n Prosecution Service has been considering very ca re fu lly papers and
 tapes in re la tio n to the disaster. In add itio n , we have exam ined some m aterial supplied by
 the H illsb o ro u g h F a m ily Support G roup.

 I expect you have heard the announcement by the Home Secretary that there is to be an
 independent scrutiny to ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not
 previously available rela tin g to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

         To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsb o ro u g h
         Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                  (a)     To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                  (b )    To the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney G eneral fo r the
                          purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory re sp o nsibilities; o r

                  (c)     To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to p o lice
                          d iscip lin a ry m atters;




                          Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
         A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not previously available is o f
         such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
         Departm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in relation to (b ) and (c) to draw to th e ir
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
         th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
         be taken in the p ub lic interest.

I t may be h e lp fu l i f I explain the role o f the CPS in re la tio n to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster to
help you put this announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll crim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The po lice are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsborough disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was su fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f c rim in a l charges against named
individ uals.

A t this stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institu te an independent scrutiny, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in w hatever way it .can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
fin d in g s before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope th a t you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider w hether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that th is le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




Dru Sharpling (Miss)
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                          m
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                          CPS
                                                                                                          CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                          50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                          London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
                                                          1                                         DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4
 fa r T H icks
  C hairm an o f H FSG
                                                                               Facsimile: 0171- 273   8050

                                                                             Direct Line: 0171- 273   1225

                                                                           Our Reference:

                                                          J               Your Reference:



                                                                                                30 June 1997




  HILLSBOROUGH
  A ltho ugh w e have not corresponded personally in the past, may I take the opportunity to
  express m y deepest sym pathy fo r you r tra gic loss in the H illsboroug h D isaster.

  I am aware that you have been in contact w ith m y colleague George C roston in Y o rk and I
  thought it appropriate to w rite to you to le t you know the up to date position. As you know ,
  the C row n Prosecution Service has been considering very ca re fu lly papers and tapes in
  re la tio n to the disaster. In addition, we have exam ined the m aterial supplied by you on be half
  o f the H illsb o ro u g h F a m ily Support G roup in you r le tte r addressed to the D ire cto r o f P u b lic
  Prosecutions, Dam e Barbara M ills Q C , together w ith m aterial supplied by M s A d lin g to n m
  her le tte r o f 4 M arch 1997.

   I know you have heard the announcement by the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an
   independent scrutiny to ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not
   previously available relating to the H illsboro ugh D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

           To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsboroug h
           Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                    (a)       To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                       (b )   To the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney General fo r the
                              purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities, o r

                       (c)    To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to p olice
                               d iscip lin a ry m atters;




                              Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
        A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not previously available is o f
        such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
        D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in re la tio n to (b ) and (c) to draw to th e ir
        attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich may be relevant to
        th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
        be taken in the p u b lic interest.

I t may be h e lp fu l i f I explain the role o f the CPS in re la tio n to the H illsb oro ugh D isaster to
help you put this announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll c rim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The police are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
a rising fro m the H illsbo roug h disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was s u fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r form a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
individ u a ls.

A t this stage the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institu te an independent scrutiny, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again w hen the outcome o f that scrutiny is know n. I can assure
you that the CPS w ill assist the independent scrutiny- in * w hatever way it can and we w ill
ca re fu lly exam ine its fin dings before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

There are tw o outstanding issues upon w hich you aw ait a re p ly, they are:

        •        the request fo r a m eeting (as m entioned in the o p in io n o f A lu n Jones QC dated
                 3 M arch 1997); and

        •        a considered rep ly to your fax o f 8 A p ril 1997, enclosing yo u r comments on
                 the statement o f South Y orkshire police dated 1 A p ril 1997.

In re la tio n to both o f these, the Hom e Secretary’ s announcement means that you can be
assured that there is to be an independent scrutiny to establish w hether m aterial not
previously considered m ight have an im pact on decisions to be made, as w e ll as w hether
there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic enquiry. I im agine you w ill be in v itin g those responsible fo r
the scrutiny to exam ine the m aterial referred to by A lu n Jones QC as w e ll as yo u r comments
in re la tio n to the South Y orkshire police press statem ent o f 1 A p ril 1997. I th in k the proper
course w ould be fo r these issues to be considered by the independent scrutiny before any
m eeting is held w ith the CPS. I am p a rticu la rly anxious to avoid any suggestion o r
im pression that the CPS has in any way pre-judged the outcom e o f the independent scrutiny.
I am sure you w ill appreciate the im portance o f ensuring that everything is done pro perly and
in the rig h t order. I w ill w rite to you again when the outcom e o f the scrutiny is know n.
I have sent a le tte r sim ila r to this one to M s A dlin g to n .

I hope that this le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.



   wowv W Cfi^cl


D ru S h a rp lin g (M iss)
C h ie f C row n Prosecutor
Miss D, H, Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                     CPS
                                                                                                           CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                           50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                           London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                 Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
                                                          "I                                         DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4

                                                                                                 273 8050
                                                                              Facsimile: 0171-

                                                                                                 273 1225
                                                                            Direct Line: 0171-


                                                                          Our Reference:
L                                                        J               Your Reference:


                                                                                                 30 June 1997



 HILLSBOROUGH

 In January 1997 you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills QC
 askmg that the tra g ic events at H illsborough in 1989 be re-exam ined so that people
 responsible can be brought to ju stice and to ensure that nothing sim ila r ever happens again.

A lthou gh we have not corresponded personally in the past, may I take th is oppo rtu n ity to
express m y deepest sym pathy fo r your trag ic loss in the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster.

As you w ill know , the C row n Prosecution Service has been considering very ca re fu lly papers
and tapes m re la tio n to the disaster. In addition, we exam ined some m aterial supplied by the
H illsb o ro u g h F a m ily Support G roup.

I expect you have heard the announcement by the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an
independent scrutiny to ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not
previously available relating to the H illsboro ugh D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

         To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsb o ro u g h
         Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                 (a)     To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                 (b)     To the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney General fo r the
                         purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities; o r

                 (c)     To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                         d iscip lin a ry m atters;

        A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not previously available is o f
        such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
        D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in relatio n to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir




                         Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
          attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich may be relevant to
          th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
          be taken in the pu b lic interest.

 I t m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the role o f the CPS in relation to the H illsbo roug h D isaster to
 help you put th is announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
 responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll c rim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
 England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The p olice are
 responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
 an offender.

 In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
 arising fro m the H illsbo rou gh disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
 ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
 evidence was s u fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r form al
 investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
 individ uals.

 A t this stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
 does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

 In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scru tin y, the
 CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
 w ill assist the independent scrutiny in w hatever way it can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
 fin d in g s before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope that you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider w hether there should be a fu rth e r pu b lic
enquiry.

I hope that this le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.


iQ c r ir n




Dru Sharpling (Miss)
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Miss D. H. Sharpling                                                                                      CPS
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                          CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                          50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                          London EC4M TEX


                                                                                               Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
 r                                                       1                                          DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4

 M r & M rs J P Joynes
                                                                              Facsimile: 0171- 273     8050

                                                                            Direct Line: 0171- 2 7 3   1225

                                                                          Our Reference:


                                                                         Your Reference:



                                                                                               30 June 1997




  HILLSBOROUGH
  A ltho ugh we have not corresponded personally in the past, may I take this opportunity to
  express m y deepest sym pathy fo r yo ur tra gic loss in the H illsb orou gh D isaster,

  O n 16 Decem ber 1996 you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills
  Q C , asking that c rim in a l proceedings be com m enced*6irthe grounds that the statem ent o f
  R oger H ouldsw orth contains allegations that m aterial evidence was destroyed o r concealed.

     As you know , the C row n Prosecution Service has been considering very ca re fu lly papers and
     tapes in re la tio n to the disaster. In add itio n, we exam ined some m aterial supplied by the
     H illsb o ro u g h F a m ily Support G roup.

     I expect you have heard the announcement by the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an
     independent scrutiny to ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not
     previously available re lating to the H illsboroug h D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

             To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsb o ro u g h
             Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                     (a)     To the in q u iry conducted b y the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                       (b)   To the D ire cto r o f P u blic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney General fo r the
                             purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities, o r

                       (c)   To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to po lice
                              d iscip lin a ry m atters;




                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
         A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not previously available is o f
         such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
         D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in re la tio n to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich may be relevant to
         th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
         be taken in the pu b lic interest.

I t may be h e lp fu l i f I explain the ro le o f the CPS in re la tio n to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster to
help you put th is announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll crim in a l cases resulting fro m p olice investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The po lice are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsb orou gh disaster. The purpose o f considering th is m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su ffic ie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was su fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
in d ivid uals.

A t th is stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scru tin y, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutin y is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in w hatever way it ean and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
fin d in g s before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope th a t you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider w hether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that th is le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




Dru Sharpling (Miss)
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                             CPS
                                                                                                         CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                         50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                         London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                               Switchboard': 0171-273 8000
 r                                                        1                                        DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4

 M s A M A d lin g to n
                                                                               Facsimile: 0171- 273   8050
 S o lic ito r to HFSG

                                                                            Direct Line: 0171- 273    1225

                                                                          Our Reference:

 L                                                        J               Your Reference:



                                                                                               30 June 1997



  f o u r      K    s

 H IL L S B O R O U G H

  I am aware that you have been in contact w ith m y colleague George C roston in Y o rk and I
  thought it appropriate to w rite to you to le t you know the up to date p o sition . A s you know ,
  the C row n P rosecution Service has been considering very ca re fu lly papers and tapes in
  re la tio n to the disaster. In addition, we have exam ined the m aterial supplied on be h a lf o f the
  H illsb o ro u g h F a m ily Support G roup by M r H icks in his better addressed to the D ire c to r o f
  P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills Q C , together w ith the m aterial you supplied m
  yo ur le tte r o f 4 M arch 1997.

  Y ou w ill have heard the announcement by the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an
  independent scrutiny to ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not
  previously available relating to the H illsb orou gh D jsaster. The term s o f reference are:

           To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsb o ro u g h
           Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                    (a)     To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                    (b)     To the D ire cto r o f P ub lic Prosecutions o r the A tto rney General fo r the
                            purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory respo nsibilities, o r

                    (c)     To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                             d iscip lin a ry m atters;

            A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not previously available is o f
            such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretory o f State fo r the Hom e
            D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in re la tion to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir
            attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to




                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
        th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
        be taken in the p u b lic interest.

It m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the ro le o f the CPS in relatio n to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster to
help you pu t th is announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll crim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The p olice are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsb o ro u g h disaster. The purpose o f considering th is m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was s u fficie n t evidence to start a c rim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was su fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
individ u a ls.

A t th is stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scru tin y, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again w hen the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in whatever way it can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
fin d in g s before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I am aware th a t there are several outstanding issues from your perspective:

        •        Y o u r requests fo r a m eeting;

        •        A considered re p ly to yo u r correspondence, in p a rticu la r yo u r letters o f 4
                 M arch 1997 and 7 A p ril 1997;

        •        A n in d ica tio n o f w hen the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions w ill announce the
                 decision in th is m atter.

In re la tio n to a ll o f these, the Hom e Secretary’s announcement means that you can be assured
that there is to be an independent scrutiny to establish w hether m aterial not previously
considered m ight have an im pact on decisions to be made, as w e ll as w hether there should
be a fu rth e r p u b lic enquiry. I im agine you w ill be in v itin g those responsible fo r the scrutiny
to exam ine the m aterial referred to by A lim Jones QC as w e ll as your com m ents in re la tio n
to the South Y orkshire police press statement o f 1 A p ril 1997. I th in k the proper course
w ould be fo r these issues to be considered b y the independent scrutiny before any m eeting
is held w ith the CPS. I am p a rticu la rly anxious to avoid any suggestion o r im pression that
the CPS has in any way pre-judged the outcome o f the independent scrutiny. I am sure you
w ill appreciate the im portance o f ensuring that everything is done properly and in the rig h t
order. I w ill w rite to you again when the outcom e o f the scrutiny is know n.
I have sent a le tte r s im ila r to this one to M r H icks.

I hope that this le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




U1W3
                               *

D u *.     (S k A v fW


D ru S h a rp lin g (M iss)
C h ie f C row n Prosecutor
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                      CPS
                                                                                                            CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                            50 Ludgate HiU
                                                                                                            London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                  Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
 f                                                         ~]                                         d x No: 300850 Ludgate EC4


                                                                               Facsimile: 0171-   273 8050

                                                                             Direct Line: 0171-   273 1225

                                                                           Oar Reference:


                                                                          Your Reference:



                                                                                                  30 June 1997




     H IL L S B O R O U G H

     Thank you fo r your le tte r o f 12 M ay 1997 addressed to Dame Barbara M ills Q C, D ire c to r
     o f P ublic prosecutions. Y ou asked her to support yo ur request to re-open the pu b lic enquiry.

     The question w hether there should be another p u b lic enquiry is a m atter fo r the Hom e
     Secretary and not the C row n Prosecution Service. I expect, how ever, that you have heard
     the announcement b y the Hom e Secretary that there-4s~to be an independent scrutiny to
     ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not previously available re la ting
     to the H illsb oro ugh D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

             To ascertain w hether any evidence exists re la ting to the disaster at the H illsb o ro u g h
             Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                     (a)      To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                     (b)      To the D ire cto r o f P u blic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney G eneral fo r the
                              purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities; o r

                     (c)      To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                              d iscip lin a ry m atters;

             A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence no t previously available is o f
             such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
             D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in re la tio n to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir
             attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
             th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
             be taken in the p u b lic interest.




                              Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
I t m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the ro le o f the CPS in relation to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster to
help you put this announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll c rim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m in or offences). The po lice are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsb oro ugh disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was s u fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm al
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
in d ivid u a ls.

A t th is stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to in stitute an independent scrutiny, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in whatever w ay it can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
fin d in g s before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope that you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider w hether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that th is le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.               •* -




D ru S h a rp lin g (M iss)
C h ie f C row n Prosecutor
f


                                                                                                               m
    Miss D. H. Sharpling                                                                                       CPS
    Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                               CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                               London EC4M TEX


                                                                                                   Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
                                                                                                       DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4
     r                                                           i
      M r & M rs L Jones
                                                                                    Facsimile: 0171- 273    8050

                                                                                   Direct Line: 0171- 273   1225

                                                                                Our Reference:


     |_                                                          -J            Your Reference:



                                                                                                    30 June 1997



      ^             lU x «• AU3
         H IL L S B O R O U G H

         O n 10 January 1997 you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic prosecutions Dame Ba
         Q C , enclosing a copy o f a le tte r you had sent to the then Hom e S e c re t*},^ M r H ow ard
         the le tte r to M r H ow ard, you asked that the tragic events at H illsborough m 989 be
         exam ined because o f new evidence and also because certam questions had been le ft
          unanswered.                                                        * -

          A lthough we have not corresponded personally in the past, m ay I take th is o pportun ity
          express m y deepest sym pathy fo r yo ur tra g ic loss in the H illsborough Disas er.

          As you know , the C row n Prosecution Service has been considering very carefuUy papers and
          to p e H n re la tio n to the disaster. In addition, w e exam ined some m aterial supplied b y the
          H illsboro ugh F a m ily Support G roup.

          I expect you have heard the announcement made by the new Hom e Secretary that there is to
          be an independent scrutiny to ascertain w hether t e e now exfets                      ^     ™
          previou sly available re la tin g to the H illsb orou gh D isaster. The term s o f reference are.

                  To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsb o ro u g h
                  Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                             (a)    To the in q u iry conducted b y the late L o rd T a ylo r, o r

                             (b )   To the D ire cto r o f P u blic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney G eneral fo r the
                                    purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory re sp onsib ilities; o r

                             (c)    To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                                    d iscip lin a ry m atters;




                                    Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
         A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not previously available is o f
         such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
         D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in re la tio n to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
         th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
         be taken in the pu b lic interest.

It m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the role o f the CPS in relatio n to the H illsbo rou gh D isaster to
help you put this announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll crim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The po lice are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have examined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsborough disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was s u fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f crim in a l charges against named
in d ivid uals.

A t this stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to in stitute an independent scrutiny, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in w hatever w ay it .can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
find in gs before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope that you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider w hether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that th is le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




Dru Sharpling (Miss)
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Miss D. H. Sharpling
                                                                                                            m
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                      CPS
                                                                                                            CPS Centred Casework
                                                                                                            50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                            London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                 Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
 [-                                                       1                                            DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4

 M r & M rs Roberts
 and M iss S Roberts                                                          Facsimile: om-213 8050

                                                                            Direct Line: 0171-
                                                                                                 273 1225
                                                                          Our Reference:


                                                          —^             Your Reference:



                                                                                                 30 June 1997



                U / t» flv n .
 H IL L S B O R O U G H

  A ltho ugh we have not corresponded personally in the past, m ay I take this opportun ity to
  express m y deepest sym pathy fo r you r tra g ic loss in the H illsb orou gh D isaster.

  O n 28 Decem ber 1996 you w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills
  Q C , asking th a t the enquiry in to the tra g ic events at H illsb o ro u g h in 1989 be re-opened to
  b rin g out the tru th about w hat happened on that day.

  The question w hether there should be another enquiry is a m atter fo r the Hom e Secretary and
  not the C row n Prosecution Service. I expect, how ever, that you have heard the
  announcement b y the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an independent scrutiny to J is^rta
  w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not previously available relating to
  H illsb o ro u g h D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

           To ascertain w hether any evidence exists re lating to the disaster at the H illsb orou gh
           Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                    (a)      To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                    (b )     T o the D ire cto r o f P u blic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney General fo r the
                             purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities; o r

                    (c)      To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                              discip lin a ry m atters;

            A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not p re v io u s ly ^ a v a il^
            such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o S ta te ^ fo rto H o m e
            Departm ent o f a fu rth e r P u b lic In q u iry ; and in re la tio n to (b ) and (c) to draw to th e ir




                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
         attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
         th e ir respective duties; and to advise w hether there is any other action w hich should
         be taken in the p u b lic interest.

I t may be h e lp fu l i f I explain the ro le o f the CPS in re la tio n to the H illsb orou gh D isaster to
help you pu t th is announcem ent in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll c rim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The police are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
arising fro m the H illsb orou gh disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a c rim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was su ffic ie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r fo rm a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f c rim in a l charges against named
individ uals.

A t this stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scru tin y, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in w hatever way it can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
findings before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I hope that you w ill be encouraged by the announcement made, given that one o f the express
purposes o f the independent scrutiny is to consider w hether there should be a fu rth e r p u b lic
enquiry.

I hope that th is le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




Dru Sharpling (Miss)
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                            m
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                            CPS
                                                                                                            CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                            50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                            London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                              Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
                                                                                                  DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4
 r                                                       1
  M rs J M cB rien
                                                                              Facsimile: 0171- 2 7 3   8050

                                                                           Direct Line: 0171- 2 ^ 3 2 2 5


                                                                         Our Reference:

                                                         J               Your Reference:



                                                                                               30 June 1997




  H IL L S B O R O U G H

     Y ou w rote to the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions, Dame Barbara M ills Q C , on 17 January
     1997 w ith detailed notes explaining you r view s regarding respon sibility fo r the trag ic events
     in 1989.

     A lthough we have not corresponded in the past, m ay t take th is opportunity to express m y
     deepest sym pathy fo r yo ur tra g ic loss in the H illsborough D isaster.

     As you know , the C row n Prosecution Service has been considering very ca re fu lly papers and
     tapes in re la tio n to the disaster. In addition, we exam ined some m aterial supplied by the
     H illsb orou gh F a m ily Support G roup.

     I expect you have heard the announcement by the Hom e Secretary that there is to be an
     independent scrutiny to ascertain w hether there now exists any evidence w hich was not
     previously available relating to the H illsb o ro u g h D isaster. The term s o f reference are:

             To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the H illsborough
             Stadium on 15 A p ril 1989 w hich was not available:

                       (a)   To the in q u iry conducted by the late L o rd T a ylo r; o r

                       (b)   To the D ire cto r o f P ublic Prosecutions o r the A ttorney G eneral fo r the
                             purpose o f discharging th e ir respective statutory responsibilities, or


                       (c)   To the C h ie f O ffic e r o f the South Y orkshire P olice in re la tio n to police
                             discip lin a ry m atters;




                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
          A nd in re la tio n to (a) to advise w hether any evidence not p reviously available is o f
          such significance as to ju s tify establishm ent by the Secretary o f State fo r the Hom e
          D epartm ent o f a fu rth e r P ublic In q u iry ; and in re la tio n to (b) and (c) to draw to th e ir
          attention any evidence not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to
          th e ir respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action w hich should
          be taken in the p u b lic interest.

It m ay be h e lp fu l i f I explain the ro le o f the CPS in re la tion to the H illsb oro ugh D isaster to
help you put th is announcement in context so fa r as the CPS is concerned. The CPS is
responsible fo r the prosecution o f a ll c rim in a l cases resulting fro m police investigations in
England and W ales (w ith the exception o f certain m inor offences). The police are
responsible fo r investigating offences and fo r deciding w hether o r not to charge o r summons
an offender.

In recent m onths, senior law yers w ith in the CPS have exam ined large quantities o f m aterial
a rising fro m the H illsb o ro u g h disaster. The purpose o f considering this m aterial was to
ascertain w hether there was su fficie n t evidence to start a crim in a l prosecution. I f the
evidence was s u fficie n t, the CPS w ould in v ite the police to conduct a fu rth e r form a l
investigation and prepare a file fo r consideration o f c rim in a l charges against named
in d ivid u a ls.

A t th is stage, the C row n Prosecution Service takes the view that the m aterial so fa r presented
does not ju s tify asking the police to re-open the investigation.

In the lig h t o f the decision o f the Hom e Secretary to institute an independent scru tin y, the
CPS w ill consider the m atter again when the outcom e o f that scrutiny is know n. The CPS
w ill assist the independent scrutiny in whatever way it can and we w ill ca re fu lly exam ine its
fin d in g s before m aking any fu rth e r decisions.

I w ill w rite to you again once the outcom e o f the independent scrutiny is know n.

I hope that this le tte r is h e lp fu l to you.




Dru Sharpling (Miss)
Chief Crown Prosecutor
30-JUN. ’ 97(MON) 12:41
                   mnMttWMMWini&fioiinmMmnmfiomiatomiamtominmiiattiMmwiuiii

                      THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT
                       TO THE LAW OFFICERS
                                           Private Office to the Lawj Officers
                                            The Rt Hon John Moms fQC MP
                                                   Attorney Generc
                                                             &
                                           The Lord Falconer of Thofoton QC
 “late , 'N iiv n h i'jb                            Solicitor Generc

  )inl» i» c o * -                                Fax No:

                           b
                       Fax from:     n h fuart Whation      Private Sec 'etary
                                                                         <
                                                                                                    \
                                            McLaren         Assistant Pi vote Secretary
                                                              Partiame itary Clerk
                                     T ~ \fracev Foster     Okay Seen tary

                                     IMMEDIATE              URGENT i     □      ROUTINE     □
                                     PLEASE CALL                       F FAX IS ILLEGIBLE


             TO:                     f e l l.   .fith&L.


             ORGANISATION:.


             FAX NO:



             MESSAGE:




                 a daM pasi t W ImA, ovctoklL                                        QtORbi
                   Ci^STOfJ - kt Wj< k                                    (W                Ufr*

                                                  y*n.       ^


             DATE:                                                        NO OF PAGES:      O
                                                                          (excluding cover sheet)
                           Attorney General's Chambers. 9 Buckingham Gate. London. SW1E 6JP
855                                               17 DECEMBER 1996                Hillsborough Tragedy                      856


                 Hillsborough Tragedy                        began mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. Individual police
                                                             officers and first aiders did what they ceuld, but there
  Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House        was paralysis at the top of the command.
do now adjourn.—[Mr. Brandreth.]                                As the Attorney-General observed in the House on
                                                             26 October 1994:
10.1 pm                                                        “It was a painstaking and thorough inquiry. . . . The Taylor
   M r. P eter Kilfoyle (Liverpool, Walton): It is with a    report placed the blame for the tragedy fairly and squarely on
 very heavy heart that I speak in this Adjournment           police handling o f crowd control at the event.”— [Official Report,
                                                             24 October 1994; Vol. 248, c. 981.]
 debate. I am grateful, however, that my hon. Friends
 and Conservative Members are in the Chamber.                Lord Justice Taylor noted in paragraphs 311 and 278
Families o f the bereaved of Hillsborough have travelled     of his interim report that
down to London and are in the Strangers Gallery to           “the real cause of the Hillsborough disaster was overcrowding”
provide their support during the debate. I particularly      and that
note the fact that the Home Secretary has chosen to
                                                             “the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police
reply to this debate, because I think that he realises the   control.”
significance and sensitivity of the issue.
                                                                There was an agreed understanding in the. Taylor
   On 15 April 1989, on a glorious spring afternoon,         report and beyond on what happened and who, in
96 people went to a football match never to return           general, was responsible, but the inquiry did not take
again to their families. They were men and women of          place in a vacuum. As the tragedy unfolded,
all ages—from 10 to 67—and 28 of them were 18                misinformation was being spread. We were told that
years old or less. They came from all parts of the           fans had broken down gate C, that hordes of drunken
country, although mainly from Merseyside, and all of         fans charged the rear o f the Leppings lane entrance and
them had one thing in common—a love of football,             that the Liverpool fans had been the authors of the
particularly of Liverpool football club.                     terrible misfortune of the day. Those who uttered such
   It would serve no useful purpose to repeat all the        charges and wrote such lies should still hang their heads
events of that day, or to attempt to rehearse the many       in shame, given the eventual findings of the Taylor
legal arguments that have been made in the intervening       inquiry.
seven and a half years, but it is important to establish,       The low point must have been the infamous report
in general terms, what happened on that fateful day.         of that terrible day in The Sun. Even by its grub street
   Although the Liverpool supporters outnumbered the         standards it reached an abysmal low, but it was not
opposing team’s supporters, they were allocated tickets      alone. Newspaper after newspaper, tabloid and
for the smaller Leppings lane end. The allocation was        broadsheet, fed the line that fans were responsible for
made on the direction of the police, to facilitate their     the deaths. The world is full of gullible people. Perhaps
plans for incoming traffic carrying rival supporters.        that is why as late as 1993 the hon. Member for
Roadworks on the trans-Pennine route slowed down the         Welwyn Hatfield (Mr. Evans) was still peddling the
traffic carrying Liverpool fans. As they approached the      line that it was all the fault of Liverpool fans. As late
ground, it was noted that match day arrangements had         as 1995, Mr. Brian Clough continued to point the finger
been changed from those for a similar game in the            at the fans in his autobiography. There is no fool like
previous season.                                             an old fool, in politics or in football.
   It has been pointed out that the standard practice at        At the same time, a steady stream of wholly partial
Sheffield and elsewhere was for police to channel            versions of events emanated from police sources,
supporters to the appropriate turnstiles by using crash      blaming the fans and fuelling a climate of cynical
barriers. Tragically, such action was not taken on that      disregard for the facts, dwelling instead on the
day, and it set in motion a train of events that led to      exoneration of those whom some might argue were
the tragedy.                                                 culpable for the events of that day.
   The crowd built up outside the turnstiles in such a          We are here tonight because of a recent docu-drama
way that the police officer in charge there,                 on Hillsborough which demythologised the Hillsborough
Superintendent Murray, was concerned that fans were          tragedy and provided catharsis for the survivors and the
in grave danger of being crushed. He sought, and was         families of the dead. It was plain to anyone who saw
given, permission from the officer in overall charge,        that harrowing account—I note that the Home Secretary
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, to open gate C to          has commented that it was a harrowing account—that
alleviate the crush outside. That resolved the immediate     there was a presumption by the authorities that drunken
crisis, but gave rise to a much greater danger because       loutish behaviour was responsible for the deaths. That
the natural path for the fans to follow, unless directed     was illustrated by the tone and content of the police
otherwise, was through the tunnel facing them. There         questioning in the docu-drama. I do not accuse
were no stewards or police to funnel fans into               individual     junior   police    officers   of     acting
comparatively empty pens. Pressure built up in pens 3        unprofessionally; they were following a line set out for
and 4 and in the tunnel. These were the killing fields       them by senior officers and the press.
for 96 innocent men, women and children.                        If showing that a wholly erroneous version of events
   In the immediate aftermath of the horror, there was       had been portrayed by the press had been the only
a breakdown in official reaction to the tragedy, which       achievement of the docu-drama, it would have been
unfolded live on television around the country. It was       worthwhile, but it also raised the issue of the allegedly
the fans who pleaded for the gates in the perimeter          faulty video camera and the missing video tape. In my
fence to be opened; it was the fans who requisitioned        research, I noticed that in questions to the Home
hoardings as makeshift stretchers; it was the fans who       Secretary in the House following his statement of

   438 CD38-PAGJ/52
857 '                 Hillsborough Tragedy           17 DECEMBER 1996                Hillsborough Tragedy                 858

17 April 1989, my hon. Friend the Member for                      10.12 pm
St. Helens, South {Mr. Bermingham) urged that all film
of the tragedy be made available to the proposed                    The S ecretary o f State fo r the Home D epartm ent
inquiry. He presciently said:                                    (M r. M ichael How ard): I would like to join the hon.
                                                                 Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr. Kilfoyle) in
  “Unless we move quickly, that footage may be lost and it
contains evidence that may be of great value to the inquiry.”—
                                                                 expressing my deepest sympathy to the families involved
[Official Report, 17 April 1989; Vol. 151, c. 38.]               in the tragic event which took place at Hillsborough.
                                                                 I know that I speak for the whole House when I say that
How right he was.
                                                                 our thoughts will remain with them this Christmas, which
    We now have the testimony of Mr. Roger                       I know that they must find a particularly difficult time
 Houldsworth— a video technician on duty at                      of year.
 Hillsborough on that fateful day— who apparently
 contradicts the police version of the state of die video           Anybody who saw the news reports on that dreadful
cameras. He had the same view as the police of the               Saturday, 15 April 1989, will have been overwhelmed by
build-up of fans in the pens. His analysis of the                the terrible, distressing pictures. I know that the loss of
impending disaster is as at odds with the view of the            the families that suffered that appalling tragedy was made
police.                                                          all the worse by the fact that it arose from an event that
                                                                 should have been a normal family outing.
    O f course, the police take contradictory positions on
Mr. Houldsworth’s testimony. First, they say that there is          I have watched the programme “Hillsborough” and
no new evidence in it, yet it was not put before the inquiry     I indeed found it harrowing, but the hon. Gentleman will
or the inquest. Only the police version of the video             appreciate that any decisions that I am called upon to
evidence was put to the inquest jury. Apparently, the            make have to be made on the basis of a consideration of
South Yorkshire police, the coroner, and the investigating       all the relevant facts and not simply on the basis of one
force—the West Midlands police—have hitherto                     television programme, however powerful and moving. As
declined to co-operate in determining how much of Mr.            the hon. Gentleman knows, there have been feur
Houldsworth’s evidence was known and to whom. Nor                independent investigations and reviews of the
has there been, as far as I am aware, any attempt to clarify     Hillsborough tragedy: Lord Taylor’s inquiry; the inquest
how, and by whom, it was decided not to call him. Some           into each of the deaths; the investigation into police
would describe that as a conspiracy of silence.                  behaviour supervised by the Police Complaints Authority;
   However, the Yorkshire Post has ascribed to the police        and the judicial review of the inquest. Each of those
the view that Mr. Houldsworth has changed what he said           inquiries served a different purpose, and it might be
at the time, which contradicts the nothing new argument.         helpful if I said a little about each of them and their
The police cannot have it both ways. Without doubt there         outcomes.
are serious grounds either way for reviewing that vital             First, the formal inquiry by Lord Taylor was
evidence. That must be added to the other outstanding            commissioned by the then Home Secretary on the second
questions that have never yet been answered.                     day after the disaster. Its terms of reference were not only
   The South Yorkshire police, in particular, must still         to inquire into the events but to make recommendations
answer the following questions. Why was Chief                    about crowd control and safety at sports events. Over 31
Superintendent Duckenfield put in charge of a major              days, between 15 May and 29 June 1989, Lord Taylor
semi-final only 21 days before the game when he was              heard oral evidence from 174 witnesses at a public
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?           hearing in Sheffield. He also received evidence in the
Why, unlike in 1988, were there no barriers or cordons to        form of submissions and letters. The inquiry considered
filter the crowd outside the Leppings lane end? As the           video film from three separate sources, providing in all
danger unfolded, why was the kick-off not delayed? Why           about 71 hours of further evidence.
did police not recognise the build-up in pens 3 and 4 when
television commentator John Motson and the video                    Lord Taylor published an interim report in August
technician, Roger Houldsworth, clearly saw what was               1989, setting out the causes of the disaster and making
happening? Why was the lethal tunnel not sealed off as it        immediate recommendations. He found that there were a
had been in 1988? Why did Chief Superintendent                   number of causes of that disaster. The immediate cause
Duckenfield tell the Football Association that fans had          of the gross overcrowding was the failure to cut off access
forced gate C when he had ordered it to be opened? Why           to the central pens, which were already over-full. They
did it take until 3.30 pm to make an address on the public       were already over-full because no safe maximum
announcement system to inform or instruct faps or to seek        capacities had been laid down, because no attempt was
medical personnel to help the dying and the injured?             made to control entry to individual pens numerically, and
Given that 42 ambulances reached the ground, why did             there was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
not more of them get on to the pitch to provide expert              Lord Taylor found that when the influx from gate C
medical help? Why did only 14 of those who died get to           entered pen 3, the layout of the barriers afforded less
hospital? Why was the city’s major medical disaster plan         protection than it should have done and the barrier
never put into effect?                                           collapsed. He found that the need to open gate C was due
   Those and many more questions need to be answered.            to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. That congestion
The House cannot raise the dead, but I hope that we can          occurred because, as both the club and the police should
raise the burden on the survivors and on the families of         have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with
the victims, who wish only to see that justice is done. The      the large numbers unless they arrived steadily over a
dead, their families and survivors cry out in the name of        lengthy period. The police had failed to draw up plans on
natural justice to be answered. It is incumbent on us to         how to control large numbers should they arrive in a short
seek a reopening of the inquiry into the events of that          period. Unfortunately, that event, which Lord Taylor
dreadful day.                                                    considered to be foreseeable, was what took place.

   439 CD38-PAG1/53
                        Hillsborough Tragedy                  17 DECEMBER 1996                Hillsborough Tragedy                 860


[Mr. Michael Howard]                                                           An inquest is a fact-finding inquiry conducted to
                                                                            establish reliable answers to four important but limited
  Finally, Lord Taylor found that the presence of an                        factual questions. They are the identity of the deceased,
unruly minority, who had drunk too much, aggravated the                     the place of death, the time—if known—and the date of
problem, as did the club’s confused and inadequate signs                    death, and how the deceased came by his or her death.
and ticketing. There were a number of reasons for that                      That is all an inquest can consider. Rule 36 of the
dreadful disaster, and no single person or organisation was                 coroners’ rules of 1984 requires that proceedings and
held to blame, but Lord Taylor did clearly put a                            evidence are directed solely at finding answers to those
significant portion of the blame at the door of the police.                 questions and forbids any expression of opinion on other
Indeed, he was particularly critical of the attitude of South               matters.
Yorkshire police to the disaster.
                                                                              The juiy examining the evidence found that the cause
   Lord Taylor said:
                                                                            of death was accidental death, but the findings of an
   “It is a matter of regret that at the hearing and in their submissions
the South Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede that they
                                                                            inquest do not bind any person affected by them. The
were in any respect at fault in what occurred. Mr. Duckenfield,             inquest’s conclusion, indeed, must not be framed in such
under pressure of cross-examination, apologised for blaming the             a way as to determine any question of criminal
Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But that apart, the police case      responsibility on the part of any named person -or any
was to blame the fans for being late and drunk and to blame the
club for failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal
                                                                            question of civil liability. A finding of accidental death
crush was not caused by the influx through gate C but was due to            does not prevent further proceedings.
barrier 124a being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives
cause for anxiety as to whether lessons have been learnt. It would            The third investigation into the disaster was conducted
have been more seemly and encouraging for the future if                     by West Midlands police, supervised by the independent
responsibility had been faced.”                                             Police Complaints Authority, with a view to establishing
  Lord Taylor also considered the reports that had been                     whether the tragedy resulted from, or was made worse
published in the press about the behaviour of Liverpool                     by, criminal activity on the part of any individual. It also
fans. Again I quote from his report:                                        considered whether any officer should be subject to
   “Before this Inquiry began there were stories reported in the press,     disciplinary proceedings.
and said to have emanated from police officers present at the match,
of ‘mass drunkenness’. It was said that drunken fans urinated on               The investigation involved the taking of 5,341
police whilst they were pulling the dead and injured out, that others       statements, as well as scrutiny of all the material that had
had even urinated on the bodies of the dead and stolen their                previously been examined. The evidence was sent to the
belongings. Not a single witness was called before the inquiry to
                                                                            Director of Public Prosecutions, who concluded that the
support any o f those allegations, although every opportunity was
afforded for any of the represented parties to have any witness called      result did not indicate that anyone should be made the
whom they wished. As soon as the allegations I have mentioned               subject of criminal proceedings. That has meant that
were made in the press, Mr. Peter Wright, Chief Constable of South          neither    Chief    Superintendent       Duckenfield     nor
Yorkshire, made a dignified statement dissociating himself from
                                                                            Superintendent Murray, who were both criticised by the
such grave and emotive calumnies. Those who made them and those
who disseminated them would have done better to hold their peace.”          Taylor inquiry—nor for that matter any other person—
                                                                            has been charged with any crime. For any other person
   That is strong criticism. I think that those quotations
demonstrate that many of the points made by the                             apart from a police officer, that would have been the end
programme, “Hillsborough”, were considered by Lord                          of the proceedings, but for a police officer there remained
Taylor at the time.                                                         the question of whether they had failed in their duty.
   I should stress that, since the report, the police have                     The Police Complaints Authority decided that Chief
accepted responsibility for the part that they played in the                 Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray
disaster. The present chief constable of South Yorkshire,                    should face disciplinary charges. Police disciplinary
Richard Wells, has on several occasions publicly                             hearings are held in private. They are concerned only with
expressed his deep sorrow at the deaths. More recently,
                                                                             whether an officer may have failed to conform to police
on the ‘Today” programme, he said that the police saw
their responsibility in three particular areas. He admitted                  discipline; it does not consider wider issues.
that once the gates were open, the police should have                           In the event, Mr. Duckenfield retired due to ill health
foreseen where the fans would go; he accepted that they                      in advance of a disciplinary tribunal’s ruling on whether
might have reduced some of the pressure by changing the                      he was guilty. It is sometimes forgotten that, although a
kick-off time; and he also accepted that officers did not                    number of punishments can be imposed for bad discipline,
recognise soon enough the distinction between disorder
                                                                             the most serious that a disciplinary tribunal can impose is
and distress. The South Yorkshire police have accepted
that they were at fault in those respects and the South                      that of dismissal or of a requirement to resign. In the
Yorkshire police authority has paid compensation to the                      event, Mr. Duckenfield stopped being a police officer and
families of those who died.                                                  the disciplinary hearing could not continue because such
    The second investigation into events was an inquest                      hearings can be held only on police officers.
 conducted by Her Majesty’s coroner for the western                            The Police Complaints Authority announced
 district of South Yorkshire. That was a difficult task,                     subsequently that disciplinary proceedings against
 partly because of the number of deaths and partly because                   Superintendent Murray would be withdrawn. When
 the Taylor inquiry was still in progress. The coroner
                                                                             explaining its decision, the authority stated that the
 conducted an inquiry into the deaths and sat for a total of
                                                                             retirement of the Chief Superintendent, Mr. Duckenfield,
 96 days. It is important that I remind the House of the
                                                                             on medical grounds, meant that what in effect was a joint
 purpose of an inquest.

     440 CD38-PAG1/54
                     Hillsborough Tragedy           17 DECEMBER 1996               Hillsborough Tragedy

 allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in        The charge has been made—it is one that I will
 the absence»of the more senior officer. However, some          consider carefully—that there has been a co¥er-up, an
 time later, Superintendent Murray decided that he did not      attempt to pervert the course of justice. I shall also
 wish to remain as a police officer either.                     consider whether there is any new evidence, and if so,
   It is of course well known that there was dissatisfaction    whether that evidence is of such significance that had it
with the verdict of the inquest. The law provides a remedy      been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either
for that by way of judicial review. The fourth                  the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the
examination, therefore, was the judicial review of the         jury would have been different.
coroner’s proceedings.                                             As I consider those questions, I shall be searching for
   Relatives of a number of the victims applied for judicial   the truth about what happened. It has been said that there
review. In those proceedings the conduct of the South          was a video camera trained on the central enclosure, and
Yorkshire coroner’s inquest was subjected to a close and       that the Taylor inquiry was told that it was not working,
detailed examination. In giving the judgment of the            although that was not the case. But I have been informed
divisional court, Lord Justice McCowan ruled very clearly      by the chief constable of South Yorkshire that both the
that none of the points raised justified the intervention of   videotape and a transcript of that tape were made
that court. In particular, the court found that the decision   available to the Taylor inquiry. Clearly, that is a matter
of the coroner to exclude evidence of what happened after      that I will need to look into.
3.15 pm on that afternoon was not an unreasonable                 I fully sympathise with the families who feel that in
decision. It also made no criticism of the coroner’s           some way they have not learnt the whole truth about the
directions to the jury.                                        deaths of their loved ones. Certainly in an appalling
   Clearly, it is not possible for me to know the truth of     tragedy such as Hillsborough it is perhaps inevitable,
what happened on that terrible Saturday. What is               though deeply distressing for the families, that there will
important is that we should be satisfied that those dreadful   be confusion about some details.
events seven years ago have been fully investigated and           I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken
examined. The hon. Member for Walton calls for a               as soon as I have been able to consider all those issues.
reopening of the public inquiry. I have had a number of        I shall certainly take into account everything that the hon.
letters making a similar request from those who were           Gentleman has said tonight. Whatever my decision, I shall
bereaved, and I have met at least two of them.                 always be deeply moved by the memory of that awful
   I have said that I will consider those representations.     event at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.
I must emphasise the fact that I would not take a decision        Question put and agreed to.
to reopen the inquiry lightly: I must be convinced that it       Adjourned accordingly at twenty-seven minutes past
would be in the public interest to do so.                      Ten o ’clock.




  441 CD38-PAG1/55
