22/04   '97      15:23                                 CPS 4th floor                                     I^j 0 0 2




    John Ringguth
    ACCP (PAGI)
    CPS Central Casework
    DX 300850
    LUDGATE EC4



    RE:       HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

    1         I understand from George Croston that you have asked him through Penny that he
              complete his latest review by tomorrow.

    2         George is working flat out in any event to complete his further review as quickly as
              possible. He is aware the Director requires the further information before she can
              make a decision.

    3         However as things stand it is unlikely that he will have finished and be in a position
              to submit a briefing note by tomorrow.

    4         As the Director stated in the video conference, she wishes to ensure that if, or more
              likely when, someone comes to look at the file in the future, it would be obvious that
              no stone was left unturned and the reasoning behind any decision will be clearly set
              out.

    5         As part of this process, Mr. Croston has asked for certain additional information from
              the police. Not all of what he requires has yet been supplied.

    6         Furthermore, we have been receiving a steady amount of correspondence from the
              Hillsborough Family Support Group, making certain requests and raising certain
              points. Where they have made assertions, they have been asked to back this up.

    7         We have today received a further note from the HFSG drawing attention to certain
              passages in the transcripts of the Inquest Evidence which they claim support their
              contention concerning the quality of the videos shown to the Inquest and to the
              availability of certain video evidence generally.

    8         In accordance with the Director’s requirements, we shall have to check this out.

    9         Also as part of this process, Mr. Croston has requested the police to supply a full list
              of all the material made available to the Taylor Enquiry. That list is still awaited.


    MMS/250.97
22/04    ’97     15:24
                                                        CPS 4th floor
                                                                                                         @003




    10         Certain assertions have been made to Mr. Croston by the Coroner concerning the
               availability of the enquiry material to the Inquest, namely that it was all made
               available and was kept in an adjacent room for reference if required. Mr. Croston
               awaits written confirmation of this.

    11         Again having regard to the Director’s concern, we must have confirmation in writing
               of any such assertions made.

    12         In this context, it should also be borne in mind that the Coroner has informed
                Mr.Croston that there is a full set of video tapes of the Inquest.

    13         It has now been ascertained that the Police have a set of these video tapes. They are
                making copies of the relevant parts and will be supplying these to us in due course.

    14         Having regard to the above outstanding enquiries and the Director’s primary concern
               that the decision when made is upon all material which might possibly be relevant and
               that the CPS should be able to demonstrate beyond all doubt on the face of the
               documents that every avenue which may in any way have a bearing upon the concerns
                of the HFSG has been explored to the very end, it is most unlikely that we shall be
                in a position to give the definitive answer which the Director requires by tomorrow.

    15         I do not need to state that this matter is being given the utmost priority and that we
                are desirous of bringing it to a conclusion at the earliest opportunity. However,
                bearing in mind how long this matter has in one form or another dragged on (by
                which I mean the continuing concerns of HFSG and others generally) I agree
                entirely with the Director’s sentiments that it is better that we should take a little
                longer to reach a decision in order to ensure that everything has been done by us
                which possibly could be done.




    P.R .P. PEARSON
    Branch Crown Prosecutor
    Central Casework: Prosecutions Branch 3
    22 April 1997
    T el:f
    Fax:_____________
    DX: 65204 - York 6




    MMS/250.97
FILE NOTE


JR advised Stephen Wooler and Paul Pugh (Home Office) of latest correspondence from
HFSG and their solicitor commenting on the South Yorkshire Police Press Release. They
were advised that we have written to HFSG and their solicitors indicating that a final decision
by the Director will be delayed. JR appraised both of the Director’s view that her decision
whether or not to invite a further police investigation should sequentially be the first to be
made public. Stephen Wooler and Paul Pugh were relaxed about that. No announcement
will come from the Home Office before the election (though if there was a change we would
be advised).

SJW would like to consult with the Attorney General on the timing of any letter to be sent
to the HFSG reporting the outcome of the Director’s considerations. He would like a sight
of any briefing that goes to the Director.

On the assumption that there is no need in the Director’s view for a further police enquiry,
Stephen Wooler’s inclination would be to keep any letter low key (eg there is nothing that
requires further steps to be taken by the police).




J S Ringguth
9 April 1997




               G
