Ms A Adlington
Hillsborough Family Support Group
1st Floor
Central Buildings
41 North John Street
LIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                                        YBF/3341/89




                                                                        9 September 1998



Dear Ms Adlington

RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

Thank you for your letters of 28 August and 2 September 1998. I apologise for any delay
in responding as I have only just returned from a holiday I booked earlier in the year.

In answer to your first query, my earlier review of the case was made in order to whether
or not there was any new evidence so as to justify the re-opening of the criminal
investigation. As you correctly point out the Director’s conclusion was that there were no
such grounds. This was announced by the Home Secretary to the Commons in June 1997.
In the subsequent scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart- Smith agreed with the Director’s conclusion.

My remit for this review is to consider the sufficiency of all the evidence in the possession
of the CPS and the police, as well as any other material which is brought to my notice, and
to make recommendations in accordance with the statutory power of the CPS under Section
6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. The policy on the exercise of this power has
been disclosed to you previously. I do not consider that in the present circumstances my
previous involvement with the case makes it in any way inappropriate for me to continue this
review. If you have any concerns on this point please refer them to Ms D Sharpling, the
Chief Crown Prosecutor of CPS Central Casework.

Your second query repeats your concern about the alleged guidance offered by the CPS to
South Yorkshire Police on the custody of the papers. Mr M Kennedy wrote to you on 26
August 1998 stating that there was no record of CPS guidance being given in the terms that
you described. I am able to confirm that I have given advice to the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police on aspects of ‘voluntary disclosure’, but not on the custody of the papers
within their archives. Mr Kennedy has already discussed these concerns with you.
I enclose a copy of the Walker Morris letter of 2 July 1998 as requested.

The solicitors for both defendants have asked me to provide to them copies of the file of
documents attached to your letter of 24 August which was sent to me. While I am prepared
to provide copies of correspondence which they do not have, I have regretfully declined to
copy large bundles of documents and have referred them to you.

Please let me know if I can assist further.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
