 04-RPR-1997          18=53        FROM      TELLEX MONITORS LONDON                      TO                                          P.01/05
               TELLEX MONITORS LTD                                             - The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8013                               This Transcript From: LONDON OFFICE -0171 490 8018



              FAO:        ANN CRIPPS                ACCT:                                               33139
              AT:         CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

              PROG: INSIDE EDGE                                                        DURATION: 00:08:05

              DATE: 03/04/97                        TIME: 20:00                        JOB:             A97-040257

              STN:        BBC RADIO 5                                                  ORDER:          RUSH/BY FAX


                                  VIDEO MAY HELP REOPEN HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


                                                                                         ^Co*. Pf
              RQBBQNHEUl                                                                              £ £ ‘. i S S 2 1
                     Now, the calls to reopen the inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster o f 1989 have
              received fresh impetus this week with the disclosure of a previously unseen police video from
              cameras observing the Leppings Lane teirace where 95 Liverpool fans were crushed to death.

                        These are pictures which appear to show, in clarity, the events leading up to the
              moments o f crisis. They were not seen by the inquest jury or the Taylor Inquiry. At the time,
              the police said that the cameras were not working satisfactorily. The statement from South
              Yorkshire Police has denied that the tape constitutes fresh evidence.


                        However, the Home Office has told Inside Edge that these developments are now being
              considered by ministers, prior to a decision expected early next week by the Home Secretary,
              as to whether the inquiry should be reopened.


                      I spoke earlier this evening to Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough Families
              Support Group and to Rogan Taylor, the author of a book describing the events o f the day.
              First the significance of this week's developments as described by Mr Hicks.


              TREVOR HICKS:
                      This new video tape completely blows out of the water, the police claims that camera
              five, the all important camera that looked at the terraces, wasn't working and it supports the
              evidence of Roger Holsworth, the video technician, who claimed in the Hillsborough
              programme, that the police could in actual fact see that the terraces were overcrowded, before
              they opened Gate C.

COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in any audio or visual material provided to tha client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied b
Tellex for private use of the client and shall not be reproduced or ra-broadcast In pert or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright hoklerc
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client. Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent

Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                        Job Number : A97-040257 - Page:
 04-RPR-1997          18=53        FROM     TELLEX MONITORS LONDON                       TO                                       I P.02/05
               l J U ^ L J L A . i V l u m H J K . a JLJLU - The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                              This Transcript From: LONDON OFFICE - 0171 490 8018




              RJii
                     But the police in a statement, on the 1st of April, said that the tape in question has never
              been - in inverted commas - 'missing' and was made available in full to both Lord Justice
              Taylor's inquiry and to the coroner’s inquest. Its existence, it adds, has never been in doubt.

              T.H:
                        All we can say is there’s a major communications problem then between South
              Yorkshire Police and the South Yorkshire Coroner because if you check the inquest transcript,
              when Bishard, the camera operator - PC Bishard, was giving his evidence he’s told by the
              Coroner that ’if I told you the tape was missing, would it affect your answer?' This is when
              Bishard is giving evidence about the camera not working.


                      Now, clearly the coroner was under the impression that the tape was missing. We've
              never seen it before, it’s never been in the public domain before and if South Yorkshire are
   i          insisting it's placed there then there's a major question as to why it wasn't placed before the jury
              when on three separate occasions, the jury asked for extra footage from that camera and they
              were told it doesn’t exist.


              R.B:
                        Rogan Taylor, why does it matter whether the police were able to see these cameras or
              not?


              ROGAN TAYLOR:
                       Well of course an inquest has to reach a conclusion about whether there was absence of
              care, whether there was an element of responsibility here for the South Yorkshire Police. Now,
              if - as the South Yorkshire Police argued - they couldn't see clearly on their screens what was
              going on - although to my mind it's not a greatly significant fact, because if their eyes in their
              heads were working, they could see what was going on - then, I suppose it's part of their
              defence although it seems to be a constantly retreating defence.


                     Now, I think they're talking about defective screens or something. I mean, it seems to
             be retreating back down the line to insist that they couldn't see clearly. The fact of the matter
             is, I with the naked eye Rob, could see 130 yards at twenty to three that there was something
             absolutely unnatural going on in Pens 3 and 4.


COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright In any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material are supplied b
 Tellex far private use of the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcest In part or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright holderc
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent.

Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.
                                                                                                         Job Number : A97-040257 - Page: S
 04-RPR-1997          IS :   5 4   FROM      TELLEX MONITORS LONDON                      TO                   {                  | P.03/05
                1 ‘JLJLJLJliA I V I U I M I U J K S J L I J J - The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                               This Transcript From: LONDON OFFICE ■ 0171 490 8018




              R.B:
                     You talk about defective screens...the police statement that I’ve already referred to talks
              about interference from the live television coverage of the FA Cup semi-final giving them a
              monitoring problem.

              R.T:
                         Well, why didn’t that interference also effect Holsworth's view of it, the Club Engineer
              who was sitting in the club security room? He was so concerned about what was going on that
              he sent a runner to the police box to ask them whether they were going to distribute the fans
              more effectively so, I mean, I don't understand the technicalities of this Rob, but I'm just
              constantly suspicious of what the police are saying now.

              R-B:
                     Trevor Hicks, can I just ask you what difference do you think to the verdict of the
   1          inquest and to the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry would the...would these tapes have made, had
              they been seen?


              UHi
                         Well, the Coroner himself, in his directions to the jury, said that the...what the police
              could see at the time they opened Gate C was pivatorial. In other words, it was crucial. This is
              also, we believe, why the jury asked so many times, 'was there any more footage from the
              crucial camera?’ We believe this...this videotape shows a degree of wrecklessness on behalf of
              the controlling officers. If wrecklessness becomes a feature, then we start talking on an
              unlawful killing verdict rather than one of accidental death.


                      Can I just make one other technical comment if I might? You asked Rogan about the
              monitors. What seemed to have been overlooked, very conveniently in the ever moving
              defence of South Yorkshire Police, is that these tapes didn't come from anywhere else other
              than the exact police box to which we are talking about.


                     So, if there had been any interference to the transmissions - and they weren't
              transmissions they were feeds along a coaxial cable - they would have affected the VTR
              machines, the VCR machines, from which this videotape came. So I'm afraid that the technical
              argument is absolute rubbish.


COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright in eny audio or visual material provided to the client Reports and audiovisual material ate supplied t
Tellex far private use o f the client and shall not be reproduced or re^troadcast in part ores a whole without the formal consent of the copyright holden
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent

Audio or Video cassettes of this Item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.

                                                                                                        Job Number : A97-040257 - Page:
 04-APR-1997          18=54        FROM      TELLEX MONITORS LONDON                      TO                  |
                                                                                                             ___________ | P.04/05
               i HiJLJLJiiA 1 V H J I M I I U K S J L 1 D - The Broadcast Reporting Service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171 490 8018                               This Transcript From: LONDON OFFICE - 0171 490 8018




              BJSi
                        The Home Office, as we know, has...is now saying that these new developments will be
              considered by ministers. We also know that the Home Secretary is due to make a decision
              about whether the inquiry should be reopened. Rogan Taylor, do you think that these
              developments this week are sufficient to reopen the inquiry?


              &li
                        Well I certainly hope so. I mean, this week’s evidence is additional to this constant
              series that we're getting now...a doctor came forward a few weeks back and said quite clearly
              people were alive who he was treating, after twenty past three, ...(unclear)... off the Coroner's
              considerations at 3:15.

                      We’ve also had the evidence from Holsworth...I mean, these are constant drip-drips and
              I think they do add up to a bucketful of evidence which means that we ought to look at this
              again and quite clearly, as we hear from Trevor Hicks and other members of the family group,
              they are not happy with the way the judicial process has gone and surely it's time to give them
              a second look at this so that maybe some satisfaction can be gained.


              EJJi
                        Trevor Hicks, I ask you this with due deference and respect because of course I know
              that you lost a relatives (sic) in the Hillsborough tragedy but what is the purpose in reopening
              this inquiry? It's eight years ago that it happened - what is the purpose for you?

              T.H:
                      It's quite simple. It's like all the other miscarriages of justice. On the living victims
              point o f view, 'cause that's...what we class ourselves as, there are matters here which have not
              been properly addressed. We've now moved into a new era where it looks as though there's
              suppression of evidence and possibilities of peijury and other criminal acts being committed so
              from the families' point of view, we've always said, all we would like is some straightforward,
              good old British justice and an opportunity for these matters to be dealt with fairly and squarely
              and we're not asking for anymore than that but we aren’t prepared to accept anything less than
              that.




COPYRIGHT: Tellex does net own any copyright In any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material am supplied &
Teliex for private use of the client and shall not be reproduced or re-broadcast in p u t or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright hokten
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client Tellex shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent

Audio or Video cassettes of this item are available for 28 days from broadcast date.

                                                                                                        Job Number : A97-040257 - Page: <
 04-RPR-199?          18=55        FROM      TELLEX MONITORS LONDON                     TO                  I                     P.05/05
               T J & L J L E X M O N I T O R S JL 'I'D - The Broadcast Reporting service
               NATIONAL OFFICE - 0171490 8018                                   ThisTranscriptFrom: LONDON        OFFICE • 0171 490 B018




              R
                         What is left to you if the authorities fail to act?

              T.H:
                     Well obviously, one of the final resorts that we have is to initiate criminal proceedings
              ourselves and if it's necessary to do that and we've had QC opinion on this evidence and then
              should it fail, we'll take the necessary action ourselves.

              R.B:
                         What do you mean by 'take the necessary action'?

              T.H;
                      We can press and press and press...if at the end of the day somebody in higher authority
              in the government of the time, which ever persuasion it is sees that's not the case, we will then
              have to resort to what's commonly known as a private prosecution and again the family...the
              family group is busy organising substantial funds for that very purpose.


              RJii
                         Trevor Hicks of the Hillsborough Families Support Group and before him, Rogan
              Taylor.




COPYRIGHT: Tellex does not own any copyright In any audio or visual material provided to the client. Reports and audio-visual material a n supped t
Tellex for private use of the client and Shan not be reproduced or ra^uoadeast In part or as a whole without the formal consent of the copyright hoklen
the broadcasting authority first having been obtained by the client Tellax shall not be responsible for obtaining any such consent

Audio or Video cassettes of this Item are available for 28 days from broadcast data.

                                                                                                       Job Num ber: A97-040257 - Page::

                                                                                                                            TOTAL P.       05
