©
From:               George Croston
To:                 CPSHQL.CCU.SHARPLID
Date:               10 July 1998 3:39pm
Subject:            Hillsborough - Disclosure of review policy

Copy of briefing note attached.

George Croston

CC:                 CPSHQL.CCU.DAW KINSL
                            HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

              Ann Adlington v David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray



1.    ISSUE

1.1   The solicitors for the two defendants in this private prosecution by the Hillsborough
       Family Support Group are asking the CPS to take over the prosecution in order to
       discontinue it. They are under the impression that the criteria that we use in such
       cases involves whether or not there is a realistic prospect of conviction, as would
       be the situation for the standard prosecution review. The policy as noted in the CPS
       Prosecution Manual in Volume 1at chapter 7.10 is that we take over and
       discontinue a prosecution where there is clearly no case to answer and/or it is not
       in the public interest to continue with it. Can we divulge this review policy to the
       private prosecutor or to the defendants?

2.    ACTION REQUIRED

2.1   Decision by CCP as to disclosure of this policy, in order to inform the parties to the
      private prosecution of the criteria used for this particular review.

3.    TIMING

3.1   Taking into account the pressure being put on us by the defendants’ solicitors an
       early decision would be helpful.

4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   The CCP will be very familiar with the case and the latest correspondence.

5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

5.1   The Code for Crown prosecutors contains the general principles that we apply to all
      prosecution cases. The Code tests are given in detail in this public document which
       is widely used by others in the criminal justice system to understand the way in
       which Crown Prosecutors make decisions.

5.2   Paragraph 11.2 of the Code reiterates that it is designed to make sure that everyone
       knows the principles that the CPS applies when carrying out its work.

5.3   The exercise of the Director’s power under section 6(2) o f the Prosecution of
       Offences Act in the taking over of a private prosecution can be seen as another
       aspect of the decision making process in the prosecution of individuals.

5.4   It can be argued that the principles used in the exercise o f this power should be as
       transparent as those shown in the Code.
5.5   Disclosure of the criteria to be used in this case will help to explain to all the parties
      the reasons for a full review of the evidence based on a lesser standard of proof, and
      the consequent delays in coming to the review decision.

6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1   That disclosure of our policy be allowed to all the parties to this private prosecution.

7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   Whatever our final decision under section 6(2) o f the Act may be, there is a strong
      possibility that one or other of the parties would ask that our decision be subject to
      judicial review. It would be to our advantage to be seen as being as open as
      possible in the way that we conduct the review.




G.R.Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Date: 10 July 1998
