                                                                               ^4 tfCog

                                                                     - 4 JUN1992

                                    CPS                       'i~i
                                                              .~ t.a
                                                                     ft   f,       t

       POLICY AND COMMUNICATIONS GROUP CIRCULAR
                                  No. 25 of 1992




            DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL TO THIRD PARTIES


1.   Chapter S of the Practice and Procedure Manual was last amended in 1989 by
     Policy Circular No 31 of 1989. Since then the obligations of the Service in
     relation to disclosure of material for use in non criminal proceedings have
     increased, the latest important development being in relation to child care
     proceedings brought about by the Children Act 1989.

2.   Chapter S has therefore been completely revised in order to clarify CPS policy in
     relation to the many and varied requests that are made. It must be emphasised
     that the chapter is concerned solely with disclosure to third parties and is not
     concerned with disclosure to the defence and the application of the Attorney
     General’s Guidelines on Disclosure of Unused Material. It must also be made
     clear that in a subject as vast as disclosure to third parties and its relationship
     with Public Interest Immunity, policy is constantly developing and revisions and
     updates from time to time will be necessary.

3.   Whilst there has to be a certain degree of flexibility in the Service's attitude to
     disclosure which will depend on the status of the third party and the urgency that
     often surrounds requests, it is possible to identify general principles that are
     applicable in the majority of cases. These general principles are adumbrated at
     paragraph S.2.

4.   Paragraph S.3 deals with material which is commonly used by the CPS and how
     the general principles can be applied to such material. Most requests that are
     received are for copies of statements of witnesses but it will be appreciated that
     tfie Service handles a variety of documents some of which attract Public Interest
     Immunity.
5.   Paragraph S.4 considers the application of the general principles to proceedings
      that are commonly encountered by the CPS. The paragraph also includes the
      approach to be adopted in relation to parties and other agencies in the criminal
     justice system with whom the Service frequently comes into contact. Here it will
      be seen that policy is flexible particularly in order that maximum assistance can
      be provided to children and victims of crime.

6.   The Public Interest Immunity section at paragraph S.5 is once again confined to
      third party requests and concentrates on civil litigation. It does not deal with PH
      considerations in relation to the criminal trial.

7.   Any queries on this Circular or Chapter S of the Manual should be directed to
     John Niblett, Policy Branch 3 on 071 273 8332. The new version of Chapter S
      will be distributed to Areas in the near future as a Practice and Procedure
      Manual Amendment and there is therefore no need to detach the copy
      accompanying this Circular for further re-distribution.




FIONA M KING
Head of Policy
2 June 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992

           DISCLOSURE OF MATERIAL TO THIRD PARTIES


5.1        Introduction

5 .1.1     From time to time the CPS will be asked to supply copies of documents
           to third parties.     Such copies may be required for the purpose of
           prosecuting or defending private prosecutions; in connection with civil
           proceedings; or in relation to proceedings involving interested third parties
           such as local authorities in child care cases, the probation service, Criminal
           Injuries Compensation Board etc.

S .1.2     This chapter will consider:

           (a)    General Principles applicable to the disclosure of material to third
                  parties.

           (b)    The application of those general principles to material commonly
                  used by the CPS.

           (c)    The application of the general principles to parties and proceedings
                  commonly encountered by the CPS.

           (d)    A summary of the principles of Public Interest Immunity which may
                  be claimed to resist the disclosure of material in certain
                  circumstances.

S.2        General principles

5.2.1      When dealing with requests for disclosure of material in the possession of
           the CPS the principles listed below should be noted although it must be
           recognised that there are a number of exceptions which have been agreed
           either because of the particular status of the third party or because of the
           special circumstances that may apply to certain types of proceedings.

5.2.2      (a)    Nature of request and person making request

           Information may only be supplied to a person with a genuine interest in
           the proceedings or contemplated proceedings in question. The various
           types of proceedings are considered in paragraph S.4 but examples include
           persons who are bona fide engaged in or contemplating civil proceedings
           or solicitors or insurance companies acting on their behalf. Requests must
           also be scrutinised to ensure that the requested material is relevant to the
           proceedings and that the party concerned is not conducting a "fishing"
           exercise.


Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

           (b)     Ownership of Statements

           Requests by third parties for disclosure of material are sometimes made
           to the police and are sometimes directed at the CPS. Ownership of
           statements is not a matter that has been judicially resolved. Statements
           are made to the police but often the originals are supplied to the CPS and,
           in committal cases, are tendered to the Magistrates’ Court and then
           forwarded to the Crown Court. At any given time the statement can be
           in the possession of one of a number of agencies in the criminal justice
           system and requests can therefore legitimately be made to the police, the
           CPS or even the Crown Court. Notwithstanding considerations as to
           ownership or possession, in most cases the party will be seeking a copy and
           there is no reason why the Service itself should not deal with requests
           made to the CPS. In any case that is still "live"before the Crown Court,
           there should be no disclosure without informing the Chief Clerk at the
           Crown Court but as is made clear at (d) below the usual practice is not to
           disclose until the proceedings are complete.

           (c)     Consent of the Maker

           Persons who make statements to the police do so in the knowledge that
           the statements are likely to be used in criminal proceedings. Furthermore,
           since the Magistrates' Courts (Witnesses Addresses) Rules 1990 which
           came into force on 2.4.90most witnesses will have made statements in the
           belief that their addresses will not be disclosed without their consent. It
           is therefore considered that it would be wrong to use the statement for any
           other purpose without consulting the maker.

           It is recognised however, that the practicalities of seeking consent will
           present difficulty. The onus for obtaining consent is upon the third party
           who is seeking disclosure but since the introduction of the above Rules the
           addresses of the makers will not appear on the statements and should not
           be provided without consultation.       When requests are received it is
           suggested that the matter be approached on the following lines:

           (i)     The police should be asked to contact the witness and explain that
                   a bona fide request has been made for a copy of the statement.

           (ii)    The witness should be asked whether there is any objection to his
                   or her name being given to a third party so that the third party can
                   communicate direct. It should be pointed out that if the witness
                   has no objection, perhaps they could indicate then and there
                   whether any objection would be made to the statement being
                   disclosed by the CPS.

           (iii)   In cases where the witness has no such objection, disclosure can be

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992
No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

         made.

 (iv)    In circumstances where the witness has no objection to the address
         being provided but wishes for the third party to communicate direct
         with them on the question of release of the statement, then the
         address can be notified to the third party.


 (v)     If consent is refused to the disclosure of the address, the officer
          should endeavour to obtain in writing the reasons for the refusal.
         The witness should be warned that the CPS will have to give
          careful consideration to the matter to decide whether the interests
          of justice are such that disclosure should nevertheless be made (for
          example in urgent care proceedings - see paragraph S.4.2later).

 (vi)    If the Crown Prosecutor decides to overrule the wishes of the
         witness, the statement will be provided and the witness should be
         so notified and informed of the reasons. In circumstances of great
         urgency where the interests of justice demand that the statement
         should be provided notwithstanding any objections that the witness
         may have, the reasons should always be noted on the file. If time
         permits, the party seeking disclosure should be advised to seek an
         order of the court before the wishes of the witness are overridden.

 (vii)   In cases where the witness cannot be traced, the Crown Prosecutor
          will exercise discretion on the question of disclosure of the
          statement.

 It must be emphasised that the above steps are only suggested guidelines
 which will cover most situations but the Service must ensure that wherever
 possible the witness is consulted before decisions to disclose addresses
 and/or statements are made. There is nothing to preclude the CPS
 communicating direct with the witness in appropriate circumstances.

 These considerations do not apply to a situation where a witness requests
 a copy of his or her own statement. This can be supplied on request,
 subject to the points dealt with at paragraph L.5.1 relating to situations
 where a statement can properly be withheld from its maker while criminal
 proceedings are still in progress.

 Completion of Proceedings

 It will not be usual to disclose material until the proceedings have been
 completed. This is to ensure that the criminal trial process and any
 ongoing police enquiries are not prejudiced. There is no need to delay
 disclosure until normal methods of appeal are exhausted. The comments

No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                         July 1992

           of Lord Reid in Conway -v- Rimmer (1968) 1AER 874 at page 889 are
           relevant " ... it would generally be wrong to require disclosure in a civil
           case of anything which might be material in a pending prosecution, but
           after a verdict has been given, or it has been decided to take no
           proceedings, there is not the same need for secrecy." No disclosure should
           take place before the police have been consulted.               The same
           considerations apply where a decision not to prosecute or to discontinue
           proceedings has been made. Requests for unused material in the criminal
           proceedings should be treated in the same manner as material introduced
           on the trial.


           (e)    Public Interest Immunity Considerations

           Sometimes the request from the third party will be for confidential
           material which they claim is relevant to the conduct of their case. In these
           circumstances the question of Public Interest Immunity may arise and
           guidance on the application of this principle to third party disclosure is
           provided at paragraph S.5 below.

           (f)    Impartiality of the CPS

           It is important that the CPS is totally impartialwhen considering questions
           of disclosure. If disclosure is madewithout an          order of the court
           consideration must be given to whether it is proper to inform any other
           party involved in the proceedings. It must be made clear to the party
           requesting material that disclosure is made to them solely for the purpose
           of the proceedings in question and that the material should not be
           disclosed to any other person. It is recognised that an undertaking of
           confidentiality by the third party will not always readily be given.
           However, there is an implied undertaking by the party on whom
           documents are served that they will not be used for a collateral or ulterior
           purpose and the decision in Home Office -v- Harman (1982) 1 AER 532
           is of assistance in this regard.

           (g)    Orders of the Court       %

           Following consideration of the bona fides of the requesting person,
           relevance, consent of the maker, conclusion of criminal proceedings and
           public interest concerns, it is proper to disclose the material without the
           necessity of a court order.

           Where it is known that the maker of the statement will not consent to its
           disclosure, it is right that the court should be asked to determine whether
           the disclosure sought is in reality necessary for the proper conduct of the
           proceedings in question, especially as the party against whom the

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992

           disclosure is sought, namely the CPS, is not a party to those proceedings.
           Liaison with the police has already been stressed but it is of particular
           importance when considering disclosure of notes or records of interview
           and statements under caution. While many police forces defer to the CPS
           on all questions of disclosure, some will insist on the production of a court
           order on public policy grounds before disclosing interview notes etc. It is
           important that the CPS and police are agreed on the course to be adopted
           in such situations for it would be totally inconsistent for the police to
           refuse to provide documents such as interview records without a court
           order if the CPS were content to do so. It is considered that best practice
           is to insist on a court order for the production of records of interview tape
           summaries etc for it will probably be the case that the interviewee would
           refuse his consent to any later disclosure and in such event the situation
           should be dealt with in the same way as where a maker of a statement
           refuses consent, that is the court should be asked to decide.

           In most cases the appropriate court order will be a subpoena duces tecum
           issued by the court in which the proceedings have commenced. For the
           production of documents at proceedings other than trials an order
           equivalent to a subpoena duces tecum may be issued. In criminal cases at
           the Crown Court, the production of documents is enforced by a witness
           summons.

           Once a court order has been issued, it may be appropriate to provide a
           copy of the document in question to avoid the necessity of attending the
           hearing to produce it. In most instances such a course cannot be
           disapproved but it is important to bear in mind that in circumstances
           where there is a strong objection to disclosure of the document by the
           maker, he or she may wish to make representations at the hearing or even
           apply to have the court order set aside. Where those situations are
           identified, disclosure of a copy before the hearing itself should be resisted.

S.3        Application of General Principles to Material Commonly Used bv the CPS

S.3.1      Statements of Witnesses

           Most requests from third parties will be for the disclosure of statements.
           Witness statements do not fall within a class to which Public Interest
           Immunity attaches and subject to the principles above are disclosable. It
           may be that the contents of the statement are sensitive (eg statements
           dealing with informants) and should not be disclosed and this is discussed
           later in paragraph S.5 below.

           It is considered that depositions and transcripts of the evidence of
           witnesses can be handled in the same way as statements made to police.
           Strictly speaking, depositions taken at the committal hearing at the

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                            July 1992

           Magistrates' Court are the property of the Crown Court so it would be
           prudent to confirm from the Chief Clerk that the Crown Court has no
           objection to the disclosure.

           Where a witness has made a statement relating to the business affairs of
           his employer the consent of the employer should also be sought as well as
           the actual maker of the statement (unless the employer is the defendant
           when such consent will be inappropriate). This is particularly important
           when the statement contains confidential information which is not normally
           in the public domain and which has been given to the police specifically
           for the purpose of a criminal investigation.

5.3.2     Statements Made bv a Defendant

           Records of taped interviews, contemporaneous written records of
           interview, summaries of taped interviews and statements under caution are
           in a different position to the statements made by witnesses in that it will
           be inappropriate to seek the consent for disclosure from the defendant or
           his legal representative. The police will usually insist on grounds of public
           policy on a court order being served on them before agreeing to the
           release. In these circumstances, and for the reasons set out at paragraph
           S.2.2.(g) above, the third party should be informed that a court order is
           required.

5.3.3     Exhibits

           Consent to disclosure of a statement normally implies consent to disclosure
           of any exhibits to which reference is made in the statement. If information
           contained in the exhibit itself is sensitive, it may be necessary to obtain the
           specific consent of the witness to disclose the exhibit. Where records or
           summaries of taped interviews are available it will be unnecessary to
           disclose a copy of the tape itself. However, if disclosure of such a copy is
           sought it can be provided upon receipt of a court order.

S.3.4      Material Seized bv the Police

           Material seized by the police in connection with the investigation of crime
           (usually under the provisions of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
           1984) must not be disclosed to a third party unless the owner has
           consented to the disclosure or a subpoena has been served on the relevant
           police officer. This type of situation received close examination in Marcel
           and Others -v-The Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis (1992)
           2 WLR 50 CA. Even where a subpoena has been served the police should
           not disclose seized documents in advance of the court attendance unless
           they:-


Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                           July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                        July 1992

           (i)     have given the true owner notice of the service of the subpoena,
                   and

           (ii)    have expressed a wish to produce the seized material in advance of
                   the attendance at court, and

           (iii)   have given the true owner a reasonable opportunity to state his
                   objections to such a course.

5.3.5      Police Reports and Correspondence Between Police and CPS

           These should not be disclosed on the grounds of Public Interest Immunity.
           Evans -v- Chief Constable of Surrey (1988) 1QB 588 is authority for the
           proposition that a report sent by the police to the Director of Public
           Prosecutions seeking the latter's advice as to whether a prosecution for
           murder should be launched against a particular individual is within a PII
           class. It follows that documents in a similar category where the subject
           matter relates to the decision to prosecute are likewise protected. (Other
           examples are given at paragraph S.5.2(a) below). There are some
           documents which pass between the police and CPS which may not attract
           immunity, such as a notification of a date of hearing, but any document
           relating to a judgment exercised in the handling of a case should not be
           disclosed. Procedures for non-disclosure are dealt with at paragraph S.5.6
           et seq below.

5.3.6     Internal Correspondence and Counsel's Advice

           Internal memoranda, conference notes, Advice from Counsel and other
           internal documents should not be disclosed for the reasons set out in
           paragraph S.3.5above. Prosecutors must be able to discuss details of cases
           freely and frankly without fear of such documentation being disclosed to
           third parties in other proceedings.

5.3.7     Antecedents and Previous Convictions

           Requests for disclosure of antecedents and previous convictions to third
           parties (as opposed to defendants and their legal advisers) should always
           be referred to the police for them to deal with. Information in the
           possession of the CPS should not be disclosed because it may be
           inaccurate or incomplete or may be subject to restrictions on disclosure
           contained in the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 or the Data
           Protection Act 1984.

S.3.8      Miscellaneous Documents

           Because of the number and variety of documents handled by the CPS it is

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                        July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

           impossible to provide a comprehensive list. Requests for disclosure of
           material not specifically covered in the paragraphs above should be
           considered in the light of the general principles set out in paragraph S.2.

S.4        Applications of General Principles to Requests from Parties to
           Proceedings Commonly Encountered bv the CPS

S.4.1      Paragraph S.2.1 above emphasised that there were a number of exceptions
           to the general principles of disclosure to third parties. It is necessary to
           look at the exceptions in the context of particular proceedings to discover
           the nature of the exceptions and reasons for the departure from the
           principles adopted by the Service.


S.4.2      Child Care Proceedings

           (i)     Care proceedings are often commenced before criminal proceedings
                   are complete because of the urgent need to protect the safety and
                   welfare of the child. The Children Act 1989 came into force on
                   14.10.91 and re-enforced the principle that it is the welfare of the

                   child which is the paramount consideration of the courts and that
                   any delay in care proceedings is likely to prejudice such welfare.

           (ii)    The Family Proceedings Courts (Children Act 1989) Rules 1991
                   ensure adherence to tight time scales when dealing with care and
                   emergency protection orders and Rule 17 places an obligation on
                   a party to the proceedings to file and serve on other parties,
                   statements and documents upon which the party intends to rely.
                   The CPS is not a party to care proceedings but requests will be
                   made by local authorities for material which is relevant to the


           (iii)   The CPS recognises that local authorities which institute care
                   proceedings are under a statutory duty to investigate the child's
                   background and provide the court with information which will help
                   the court reach its decision. This duty extends to investigating all
                   the circumstances relevant to the proceedings and it is clear that
                   material in the possession of the CPS may be of considerable
                   importance to the local authority which may not be able to proceed
                   properly without it.

           (iv)    There can be no doubt therefore that the CPS must give every
                   assistance to local authorities. A major difficulty however, is that
                   any disclosure made to a local authority is subject to further
                   disclosure to the other parties to the care proceedings so it is

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                           RESTRICTED                            July 1992

                    possible that other family members and actual or potential
                    defendants in criminal proceedings will receive this information.

           (v)      In view of the sensitivities involved in requests for disclosure in care
                    proceedings a lawyer of at least Grade 6 should be consulted. In
                    each case an assessment must be made of how much information
                    is required to meet the local authority's needs. The question of
                    disclosure must always be considered in the light of the child's
                    welfare. Even in cases where there is a perceived risk to the
                    success of criminal proceedings it may be necessary in the interests
                    of the child for disclosure to be made.

           (vi)     Requests for disclosure prior to CPS involvement with the case or
                    where advice has been sought but no charges brought should be
                    dealt with by the police. If advice from the CPS is sought, such
                    advice may be given on the lines set out below.

           (vii)    Because of the overriding interest in the welfare of the child it will
                    not be possible to delay disclosure until the criminal proceedings
                    are complete but in cases where there is a danger that disclosure
                    will prejudice ongoing police enquiries it is important that
                    conferences be held between the CPS, police and local authority to
                    discuss what can safely be disclosed which would serve the purposes
                    of the local authority yet not hinder the police investigation.

           (viii)   Wherever possible attempts should still be made to obtain the
                    consent of the maker of any statement to its disclosure in
                    connection with care proceedings. It is recognised that this will not
                    always be possible in which event disclosure should be made with
                    the witness concerned being advised by the policeof the fact and
                    the reasons for it. (For the future it is to be hopedthat police
                    forces will consider dealing with the disclosure aspect of care

                    proceedings when the statement is obtained           so the need for
                    obtaining consent later will be obviated).

           (ix)     If there is agreement between the police and CPS on what can be
                    disclosed without prejudicing the criminal proceedings there will be
                    no need to insist upon an order of the court. In the absence of
                    agreement or in circumstances where the local authority request
                    material which the CPS considers should not be disclosed, then the
                    local authority must be informed that an order of the family
                    proceedings court will be essential. Some documents such as police
                    and other confidential reports, attract Public Interest Immunity
                    which will need to be claimed (see paragraph S.5 below).


Amendment No 12                           RESTRICTED                            July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

           (x)     Guardians ad litem may be appointed by the court if there is a
                   conflict between parents or a guardian and the child. They too are
                   under a duty to investigate all of the circumstances relevant to the
                   proceedings and it is likely that requests for material will be
                   received direct from guardians ad litem or their solicitors. To
                   maintain clear disclosure channels the CPS should only disclose to
                   local authorities and it will then be the responsibility of that
                   authority to provide information to the guardian ad litem.

S.4.3      Wardship Proceedings

           (i)     Attention is drawn to the Practice Direction of 11.11.87(1988) 1
                   AER 223 and the Practice Direction of 18.7.88(1988) 2 AER 1015
                   which set out the procedures to be followed to obtain leave for the
                   police to interview a child who is a ward of court.

           (ii)    No evidence or documents in the wardship proceedings or
                   information about wardship proceedings should be disclosed in the
                   criminal proceedings without the prior leave of the wardship court.
                   For the principles to be applied in deciding what material


                   concerning a ward of court should be disclosed to the police or
                   another party see Re S and Others (1987) 3 AER 1076and In re
                   M (a minor) Times Law Report 4.1.90.

           (iii)   Just as care must be taken by the police when obtaining statements
                   in wardship cases, great care must be exercised by the police in any
                   question of disclosure of material and the safest course may be to
                   seek leave from the wardship court.

S.4.4      Civil Proceedings

           (i)     The general principles relating to disclosure which are set out in
                   paragraph S.2 above are particularly relevant to civil proceedings.
                   Persons who have made statements for the purposes of criminal
                   proceedings must be given an opportunity to refuse consent for
                   their statements to be disclosed in civil proceedings and nothing
                   should be disclosed which would prejudice the criminal proceedings.

           (ii)    Civil Proceedings concerning personal injury or death

                   By the Supreme Court Act 1981 a potential plaintiff in an action in
                   respect of personal injuries or death (Section 33(2)) or an actual
                   plaintiff in such a case (Section 34) may apply for the disclosure of
                   any document "relevant to an issue arising or likely to arise out of

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992

                   the claim". Requests for the supply of witness statements in
                   criminal proceedings where Section 33 to 35 of the Supreme Court
                   Act applies should be complied in accordance with the general
                   principles at paragraph S.2 above unless there is reason to believe
                   that disclosure would be injurious to the public interest.

           (iii)   Interviews with CPS Staff

                   Requests are often received from parties to civil litigation (and
                   private prosecutors) to interview CPS staff regarding aspects of the
                   prosecution process. There is no property in a witness and the CPS
                   cannot prevent employees either giving evidence or being
                   interviewed. However, no one is obliged to give evidence or to
                   volunteer to be interviewed and assist in the preparation of proofs
                   of evidence. Any member of CPS staff who is approached with a
                   request to be interviewed is therefore entitled to refuse. The Chief
                   Crown Prosecutor or relevant Head of Division in Headquarters
                   should be notified immediately if such a request is received.

           (iv)    If a member of staff agrees to be interviewed he or she must only
                   give evidence relating to matters of fact. The possibility of giving
                   evidence by affidavit should also be borne in mind. Evidence must
                   not be given which touches in any way upon the reasons for a
                   decision to prosecute or judgments on the handling of a case. In
                   cases where a subpoena has been issued and it is desired to apply

                   to have it set aside, Policy and Communications Group should be
                   informed so that suitable steps are taken to ensure that the Service
                   is represented by Counsel who is fully instructed.

S.4.5      Road Traffic Accidents

           (i)     Guidance has been given to Chief Police Officers by the Home
                   Office on how to deal with requests for information in road
                   accident or similar incidents. Furthermore, during the course of his
                   judgment in Marcel & Others -v-the Commissioner of Police of the
                   Metropolis (1991) 1AER 845, Dillon U specifically approved the
                   current practice of the supplying by the police of information and
                   witness statements to interested parties where there is a possibility
                   of civil litigation after a road accident; in particular the supplying

                   of names and addresses of parties involved in the accident whom
                   an injured person could well otherwise have difficulty tracing.

           (ii)    Disclosure of information in this context is less strict than is
                   generally the case and in view of the guidance issued to Chief

Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992

                   Officers, requests for information while criminal proceedings or an
                   inquest are pending should be referred to the police. Police
                   guidance requires that information should only be dealt with after
                   the completion of criminal proceedings but Chief Officers do have
                   a discretion to provide certain information to parties contemplating
                   litigation while criminal proceedings or an inquest are pending.
                   The information is the date and time of the accident; names and
                   addresses of those involved; description and ownership of vehicles
                   involved; the names of insurers in cases involving personal injury;
                   copies of certain statements; name of defendant in any forthcoming
                   criminal proceedings and the date and place of hearing. The
                   outcome of any criminal proceedings may also be made known to
                   interested parties on request.

           (iii)   In so far as requests made to the CPS at the conclusion of
                    proceedings are concerned, they sould be dealt with in accordance
                    with the general principles at S.2 above. Information may be
                    supplied upon request to persons bona fide engaged in or
                    contemplating civil proceedings, or their solicitors, and also
                    insurance companies, trade unions or friendly societies acting on
                    behalf of a person. When a person requests a copy of his own
                    statement this should be supplied unless there is a reason to believe
                    that it is being sought for an improper or ulterior purpose.

           (iv)    Requests for Accident Report Books should be directed to the
                   police. As a general rule they are retained for 3 years and the
                    police will normally provide a copy of the Accident Report book
                    once criminal or, where appropriate, disciplinary proceedings are
                    complete. However, comments, expressions of opinion and any
                    recommendations on the question of bringing proceedings should
                    be excluded.

           (v)     Chief Officers have a discretion as to whether an interview with
                   reporting officers should be granted. Normally an interview will
                   not be granted until an abstract of the accident report book has
                   been provided and the grant of any interview will usually be subject
                   to the condition that a proof of evidence will be supplied to the
                   police.

           (vi)    Applications for Reports and statements prepared for the purposes
                   of a police enquiry but furnished to a coroner to assist him in his
                   enquiries should be dealt with by Chief Officers of police.
                   Applications for reports prepared expressly at the coroner's request
                   for the purpose of an inquest when no criminal offence is suspected
                   should be referred to the coroner.


Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                           July 1992

           (vii)   Reports by medical practitioners should not be disclosed but the
                   name and address of a practitioner who has examined a party
                   should be supplied.

           (viii) Reports by vehicle examiners contain information of importance to
                  civil proceedings and copies should normally be provided.

           (ix)    Copies of reports by forensic scientists should be supplied if the
                   report is addressed to the police. If not, the party should be
                   referred to the person to whom the report is addressed, for
                   example, the coroner.

S.4.6      Private Prosecutions

           (i)     Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 preserves the
                    right of an individual to institute a private prosecution. It does not
                    mean that the individual has an implied right of access to
                    statements taken by the police and other reports and documents
                    held by the CPS. It was held in R -v- DPP ex parte Hallas (1988)
                    87 Cr App R 340 that a court cannot make an order for the
                    production of documents unless an applicant can show some right
                    to have those documents produced.

           (ii)    In ex parte Hallas the CPS was prepared to give the names and
                    addresses of witnesses so the applicant could instruct solicitors to
                    interview those witnesses. This course is recommended although
                    steps should be taken to obtain the consent of the makers in view
                    of the Magistrates' Courts (Witnesses Addresses) Rules 1990.

           (iii)   It must also be noted that once a prosecution conducted by a
                   private prosecutor has been committed for trial, a summons under
                   section 2 of the Criminal Procedure (Attendance of Witnesses) Act
                    1965 will be granted by the Crown Court to require the police
                   officer having charge of the investigation to produce the relevant
                   statements and exhibits so as to permit the private prosecutor to
                   comply with the general responsibilities of a prosecutor - see R -v-
                   Gregory Pawsey 1989 Crim L R 152.

S.4.7      Police Discipline and Complaints

           (i)     Statements which have been taken in the course of an investigation
                   into a complaint against the police under sections 85 and 86 of the
                   Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, and reports of such
                   investigations, practically always attract Public Interest Immunity -
                   see Neilson -v- Laughame (1981) 1 QB 736 and Makanjuola -v-
                   The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis unreported Court of

Amendment No 12                           RESTRICTED                           July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992

                   Appeal 16.3.89. There may, however, be an exception where the
                   dominant purpose of the enquiry is the investigation of a death or
                   a crime - see Peach -v- The Commissioner of Police of the
                   Metropolis (1986) QB 1064.

           (ii)    Whenever a complainant institutes or indicates that he intends to
                   institute civil proceedings against a police officer who has been the
                   subject of a section 85/86 investigation, any request for disclosure
                   of documents created in the course of the investigation and which
                   are in the possession of the CPS should be declined on the grounds
                   of Public Interest Immunity. The investigating officer should be
                   informed and the Head of Police Complaints Division should be
                   notified.

           (iii)   The consent of the maker of the statement is irrelevant where the
                   statement belongs to a class to which Public Interest Immunity
                   applies. Immunity also applies to a transcript of a disciplinary
                   hearing.

           (iv)    It was made clear in Makanjuola (see para S.4.7(i) above) that
                   where a party holds documents in a class which is prima facie
                   immune, he should (save in a very exceptional case) assert that the
                   documents are immune and decline to disclose them since the
                   ultimate judge of where the public interest lies is not with him but
                   the court. In the event of disclosure being ordered the appropriate
                    method of disclosure may vary from case to case. The CPS should
                   liaise with the police officer in charge of the complaints
                   investigation before disclosure takes place and in any event there
                    should be no disclosure until the Head of Police Complaints
                    Division has been consulted.

           (v)     In addition to Public Interest Immunity, confidentiality in the
                   investigation of police complaints is safeguarded by section 98 of
                   the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, Regulation 6 of the
                   Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 and section 4 of the Official
                   Secrets Act 1989.

           (vi)    Applications are sometimes received from police officers
                   investigating complaints who require access to CPS files. Because
                   of the importance of the proper investigation of complaints against
                   the police, every possible assistance should be afforded to the
                   investigating officer. Bearing in mind the provisions which preserve
                   the confidentiality of information coming into the possession of
                   investigating officers and the Police Complaints Authority, there
                   will be no need to seek the prior consent of witnesses or to require
                   court orders before material is disclosed.

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992

           (vii)   There may, however, be material on the file which should be
                   withheld such as internal memoranda and advice from Counsel.
                   Requests from investigating officers for access to CPS files should
                   be referred to the Chief Crown Prosecutor or a person nominated
                   by him for that purpose so that each request can receive prompt
                   attention and advice can be sought from the Head of Headquarters
                   Police Complaints Division in cases of difficulty.

S.4.8      Schemes Involving the Probation Service

           (i)     Requests are sometimes received from the Probation Service for
                   disclosure of material in the possession of the CPS. Areas will no
                   doubt have their own informal arrangements with the Probation
                   Service for the exchange of information which is essential for each
                   Service to function properly eg prosecution of breach proceedings.

           (ii)    In connection with the preparation of pre-sentence reports required
                    by Section 3 of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, information will be
                    provided, in either way and indictable only cases, in accordance
                    with paragraph 2.4 of National Operational Practice.

           (iii)   Police Reports to the CPS have an important part to play in Bail
                   Information Schemes and also in Public Interest Case Assessment
                   projects. Where such a report is disclosed to the Probation Service
                   it forms a useful starting point to enable the Probation Service to
                   conduct enquiries and gather information which may form the basis
                   for a recommendation to the CPS as to whether it is necessary to
                   oppose bail.

           (iv)    It is considered that the doctrine of Public Interest Immunity does
                    not require that police reports should be withheld from the
                    Probation Service and this is therefore an exception to the principle
                    set out in paragraph S.3.5 above. The reason why Public Interest
                    Immunity attaches to police reports is that their liability to be
                    exposed in court proceedings might cause those responsible for
                    their compilation to be less candid in carrying out their task to the
                    detriment of the criminal justice system.

           (v)     Disclosure to the Probation Service for the purpose of Bail schemes
                   can be distinguished as the Probation Service would not disclose
                   the report to any third party (including defendants). Reports can
                   therefore be disclosed on the strict and express understanding that
                   they are kept absolutely confidential.




Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

S.4.9     Investors Compensation Scheme

           (i)     Investors Compensation Scheme Limited exists under the aegis of
                   the Securities and Investment Board which was created by the
                   Financial Services Act 1986. Its principal task is to provide
                   compensation to private investors who have lost money due to the
                   malfeasance of a member firm of the self-regulatory organisation.
                   For an investor to claim compensation, the firm concerned must
                   have been declared to be in default for the purpose of the Financial
                   Services (Compensation of Investors) Rules 1990.

           (ii)    The first task of Investors Compensation Scheme Limited is to
                   identify and verify each claim and their professional accountants
                   will check claims submitted by individual investors against the
                   information which those investors have given the police in
                   conjunction with other relevant information.

           (iii)   Request may therefore be received by Areas seeking disclosure of
                   relevant material before the criminal proceedings are complete. It
                   may be claimed that as fraud trials take a considerable time to be
                   heard and an investor may have lost all his or her life savings there
                   is a need to act quickly.

           (iv)    Provided the makers consent to the release of their statements and
                   there is no risk of prejudice to the trial, it is considered that the
                   request can be treated as an exception to the general principle of
                   waiting until the criminal proceedings are complete. There will
                   need to be discussion with the officer in the case and the need for
                   ICS Limited to provide an undertaking to prevent further
                   unauthorised disclosure.

           (v)     It will not be possible, however, to disclose bank statements or
                    other material which may have been seized by the police under the
                    Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984. Similarly there are
                    considerations of public policy which militate against voluntary
                    statements of defendants and records of interview being
                    communicated to a third party before criminal proceedings are
                    complete so they should not be disclosed.

S.4.10     Criminal Injuries Compensation Board

           (i)     The CICB makes application from time to time for copy documents
                   in respect of cases involving violence. Requests are usually handled
                   by the police and procedures have been agreed by the Home Office
                   and Chief Officers of Police. The agreements reached are clearly
                   designed to assist and expedite the determination of claims made

Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                         July 1992

                   by victims of crime and in some instances provide exceptions to the
                   general principles of disclosure to third-parties that has been
                   adopted by the CPS. The following practices have been agreed
                   with the CICB.

           (ii)    In cases tried at the Crown Court, copy statements, depositions and
                   exhibits can be handed to the CICB after the trial subject to the
                   consent of the appropriate Courts Administrator (the Courts
                   Administrator at the Central Criminal Court has given general
                   consent to the release of these documents). Transcripts of evidence
                   produced for the purposes of appeals to the Court of Appeal should
                   not be supplied without the consent of the Registrar.

           (iii)   Irrespective of place of trial, Chief Officers have agreed as a
                   normal practice to supply the CICB with copies of witness
                   statements in individual cases upon request. The consent of the
                   witness will not generally be sought although the Chief Officers

                   have made it clear that in exceptional cases they may decline to
                   follow the general practice.

           (iv)    Statements taken during an investigation under section 85 or 86 of
                   the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 which are the subject
                   of public interest immunity will also be supplied to a single member
                   of the Board on a confidential basis. In the event of a hearing
                   before three Board members such statements will not be placed
                   before the Board without the consent of the Chief Officer and
                   through him the maker of the statement (see Home Office Circular
                   No 65/1982).

           (v)     A copy of a police report will also be supplied to the Board on a
                   strictly confidential basis. The report will only be seen by the
                   Board's staff and the Board member who decides the application.
                   If that decision is not accepted and the case goes to a hearing the
                   report is not disclosed to the applicant, his representative or to
                   members of the tribunal.

           (vi)    Requests for disclosure of material to the CICB should be referred
                   to the police. If any request is made to CPS because the police
                   have exceptionally refused to provide material, then any disclosure
                   should only be made in accordance with the general principles set
                   out in paragraph S.2 above.

S.4.11     Regulated Professions

           (i)     Requests for information may be received from organisations such

Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                            July 1992

                   as the Law Society, Bar Council, General Medical Council,
                   Solicitors' Complaints Bureau and the Stock Exchange in
                   connection with investigations or complaints against members of the
                   professions.

           (ii)    Such requests will usually relate to the disclosure of details of the
                   case in which the member of the profession appeared as an
                   advocate or a witness and may possibly involve a request to
                   interview, or to receive a written account of the hearing by a
                   member of the CPS staff who was present. In so far as interviews
                   are concerned, procedures set out in paragraph S.4.4(iv)should be
                   followed. There is no objection to a summary of the facts being
                   provided together with a copy of the charges or indictment. If a
                   case summary of the facts has been prepared for the Judge, this
                   may be provided once the case is concluded.

           (iii)   It must be made clear that any disclosure is for the purposes of the
                   investigation in question and any material provided should not be
                   otherwise disclosed without prior permission of the CPS in
                   accordance with the general principle at S.2.2(f) above.


           (iv)    In the event of a member of a profession being convicted of a
                    criminal offence, the profession may seek further information. Such
                    requests can be referred to the police whose responsibility it is to
                    receive and record the conviction.

S.4.12     Bodies with Statutory Powers of Investigation

           (i)     Organisations with statutory powers of investigation, such as the
                   Civil Aviation Authority or Department of Transport Air Accidents
                   Investigation Branch may approach the CPS for information. Such
                   requests will be dealt with in accordance with the general principles
                   of disclosure set out in paragraph S.2 above.

           (ii)    The only exception is with regard to the provision of police reports.
                   Although such reports will attract the principle of Public Interest
                   Immunity it must be borne in mind that PII does not necessarily
                   clothe a document with an imperative of absolute secrecy. It is a
                   principle by which documents are protected from disclosure in legal
                   proceedings. In cases where a body such as the CAA is exercising
                   its statutory powers of investigation, there is a public interest in the
                   police and CPS assisting.

           (iii)   The preferred course would be for the police to provide a separate
                   report incorporating the substance of their original report to the

Amendment No 12                           RESTRICTED                           July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

                   CPS. In this way the general CPS policy of non-disclosure of police
                   reports to third-parties would be maintained. If such a course is
                   not possible, the report may be disclosed provided the police have
                   no objection and provided the authority in question confirm that
                   the disclosure is confidential and the report should not be disclosed
                   further.

S.4.13     Official Solicitor

           (i)     The Official Solicitor to the Supreme Court has varied duties which
                   include acting as guardian ad litem to persons under disability and
                   intervening in contempt proceedings and applications for bail where
                   the person is unable to act on his own behalf.

           (ii)    Because of his varied responsibilities in different types of
                   proceedings it is not possible to determine specific guidelines in
                   relation to disclosure but clearly every assistance should be given
                   with the provision of relevant material.
           (iii)   When the court refers a matter to the Official Solicitor it will
                   normally do so in writing and the instructions may clarify what is
                   required. Regard must be had to the general principles of the
                   disclosure set out at S.2.2 above, especially Public Interest
                   Immunity considerations.



S.4.14     Prison Medical Officers

           (i)     Prison medical officers should be supplied with relevant witness
                   statements upon request and in cases of murder as a matter of
                   course so that psychiatric reports can be prepared for the benefit
                   of the court (see paragraph H. 1.6 of the Practice and Procedure
                   Manual).

           (ii)    The CPS has accepted responsibility for ensuring that medical
                   reports are obtained in murder cases as the court has no
                   mechanism for instructing doctors directly (although section 3(6A)
                   of the Bail Act 1976 creates a requirement that the defendant
                   should undergo an examination by two medical examiners).

           (iii)   Following conviction requests are sometimes received from the
                   Prison Service in connection with their Sex Offender Treatment
                   programme. The requests are for statements of victims and police
                   reports. Whilst there is no objection to the release of statements
                   provided there is no unauthorised disclosure further, there is no
                   reason why the statements should not be obtained from the

Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992

                   defendant's solicitors or the defendant himself.      Police reports
                   should not be provided.

           (iv)    Requests from third parties for copies of medical reports compiled
                   by the Prison Medical Service should be directed to the court.
                   Public Interest Immunity will not normally attach to such reports
                   but they are by their nature confidential and are the property of the
                   court which will have requested them in most instances.

S.4.15     Parole Board

           (i)     The Parole Board advises the Home Secretary in connection with
                   the early release or recall of prisoners and new arrangements for
                   release were introduced by the Criminal Justice Act 1991. In the
                   discharge of its responsibilities the Home Office Parole Unit may
                   seek information on the facts of the case from the CPS.

           (ii)    The Parole Unit will always in the first instance endeavour to
                   obtain information from the Probation Service or the police but in
                   cases of urgency approaches may be made to the CPS.

           (iii)   If the CPS    can assist, there is no objection to asummary of the
                   facts being   provided together with a copy of the charges or
                   indictment.    If a case summary of facts was prepared for the trial
                   Judge this    may be disclosed. Police Reports         should not be
                   provided.




S.4.16     Forensic Scientists

           (i)     There are conflicting principles involved in the supply of witness
                   statements to forensic scientists. On the one hand scientists must
                   be seen to be independent of the police and they must not be
                   rendered vulnerable to the suggestion that they have tailored their
                   evidence to fit the information that they have been provided with.
                   On the other hand they must be provided with all the information
                   necessary to enable them to decide what tests should be carried
                   out.

           (ii)    In many cases, such as drugs, handwriting and firearms'
                    examinations no information will be required. In other cases only
                    straightforward information (which need not involve the disclosure
                    of statements) will be required - for example the time a woman last
                    had intercourse before the incident complained of in an allegation

Amendment No 12                           RESTRICTED                         July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992

                   of rape. In other circumstances, such as road traffic accidents and
                   fires, fuller disclosure is essential in order that the scientist can
                   determine what to examine.

           (iii)   Initial disclosure will be made by the police but the CPS lawyer
                    reviewing the case may be asked to advise and in any event will
                    have to assess the requirements of each case. Disclosure of
                    relevant material to scientists may be authorised but prosecuting
                    Counsel must be informed and a record of what has been disclosed
                    must be kept on the file.

S.4.17     Applications for Restraint Orders/Mareva Injunctions

           (i)     Under section 8 of the Drug Trafficking Offences Act 1986 a
                   prosecutor may make an ex parte application to a Judge in
                   Chambers for a restraint order prohibiting dealing with realisable
                   property held by a specified person. The power to make a restraint
                   order is exercisable by the High Court where proceedings have
                   been instituted against the defendant for a drug trafficking offence.
                   Where those proceedings have not been concluded and the court
                   is satisfied that there is reasonable cause to believe that the
                   defendant has benefited from drug trafficking, an order may be
                   made.

           (ii)    The jurisdiction of the High Court to make restraint orders is very
                    similar to its jurisdiction to make Mareva injunctions under Order
                    29 of the Rules of the Supreme Court. In Brink's Mat Limited -v-
                    Elcombe 1988 3 AER 188 the Court of Appeal restated the
                   principles governing the duty of disclosure in Mareva applications
                    and it is considered that the same principles apply to applications
                    for restraint orders.



           (iii)   It is the duty of the plaintiff to make full and frank disclosure of
                   the material facts when applying for an injunction. Materiality is
                   to be decided by the Court and not by the plaintiffs and their
                   advisers. The duty of disclosure applies to material facts known to
                   the plaintiffs and to any additional facts which should be known if
                   proper enquiries are made.

           (iv)    Affidavits in support of applications for restraint orders are made
                   by police officers but the Crown Prosecutor handling the
                   application must ensure that full and frank disclosure of relevant
                   material is made. Failure to do so may risk an application for
                   compensation against the Service under section 19 of the Drug

Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992

                   Trafficking Offences Act 1986.

S.4.18     Data Protection Act 1984

           (i)     Data is defined in section 1 of the Data Protection Act as
                   "Information in a form in which it can be processed by equipment
                   operating automatically in response to instructions given for that
                   purpose". Records of convictions are a common example of such
                   data.

           (ii)    CPS registrations under the Data Protection Act 1984 are under the
                   control of the Data Protection Controller who is the Departmental
                   Records Officer at Headquarters. Any requests for the disclosure
                   of data held by the Service must therefore be directed to the DRO.
                   It is in fact an offence under section 5(2)(d) of the Act to disclose
                   personal data to a person not described in the register entry.

           (iii)   The Act does, however, give certain exemptions that concern the
                   disclosure of personal data and, if they apply, personal data may be
                   disclosed even though the disclosures are not covered by the
                   register entry. The exemptions are listed below:

                   (a)    Disclosures to the data subject or with consent of the subject
                          to someone acting on his behalf.

                   (b)    Disclosures to employees or agents of the CPS (if these are
                          made to enable them to perform their duties as employees
                          or agents).

                   (c)    Disclosures made for the prevention or detection of crime,
                          the apprehension or prosecution of offenders or the
                          assessment or collection of any tax or duty. This applies
                          where the fact that it could not otherwise legally be made

                          would be likely to prejudice one of those purposes. It does
                          not oblige the CPS to make the disclosure.


                   (d)    Disclosures made to safeguard national security.

                   (e)    Disclosures made for legal purposes ie required by statute,
                          rule of law or an order of the court; made for the purpose
                          of obtaining legal advice; made for the purposes of, or in the
                          course of, legal proceedings in which the person making the
                          disclosure is a party or a witness.


Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

                   (f)    Emergencydisclosures made if required urgently            for
                          preventing injury or other damage to anyone's health.

                   It should be noted that the exemptions are not relevant to the
                   question of whether the data should be registered and do not
                   inhibit the court's powers to award compensation for damage
                   suffered by an unauthorised disclosure even though it falls within
                   the exemptions.

           (iv)    Requests may be made by solicitors acting for third parties for
                   information from police computers. These mustbe scrutinised to
                   ensure that any      such request is relevant to proceedings or
                   contemplated proceedings. As this is a development area of the
                   law such requests should be notified to Policy and Communications
                   Group Branch 3 for advice.

S.4.19     Researchers and Authors

           (i)     Requests are often received for facilities to be made available to
                   researchers investigating aspects of CPS casework and legally
                   orientated policy. When such requests are received in Areas for
                   access to CPS files, or in circumstances where the findings may
                   have implications for other Areas or the CPS as a whole or where
                   the project will involve resource implications for the Service, and
                   where the Chief Crown Prosecutor is minded to co-operate, the
                   request should be referred to Policy and Communications Group
                   Branch One before there is even an agreement in principle to offer
                   facilities to the researcher.

                   When a Chief Crown Prosecutor wishes to co-operate he should
                   indicate his reasons, the likely resource implications for his Area
                   and his assessment of the benefit of the project to the CPS as a
                   whole. Where appropriate an assessment of the bona fides of the
                   researcher should be included.

           (ii)    Policy and Communications Group will determine whether or not
                   the facilities requested (or a variation thereof) can be offered to
                   the researcher in question, after consulting others at Headquarters
                   as appropriate.
           (iii)   The relevant Chief Crown Prosecutor will be advised whether the
                   request for facilities has been granted and if so on what terms.

           (iv)    Arrangements for the researcher to be afforded those facilities will
                   be made at a local level.

           (v)     It is the responsibility of the Chief Crown Prosecutor in whose Area

Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992

                    the researcher is working to ensure that the appropriate
                    declarations under the Official Secrets Acts are completed and
                    returned to Personnel Management Branch Two at Headquarters.

           (vi)     The Chief Crown Prosecutor (or his nominee) will advise Policy
                    and Communications Group Branch One when the research project
                    has been completed and further advise Branch One of any matters
                    arising from the grant of facilities to the researcher.

           (vii)    Requests from individuals who simply wish to meet a representative
                    of the CPS to discuss the Service in general or who have
                    straightforward queries will be handled locally. Care must be taken
                    to ensure that such visitors do not have access to CPS files nor are
                    in a position to see papers of a sensitive nature, which includes
                    Manuals, PCG Circulars and other restricted documents. Security
                    of documents must be maintained at all times. The Code for
                    Crown Prosecutors is a public document which may be shown to
                    visitors.

           (viii)   Requests from authors and others who are interested in writing
                    about a particular case or cases rather than conducting research
                    into the academic legal interest of a class of case, should be
                    referred to the Departmental Record Officer. Most requests will
                    relate to older cases and will be directed to Headquarters in any
                    event but where requests are received in Areas for information on
                    more recent cases the Department Record Officer must be
                    informed so that a consistent policy is applied.

           (ix)     The Departmental Record Officer will consider each request on its
                    merits in discussion with Policy and Communications Group and
                    other interested parties which may include the police force which
                    investigated the case.

S.5        Public Interest Immunity

S.5.1      The principle of Public Interest Immunity is that a witness may not be
           asked, and will not be allowed, to state facts or to produce documents the
           disclosure of which would be prejudicial to the public interest. It is an
           important principle of CPS policy concerning the disclosure of material to
           third parties that consideration must be given to the public interest before
           there is any question of disclosure (see paragraph S.2.2(e) above).
           Reference is made at paragraph S.5.5below of the balancing act between

           competing public interest and it is important to bear in mind that a court
           may order disclosure, notwithstanding actual or potential prejudice, to one
           of those interests.

Amendment No 12                          RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                        RESTRICTED                          July 1992

5.5.2      Claims for PII

           Claims for Public Interest Immunity fall under two main heads which are
           not mutually exclusive.

           (a)    "Class" Claims are appropriate where the material belongs to a
                  class which it would not be in the public interest to disclose even
                  if the contents are innocuous because confidentiality is necessary
                  for the proper functioning of the public service. Some examples
                  are confidential reports from the police to the CPS; correspondence
                  between the CPS and the police relating to the conduct of the case;
                  and file notes relating to the decision making process by the
                  prosecutor (see paragraphs S.3.5and 3.6above). Statements taken
                  during the course of a police complaints investigation are normally
                   subject to Public Interest Immunity but there may be an exception
                   if the dominant purpose of the investigation is in the public domain
                  because it involves the investigation of a death or crime (see
                   paragraph S.4 .7above).

           (b)    "Contents" Claims are appropriate where the document itself may
                   not belong to a class which is prima facie immune from disclosure
                  but the disclosure of its contents would be damaging to the public
                   interest. An example would be a witness statement which contains
                   references to matters of national security or the identity of an
                   informant.

5.5.3      Non-Waiver of PII

           Public Interest Immunity does not necessarily clothe material in absolute
           secrecy. It is a principle according to which material is protected from
           disclosure in legal proceedings. Its application to a particular class of
           material does not produce the result that items within that class can never
           be lawfully shown to anyone. However, the disclosure of material which
           attracts PII is a matter for the court to decide and it cannot be waived
           even if the maker consents to its disclosure. The interest is that of the
           public and not of the parties to the litigation and         PII exists quite
           independently of the interests of justice in a particular case.

5.5.4      Public Interest Immunity is a duty as opposed to a rieht and when a
           person is in possession of material which is prima facie immune from
           disclosure, immunity should normally be asserted because the ultimate
           iudee of where the public interest lies is the court. Similar principles
           apply to oral evidence in which a party to proceedings may seek to adduce
           secondary evidence of the contents of a document which is prima facie
           immune from disclosure.


Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992




5.5.5     The Balancing Exercise

           In criminal proceedings the confidentiality necessary for the proper
           functioning of the public service must always be balanced against the
           public interest that information should not be withheld if it will assist a
           defendant to establish his innocence. In civil proceedings the court will be
           called upon to carry out a similar balancing exercise where the party
           seeking disclosure has to satisfy the court thatthe material            will
           substantially assist his case and the party claimingPII will claim that
           disclosure will prejudice the proper functioning of the public service.

5.5.6     Procedures for Claiming PII in Civil Litigation

           Procedures outlined below will be confined to civil proceedings as third
           party disclosure of documents will seldom apply in the course of a criminal
           trial. Public Interest Immunity in relation to matters in a criminal trial
           such as identity of informants, disclosure of police surveillance techniques
           and national security are dealt with elsewhere.

5.5.7     A claim for PII will most   often arise when a party to civil litigation seeks
          disclosure of documents     which the CPShas in its possession or seeks to
          interview a member of       staff about the decision to prosecute or what
          happened when the case      was reviewed. It will sometimes be possible to
          resolve the matter at the   discovery stage but if not then the claim must be
          made in court.

5.5.8     A request for disclosure of material which may be the subject of PII should
          be considered by a lawyer of not less than Grade 6. Copies of the relevant
          documents together with the recommendations of the lawyer dealing with
          the case should then be forwarded to Policy and Communications Group
          Branch 3 which will advise the Area. Similar procedures should be
          followed if a subpoena is served in the first instance. Where the request
          arises in a case being handled within Headquarters Casework it should be
          referred to the relevant Head of Division.

5.5.9     Certificates from the Law Officers

           In every case time is of the essence because in difficult cases it may be
           necessary to seek the advice of the Treasury Solicitor or to instruct
           Counsel so that an application can be made to set the subpoena aside.
           The Treasury Solicitor will also be able to advise regarding the need for
           a Certificate from a Law Officer asserting Public Interest Immunity.


Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992
Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                          July 1992

S.5.10     Though certificates are not essential in every case, they do add
           considerable weight to a claim for PII, especially when there is a "contents"
           as opposed to a "class" claim. The certificate is signed by a minister or a
           senior permanent official. In the case of the CPS the certificate will
           normally be signed by a Law Officer. Whilst the determination of a claim
           is a question of law and not an executive decision, the court will give due
           weight to the views expressed in a certificate. If a Certificate is required,
           the application is usually dealt with by the Treasury Solicitor who will have
           it settled by Counsel who is familiar with such matters.              Prompt
           notification is therefore essential.

S.5.11     The Procedure at Court

           Close liaison with the court's listing office is essential and steps must be
           taken to ensure that proper service of all the necessary notices of
           application is effected in good time.

S.5.12     At court the first step will be to decide if a claim is made out. If there is
           any doubt the court may inspect the material concerned but before it can
           do so the onus is on the party seeking disclosure to satisfy the court that
           the material will substantially assist his case or damage that of his
           opponent; or will give substantial assistance to the court in determining the
           facts on which the decision in the case will depend. The court should
           inspect documents only when it has definite grounds for expecting to find
           material of real importance to the parties seeking disclosure.

S.5.13     If the court considers it should inspect the material, it will normally order
           production for inspection, which order can be the subject of an appeal. It
           should not inspect the document until after the appeal (if any) has been
           heard. If appropriate, it may then inspect the document and proceed with
           the balancing exercise dealt with in paragraph S.5.5. It is for the party
           seeking disclosure to establish clearly that the scale falls decisively in
           favour of disclosure if he is to succeed. If he does succeed, the court will
           order full or partial disclosure. If he fails, even material which is clearly
           necessary for disposing fairly of the cause or matter must be withheld.




Amendment No 12                         RESTRICTED                           July 1992
