Incident     102   270790 OP227        DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                           STATEMENT NUMBER    S2258

                                                                              Station

Surname            HARVEY

Forenames          TREVOR

Age                                        Date of birth

Address


Occupation         POL INS   DISCIPLINE & COMPLAINTS

Telephone

IC                 Height                  Build

Hair colour

Hatype
 W
Eyes                                       Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                    Accent

Number of Pages

Dated                                                               T HARVEY Signed


           I am an Inspector in the South Yorkshire Police presently seconded to

           the Discipline and Complaints Department, Force Headquarters.        Prior

           to this appointment 30.1.89 (300189) I was an operational Inspector

           at 'F' Division stationed at Hairmerton Road.    I have at least 4 years

          experience of uniformed supervisory duties at Hillsborough Football

          Ground and several years experience of working in criminal

           investigation duties at this venue.

           I have assisted in the last three cup semi-final football matches to

          be played at Hillsborough.   My main uniform supervisory duties at this

          venue have been the supervision of serials 1 to 3 (perimeter track and

          car park areas) and more lately Crime and Vandal Commander duties,

          being deployed where and when required.      (The majority of these

          requirements have been at the Leppings Lane area of the ground on

          coach reception, etc).
                                                                       PAGE
                                                                       S2258

I have also supervised serials having responsibility for all sections

of the ground, including the West Stand area but this has been on a

lesser footing than the other areas mentioned.

At 9.45 a.m. (0945), 15 April 1989 (150489), I reported for duty at

the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground Semi-Final - Liverpool v.

Nottingham Forest.        My call sign was India 2, in charge of serials 4 -

6.    My overall sector commander was Superintendent GREENWOOD, his

deputy was Chief Inspector BEAL.

Briefing was held in the South Stand, given by Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD - incident commander.

Serials 4 - 6 overall coverage of roadway from Penistone Road - rear

South Stand to Leppings Lane turnstiles (barriers).

Serial Sergeants: 4 PS266 JACQUES (E) + 10

                        5 PS1084 HODGETT (E) + 1 0

                        6 PS729 NORBURN (E) + 10



All experienced officers in football duties.          No problems foreseen.



Serial 4 - Penistone Road area, safety of persons,

                 vehicles, etc.   Run South Stand

                 Supervision of turnstiles etc.



Serial 5 - Supervision turnstiles and

                 security of TV vehicles etc.



Serial 6 - Erections of barriers near to 'C' gate

                 Leppings Lane end.     Security of South

                 Stand car parks etc.



1 1 .2 0 ( 11 20 ) .
                                                                    PAGE        3
                                                                    S2258



All serials, 4, 5 and 6 at their respective details.       No problems,

spectators light good humoured.     Mainly Nottingham Forest supporters

except near players' entrance of both.



Both teams arrived - no problems.     Fans well behaved.



Approx. 2.30 p.m. (1430).



Apparent radio fault - buzzing when control pass message - similar to

radio battery fault.    Enter ground by players' entrance and tunnel

speak to officers there - fault on radio system - saw Chief Inspector

BEAL who apparently had civilian radio engineer with him on way to

control box.



South Stand and Spion Kop - filling well.



North Stand and West Stand and terracing - large gaps.



Liverpool players on field, pre match kick around.



Whilst speaking to other officers near to players' tunnel, approached

by Doug LOCK (Ex Police Superintendent FI) now head of security at

ground.   Looked very worried, made mention of large crowds at Leppings

Lane end of ground.

It looked as if they were trying to push their way in.      Seme had already

got in through a gateway.    Mr. LOCK stated that ground control was

aware.    Players had left pitch by this time.

Exit ground via players' tunnel and called at Doug LOCK'S office.         Saw

large group outside Leppings Lane end on camera.
                                                                   PAGE      4
                                                                   S2258

Left South Stand via players' entrance and commenced to go to Leppings

Lane turnstiles.

Once outside, rear of South Stand, heard Superintendent MARSHALL on

radio requesting permission to open gates.

Two horses pass by towards Leppings Lane.

Whilst passing television vehicles mention on radio of possible

postponement of kick off.     Radio reception poor.   Unknown source.

2.55? (1455).

Arrive at barrier near to 'C' gate - large crowd possibly 4,000

outside turnstiles all pushing and shoving.    Horseman in middle of

crowd - didn't look happy with situation, didn't look as if he could

get out.   There were a number of 10 - 20 youths climbing on wall above

turnstiles towards 'B' gate.     I could see Inspector BENNETT on top of

turnstile wall trying to stop them.

Crowd chanting and pushing very frightening scene - never seen

anything like this at a football match.     In fear that someone would

get badly injured or worse.

Noise from inside ground - possible teams onto field.      This made crowd

push even more.    Real danger of people being crushed.    Several being

pulled or pushed out at side.



Saw Inspector PURDY - worried.



Noise too loud to hear radio etc - could smell alcohol drifting from

crowd.   People shouting for help.

Gate 'C' opened from the inside - unable to see by whan.      Crowd surged

forward and allowed into ground, unable to stop.      The smell of alcohol

got worse the nearer they got.    Aproximately 1500 or more passed

through the gateway.

Horses move and close crowd down somewhat.    Gate pulled together
                                                                    PAGE     5
                                                                    S2258

slightly and crowd let in a little more orderly.        Those holding

tickets in the air were allowed to pass. Another 5 or 600 allowed in

pressure easing by this time.

I then went around the barrier and saw 200/300 supporters at the

turnstiles still trying to get in that way, it didn't appear as though

they had seen Gate 'C' open.     Then someone, I couldn't see who, opened

Gate 'B'.     The people at the turnstile then ran through this gate and

the pressure on the turnstile was relieved.

There were several people who were limping, etc., and had obviously

been injured in the crush.     None appeared serious and there were

definitely no bodies at this location.

I do not know who opened gates 'C' or 'B' or if control had requested

them to be opened.     I can only say that if they had not been opened

when they were serious and probable fatal injuries would have been

caused.     There were roars from the crowd inside, possibly kick-off or

football action of seme description, I was unable to tell.

I spoke to Sergeant NORBURN And we discussed the behaviour of the

crowd and the pressure build up.

Started to walk back towards the television vehicles as the problem

had cleared and we intended to activate phase 2.

I heard Sergeant GODDARD'S voice come over the radio, although

reception was none too clear there was an anxious tone in his voice.

'All officers on to perimeter track.'     (repeated).

I shouted to the serial (6) and we all ran towards the entrance near

to turnstiles 19 to 22 at the rear of control point.       We entered the

perimeter track via the front area of the South Stand.       People in the

South Stand were stood up and shouting abuse towards the West Stand

area.     It looked like a pitch invasion from the West Stand terraces.

There were no players on the field.     Numerous police officers near and

around the perimeter fencing and goal mouth area.       Fans were spilling
                                                                   PAGE        6
                                                                   S2258

onto the field, climbing fencing etc.     My immediate thought was that

it was a pitch invasion and nothing more.

With the officers I made my way to the perimeter fencing.      I made my

way to the fencing towards the left hand side of Gateway No. 3.         This

gate was open and police officers were trying to clear the gateway of

fallen people.

To my horror I then saw the reality of what was taking place.      The

first 4 or 5 rows of supporters who had been stood behind this section

of fencing had all be crushed together up to the fencing.      Several

were obviously dead and others appeared to be dying.

There was one elderly man, greying hair, whose face had been pushed so

hard into the fencing that his false teeth had come out and were on

the floor of the perimeter track.     He was obviously dead.   Others

around him were turning blue/purple as they were suffocating.     A young

girl probably 15 or 16 years was struggling to keep alive.     She was

unable to speak and I suspect fading fast.     The gateway was open and

officers were trying to remove what I realise now were bodies from the

gateway.     The bodies were entangled with other bodies which were

alive.     Supporters from the back were climbing over bodies to get out,

thereby hindering the rescue attempts by the officers concerned.

The crowds were still pushing forward and chanting at the police.        I

joined the officers stood on the wall and shouted at the crowd to stop

pushing.     Shouts of abuse were the only reply.

Officers were trying to make their way through the section of crowds

to the left compound 2, and climb over the adjoining fence.     They were

being pushed and jostled by the crowd as they did so.

Other supporters were climbing over the dead and injured at the front

to escape over the fencing.     The crowd at the rear of this section and

the West Stand area did not seem to realise what was happening at the

front.     They continued to shout abuse at the police.
                                                                     PAGE    7
                                                                     S2258

I was unaware if control had realised the seriousness of the

situation.     It was impossible to hear radio transmissions if in fact

they were being made.

I jumped down from the fencing and ran towards the goal mouth area in

the hope that I could contact control and ensure that other services

were attending.     We urgently required cutting equipment, bullhorns or

the public address system to let the crowd know what was happening

etc., and for officers to be deputed to attend from the rear tunnel,

that being the main entrance to areas 3 and 4.

It was mayhem and there was no way that a message could be passed from

my position.     I ran towards the South Stand where I saw Superintendent

GREENWOOD near to the touchline facing the South Stand and the control

box.     I shouted to him that there were fatalities and we needed

assistance quickly.     I did not wait for an answer and ran back to the

fencing area near to gateway no. 3.

By this time several officers had climbed the fencing and were hanging

over the top trying to pull people up from the other side of the

fence.     To some extent this was being successful.   Some were being

extracted from the gateway.     By now a number of severely injured were

laid on the playing area to the left of the goal mouth.     Police

Officers and supporters alike were giving what assistance they could.

I ran towards the gateway and as I did so a youth was pulled from the

gateway.    Assisted by some supporters, I carried the youth aged about

17 years to the playing area, his breathing was shallow but he was

alive.     I, therefore, placed him in the coma position and as I started

to get up I saw Chief Superintendent NESBIT go past me and go towards

the gateway no. 3.

I followed him and saw that the gateway was still blocked.     Chief

Superintendent NESBIT had told the officers to clear the gateway of

bodies as best they could but they were being hampered by two bodies
                                                                   PAGE    8
                                                                   S2258

in particular, one of which was laid face down, his head and upper

body being entangled with the other bodies in the doorway, his legs

and lower body being on the perimeter track.

I intended to attempt to remove this body when the body of a male 40

to 45 years, well built, salt and pepper hair, was passed through the

gateway.     Sergeant 840 WRIGHT and myself carried this man on to the

grassed area.     I cleared the man's throat and Sergeant WRIQTT

corrmeneed heart massage, whilst I cormenced mouth to mouth

resuscitation.    After a couple of minutes we realised that this was a

pointless exercise, the man was dead and I covered his upper body with

my coat.

I returned to gateway no. 3 and saw Chief Superintendent NESBIT

lifting a small boy up the perimeter fence.     The child's shoe

or shoelace had became entangled in the perimeter fence and it had to

be released by Sergeant GUTCHER, Serious Crime Squad, who was inside

the compound.     By this time a number of officers had made their way

into the enclosure and were either moving bodies, assisting others

over the fences, or giving mouth to mouth resuscitation.      Two officers

in particular cams to mind, although there were many others whose

names I do not know.     Sergeant GUTCHER and Constable HUMPHRIES of 'C'

Division.     Their actions were praiseworthy to say the least.

I then assisted several other officers with the removal of casualties

from the         of around gateway no. 3.   With Chief Superintendent

NESBIT, Sergeant MORTON, HQ Serious Crime Squad, and other officers,

we made a chain and continued to pass injured and dead people frcm the

corrpound.    It is proper to say at this time that the majority of these

people were in fact dead by now.

As the number of bodies inside the compound dwindled, I assisted

police officers and supporters to carry the dead away on make-shift

stretchers. These were advertising hoardings used on the perimeter
                                                                     PAGE    9
                                                                     S2258

track of the ground.

The bodies were carried to the gymnasium where they had to be taken

from the stretcher in order to get them through the door.     The bodies

were then either left with one of the officers who had assisted in

carrying them or handed over to officers inside the gymnasium for

continuity purposes.

I assisted with the removal of 3 or 4 such bodies but I am unable to

recall anything about them other than they were all male and in either

their late teens or early twenties.

As I was about to leave the gymnasium on the last such venture,

somebody I am unable to say who, asked if a check could be made

outside to see if there were any more dead in the immediate area of

the prison van and police room.

I went outside and assisted in carrying the body of a male 20 to 22

years, fair hair, no other details, into the gymnasium.     I returned

and saw one more body outside.     It was laid on the floor between the

prison van and the gymnasium wall.     It had been partially covered with

a green blanket.     Together with PC2051 JACKSON, I carried this body

into the gymnasium.     I assisted PC JACKSON with the completion of a

sudden death report and left him with the body.    This body was later

identified as Stuart William Paul THOMPSON, 17 years,

\
Sometime after 4.30 p.m. (1630).

I then returned to the playing area and made my way towards enclosure

no. 3.   I saw that the wire fencing had been bent away from the frame

at one comer.      This I understood had been done by police officers in

an attempt to remove the casualties.     I then noticed the broken

barrier which must have had an effect on the outcome of this tragedy.

The cross member had snapped near to the neck of the securing stand

and then the whole stand had been pushed forward, no doubt by the
                                                                           PAGE 10
                                                                           S2258

        pressure exerted by the supporters at same stage.   Chief

        Superintendent NESBIT had already positioned officers to preserve the

        inmediate scene for evidential purposes.

        I looked around the scene at same of the officers and saw that some

        were overcome with emotion and others were physically exhausted.     All,

        I felt sure, were numb with the scenes they had witnessed.   It was at

        this time that I noticed that my shirt had vomit and blood on it, my

        trousers and shoes were covered in mud, my hat, coat and tie were

        missing.

        I went around speaking to police officers giving what support and

        encouragement I could under the circumstances.   I stayed on the

        playing area until nearly all the supporters had left the ground and

        then remained in the ground until I was stood down at 7.00 p.m. (1900)

        that evening by Chief Superintendent MDLE.




                                                             T HARVEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

 i # s TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:

ND OF REPORT




                                                                                     331 1J
                                                                          STATION

|p4E:             GRAHAM
                  DELANEY

ADDRESS:          ECCLESFIELD POLICE STATION
                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

AGE / DATE OF BIKIH: 21 100

OCCUPATION:       POL INSP


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.




•
DATED: 180790                                             G DELANEY INSP (SIGNED)



           Further to my recollections/statement I made on the 29th April 1989

           (290489) concerning my duties at the Cup Sani-Final held at

           Hillsborough Football Ground on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I

        wish to say as follows.

           I attended a briefing held at Hillsborough at 10 am (1000) on Friday

           14th April 1989 (140489) which was given by Chief Supt DUCKENFIELD.

           The officers in attendance were Inspectors and above who would be on

           duty at the match.   C/Supt DUCKENFIELD went through the Operational

           Order picking out the salient points.   He asked for any comments or

           questions on the Operational Order or anything concerned with the

           match, and although seme were made I cannot ranember any details. At

           the conclusion of his briefing we then went with our respective

           Section Commanders, mine being Supt GREENWOOD, for a more detailed

           briefing on our respective "Serials" duties.

           During the course of his briefing to us Supt GREENWOOD made reference

           to the Semi-Final between Wolves and Tottenham in 1981 (000081) when

           large numbers of fans were transferred from the Kop to Leppings Lane

           End.    He said that this had resulted in overcrowding and therefore on




                                                                                     3042E
       DELANEY                 GRAHAM                                             2


       this occasion no fans would be transferred.    They were to be kept in

       the sterile area of the Kop which is a triangle section of the Kop.

       This was confirmed by Inspector Gordon SYKES who had also been at the

        1981 (000081) match.

       Supt GREENWOOD explained his reasons for the non transfer of Liverpool

       supporters because of the crushing that occurred in 1981 (000081).

       I did not attend the briefing given by Chief Supt DUCKENFIELD on the

       morning of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) because of outside public

       order duties corrmencing at 8.0 am (0800).

       Prior to going out at 8.0 am (0800) I had briefed my Serial on their

       duties for that day.     I informed the Serial of the contents of the

       previous days 'Briefings' but did not mention the transfer of Liverpool

       supporters from the Spion Kop because it would not concern them.     The

       briefings that I attended on the Friday were very clear and concise and

        I fully understood them.

       G Delaney Insp

                                                        G DELANEY INSP SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    S BEECHEY D/SUPT360

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      S BEECHEY




                                                                                      3042F
Incident     102   280790 OP4909           DOCUMENT RECORD PRINT

                                                              STATEMENT NUMBER   S1346



ft.
Forenames
                   DELANEY

                   GRAHAM
                                                                                 Station




Age                                           Date of birth

Address            SOUTH YORKS POLICE, HAMMERTON ROAD POLICE STATION.


Occupation         POL INS

Telephone

IC                 Height                     Build

Hair colour


w lir type

Eyes                                          Complexion

Facial hair

Glasses            Use                        Accent

Number of Pages 4

Dated              290489                                                         Signed


           Call Sign 1.9.A.    Serial 20



           0700 hours       On duty Claywheels Ln with my Unit consisting of:

                            PS1066 HIGGINS

                            PC567   SALWAY

                            PC684   NORTON

                            PC722   GEE

                            PC1398 GOOEWILL

                            PC2000 BRAYFORD

                            PC2281 BARKER

                            PC2493 WEBSTER

                            PC2551 BILLINGS

                            PC2773 WHITELAM

           To Firth Park and load van with PSU equipment.
                                                                    PAGE    2
                                                                    S1346



0800 hours      Sheffield Wednesday ground briefing by Insp SEWELL.

Mobile patrol used as early warning system.    Apart from the odd

Transit and supervising Hot Dog Vendors, nothing very much to report.



1115 hours      S/B Gymnasium.



1400 hours      Stood at Spion Kop - North Stand with Sgt HIGGINS.

Noticed Spion Kop two thirds full.   West Stand and North Stand

virtually empty in comparison.   My attention at this time was drawn to

the North Stand end of the Spion Kop which was occupied by numerous

Liverpool fans.

I remained in this location (my Unit still being on S/B) when I

received a message to attend at the turnstiles Leppings Ln with full

Unit.

On arrival at 'A' gate there were a lot of people milling about who

had cane through the turnstiles. Inspector BENNETT was on top of the

wall assisting supporters who were climbing over it.   I was approached

several times by fans who physically (by poking me, etc) and verbally

abused me.   Seme were saying, "You'll have to do something outside,

people are getting crushed or someone will be killed."

Others screamed, "Open the bloody gates before you kill somebody."

The majority smelt strongly of intoxicants and the smell seemed to

fill the air.

Although I did not receive any requests for ambulances or medical

treatment, I noticed that several of these fans were holding their

chests and sides and were physially hurting.   I realised there were

obvious problems outside.   There was no access from 'A' or 'B' gates

because of the build up of fans outside.   I therefore started to make

my way to 'C' gate being continually abused on the way.   While en




                                                                                3042 B
                                                                   PAGE      3
                                                                   S1346

route I heard a message over the radio, "Open the gates at the rear of

Leppings Ln Terraces

I hurried towards C gate and once outside my attention was immediately

drawn to the crowds attempting to get through the turnstiles.

leppings Ln at this time was just a sea of people.      The fans were

shouting and screaming as they were being crushed against the

barriers.   Other Officers were trying to pull some of the fans under

the barriers who had tickets in their hands.      I immediately went to

their assistance.    The fans we pulled out were fed through 'C' gate

via the horses who were outside the gate.      At this time I noticed that

there were several hundred fans on the bridge at Leppings Ln and

Superintendent MARSHALL was stood on the bridge parapet.      I don't know

how many fans went through   'C'   gate at his time because I was too busy

pulling fans out of the queue.      I wasn't aware of any sudden surge.

I then looked across the queues and saw 'B' gate open.      The crush

seemed to subside quite a lot when the fans went through but the gate

was only open for a short space of time.

I then heard a message via the radio requesting all personnel to come

inside the ground.   I immediately went and joined my serial who were

at 'A' gate.   We ran down the back of the North Stand through the

first aisle and down the steps of the stand leading to the pitch.

On entering the ground I saw a cordon of Police Offricers on the field

near to the leppings Ln goal and a lot of fans milling about on the

perimeter track and field.   I inmediately thought there had been a

pitch invasion.   With my Serial, we were to strengthen the cordon.

It was not until a short time later a Police Officer came to me and

said people are dying in there, we'll have to do something.

I inmediately went to the fence and saw people crushed up against it.

Seme appeared to be in a bad way.     No. Four safety gate was open and I

Immediately went to assist Police Officers who were trying to drag




                                                                                 3042C
                                                                             PAGE    4
                                                                             S1346

         fans through it.

         The fans I helped through were badly shaken apart from one who needed

         resuscitation and looked in a bad way, but this man was carried out by

         a St Johns Officer.    I am unable to say if he died as I left him in

         the care of that Officer and another Police Officer.     I cannot

         describe him.

         I have policed football matches at Hillsborough on and off for twenty

         years.    I have never seen Leppings Ln so congested near to kick off

         time.

         I am familiar with the layout of the ground.

         I am unable to say what time the turnstiles were opened.

         The radio communications were intermittent but I hadn't got an ear

         piece so I am unable to catment on the overall reception but the noise

         from the crowd was deafening and I had to put my radio to my ear

        to hear.

         I have never been to a match where we have been so overwhelmed by

        thousands of fans at the last minute.    They were determined to get in

        the ground at all costs.




                                                              G Delaney SIGNED

fl^TEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:      290489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         G Delaney

END OF REPORT
