••
                  Director of Public Prosecutions                         Deputy Director and Chief Executive
                                 Allan Green Q.C.                         D. S. Gandy CBOBE




                                         Director o f Headquarters Casework
                                                    C. W. P. Newell




                                                                               Crown Prosecution Service
    The Clerk to Mr G Williams QC
     and Mr Peter Birts                                                        Headquarters
    Farrar's Building
    Temple                                                                     4/12 Queen Annes Gate
    London                                                                     London
    EC4                                                                        SW1H 9AZ
                                                                               Telephone 01-222-7944
                                                                                         Ext.




YourRef:                                Our Ref:                                          Date:
                                           P G K .3341.89                               16 February 1990


    Dear Sir

    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

    Mr Gareth Williams QC and Mr Peter Birts are retained to
    advise the Crown Prosecution Service in this case.

    A request by the Hillsborough Steering Group has recently been
    received in a letter dated 5th February 1990, for the
    disclosure of information as to the actual positions of the
    deceased at the ground.  This is to assist them in dealing
    with negotiations on damages in the civil claim.  A copy of
    the letter from the Steering Committee is attached.

     I also attach a copy of a letter from the coroner Dr Popper.
     He has received a similar request.  He feels that the
     information should be supplied via adjourned inquest hearings
     which could be held on a formal basis but restricted to giving
     only that information requested by the Steering Group.

     I have spoken to ACC Jones who is also content to supply the
     information in the way Dr Popper suggests.  He agrees that the
     supply of this information, on a restricted basis would not
     prejudice the criminal investigation.  Mr Jones also feels
     that there would be operational advantages to him if the
     requests could be dealt with in this way.

     We have considered the request carefully, bearing in mind in
     particular, Public Interest Immunity.  It is our view that the
     information could be released provided it can be disclosed
     through the formal channel of an inquest and restricted to
     that information requested which will not involve the
     disclosure of any controversial information.  However, before
     the information is released we ought to be satisfied first,
     that the supply of this information will not prejudice the
     criminal investigation and second, that there will be no
     prejudice to any potential prosecution case.



Fax 01-222-4751                                Telex 9 4 5 3 1 0 CPS HQ                                    Britdoc D X 2 3 2 8 Victoria
                            -   2   -




I should be grateful to receive your views on this point as
quickly as possible.

I also enclose a copy of a letter which I have received from
the solicitors acting for the South Yorkshire Police.  A reply
is being sent indicating that in our view the civil trial
should not take place until the conclusion of any criminal
prosecution.

I enclose this documentation in duplicate to be placed before
both Mr Williams and Mr Birts for their attention.  If there
are any difficulties please could you telephone
Michael Kennedy to discuss the matter.

Yours faithfully




C J Cleugh
Head of Police Complaints Division
