Chris Newell
DCE
CPS HQ
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4



CC    Dm Sharpling
      Robin Booth
      George Croston




RE:   HILLSBOROUGH -
      THE ATTEMPT PERVERT COURSE OF JUSTICE CHARGE


1     I have spent some time over the last couple of days thinking about the
       complex issue of whether to take over the attempt pervert course of justice
      charge alone, i.e. intervening in part in the Hillsborough prosecution. I have
       looked very carefully at your letter to Stephen Wooler. I initially started this
       minute on the basis that I felt there were powerful arguments in favour of
       partial intervention. I have since reconsidered, but I thought it might be
       helpful to expose these arguments in case they are useful at a later stage in the
       event that the policy is rewritten.

2     In your letter you set out a tentative conclusion that it is possible to take over
       part of a private prosecution in order to discontinue it and leave the remainder
       of the case to be run by the private prosecutor. This follows the arguments
       contained in George Croston’s review and I support those arguments.

3     Further support for this view may be derived from the argument that our
      policy on private prosecutions is in effect a duty, where a request has been
      made by either party that we take over “the case” for whatever reason. It is
      important here to note that any ‘duty’ is very limited in its application.

4     The right to bring a private prosecution is enshrined in statute, of course. It is
      considered an important constitutional right and is one which should not be
      interfered with lightly. To intervene when it is not strictly necessary to do so
      would be to act to the prejudice of the private prosecutor. Our own policy
      states that where there is clearly no case to answer a prosecution commenced
in such circumstances would be unfounded and would therefore be an abuse of
the right to bring a prosecution. Thus we must be sure that there is clearly no
case to answer before stepping in to discontinue. The principle underlying the
policy here must be to give maximum effect to the right of the individual to
bring a private prosecution.

Dru has drawn my attention to the case of Doody -v- Secretary o f State for the
Home Department [1993] 3 All ER 92. At page 106, Lord Mustill summarises
the principles to be applied in the exercise of statutory powers. The following
principles can be summarised thus:

•    Statutory powers must be applied in a manner which is fair in all the
     circumstances
•    Standards of fairness are not immutable and may change over time
•    The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in
     every situation; the context must be taken into account
•    Fairness will often require the opportunity for a person affected to make
     representations either before or after the decision is taken
•    Fairness will often require that a person affected should know the gist of
     the case against him in order to make representations.

I suggest we should consider the principles set out in Doody in making our
decision.

If the relative seriousness of the charges were reversed, i.e. a private
prosecution consisted of several charges, the most serious of which was so
weak that there is clearly no case to answer. In those circumstances, I suggest
we would conclude that we would have little choice but to intervene in the
most serious charge and discontinue it. Our position on the other charges
would depend on our assessment of the strength of the evidence. If, as in
Hillsborough, we concluded that the charges fell between clearly no case to
answer and realistic prospect, I suggest we would let the private prosecution
continue on those charges only.

The question I pose here is whether there is any logical distinction of
substance which can be made between that hypothetical situation and the
Hillsborough situation? On one view, there is not and I refer to paragraph 4.1
of the Code, “if the case does not pass the evidential test, it must not go ahead,
no matter how important or serious it may be”. The Code does not permit a
distinction to be made on the basis of the seriousness o f the charge when
applying the evidential test. It could be argued that there is a read across to the
private prosecution policy, ie. where there is clearly no case to answer the
charge must not be allowed to proceed no matter how serious (or trivial, I
might add) it is.

I think there are other arguments which militate in favour of taking over the
attempt pervert course of justice charge and I thought it would be helpful if I
briefly rehearsed these as I think there are some potential dangers for us if we
do not act.
It could be argued that taking over the case in part is more readily justifiable
than not intervening at all. In developing these arguments, I am mindful that
our policy on private prosecutions has been exposed to both the prosecutor and
defendants. I am also aware that the defendants are funded by South
Yorkshire Police and further that they have each put together very powerful
defence teams. There is every reason to suppose that they will go for judicial
review whatever our decision.              There has already been a hint in
correspondence when the defence argued that they considered the code tests
ought to have been applied. To the best of my knowledge, there has not been
a challenge on our policy on private prosecutions and the defence may well
consider that this is potentially fertile ground for them.

Leaving aside judicial review, I think there is still an issue in justifying a
decision not to intervene in part on its merits. If asked about the attempt to
pervert the course of justice charge, we could fairly quickly be backed into a
corner on the basis that we considered we could intervene in part, we thought
there was clearly no case to answer but we were influenced by our decision on
the other charges. It might be difficult to maintain a justification. I appreciate
that we could attempt to avoid the issue by declining to comment on an
individual charge basis. In any event we would have to be extremely careful in
what we say to the press as the case will still be sub judice, of course. Here it
is appropriate to note the distinction between justifying our decision to the
parties and justifying it more widely to the press.

I agree that it would be difficult to explain a decision to intervene in part,
given the tight limits on our ability to explain a decision in relation to a case
which continues before the courts. It ought not to be impossible, however, and
the decision would be capable of being justified to the parties on the basis of a
proper application of our policy on a charge by charge basis. It could be
argued that we would be in a stronger position should judicial review
proceedings be commenced. We would then be able to demonstrate with ease
to the court that we had considered our policy, we felt it should be applied on
a charge by charge basis and we had applied it accordingly.

The converse argument is that we might find it difficult to sustain the non
intervention line before the Divisional Court as we would have to agree that
we had not applied our own policy on an individual charge basis. This could
taint, in the eyes of the Court, a decision in relation to the other charges. The
defendants would have a better chance of persuading the court that the whole
decision was wrong if they were able to point to part of it and criticise it. I
pose the question whether this could in itself put the entire policy on private
prosecutions at risk?

Having exposed some of the arguments in favour of partial intervention, I
readily accept that there are arguments which go the other way.

In paragraph 8 1 pose the question whether there is a logical difference. At one
level the answer is probably not, in pure logical terms. However there are
powerful practical/rational arguments which enable a distinction to be made.
16    Where the more serious charge fails the ‘clearly no case to answer’ test, it
      would be likely that it would be appropriate to step in and take over and
      discontinue, even on a partial basis. It would be wrong for the defendant to be
      in before the court where there is clearly no case. Intervention would thus be
      necessary to achieve a fair result. Whilst the defendant would still face other
      charges, it would be unfair on the defendant to face the trauma of the more
      serious charge.

17    The distinction where the weak charge is less serious is that the defendant will
      continue to suffer the trauma o f the more serious charges. It is unlikely that
      continuing to face the less serious charge would unduly add to the trauma of
      the proceedings. There can be little doubt that the manslaughter charges in the
      Hillsborough case far outweigh the attempt pervert charge in their seriousness.

18    Further, the defendant retains another remedy, ie. asking the court to discharge
      the charge at committal proceedings. True, this is available in the case where
      the weak charge is the more serious, but the trauma argument would still be in
      play. This can be put in another way, will the defendant suffer prejudice as the
      result of non intervention?

19    The question then becomes, is partial intervention necessary in the interest of
      fairness? In this context, necessary really means essential.

20    Taking all factors in account, the decision may be perceived to be finely
      balanced, with competing factors on both sides. That being the case, the
      decision ought to be exercised in favour of non intervention. Further, the
      Doody arguments lend considerable support to the view that the decision,
      unlike the Code test, must not be taken in isolation from other relevant and
      appropriate factors.

21    I understand that the view at this stage is that it is likely that the decision will
       remain in favour of non intervention. I hope that this minute may be helpful in
       exposing these arguments for use at a later stage in the event of a policy re­
       write.

22    George Croston has seen this minute and he agrees with the views expressed.




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework: York
14 December, 1998
Telj
Fax
DX: 65204 - YORK 6
