                                                                          } 2' l
 Tel:
 Fax:
                                                              Crow n Prosecution
                                                              S ervice
                                                              C entral C asew ork
                                                              U nited House
                                                              YO R K    Y019PQ




Fax
 To:      M. Shepherd Esq                       From:   George Croston

 Fax:     0113 284 7001                         Pages: 2

 Phone:                                         Date:   12/23/98

 Re:      Adlington v Duckenfield & Murray     Time:

 □ Urgent       □ For Review       □ P lease Comment    □ P lease Reply    □ P lease Recycle


 • Comments:

 Schedule previously sent.
HAMMOND SUDDARDS
Solicitors                                                                j
FAO M Shepherd Esq                                                        '

DX: 26441 LEEDS

                                                                          YBF/3341/89

                                                                          POM.SB.CHI.57-9


                                                                          23 December 1998


Dear Sirs

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

Further to my fax o f yesterday, attached are the two schedules o f material reviewed by the
CPS in 1990 and 1997 and still in our possession.

We have been asked by the HFSG to commence disclosure immediately and without waiting
for any judicial review hearing to be set following the intimated application by both defence
solicitors. This request is being considered and a response will be given as soon as possible.

In order to assist in the provision o f voluntary disclosure o f relevant and material documents
in the possession o f the CPS, I would be grateful if you could indicate which o f the police
generated items may be disclosed by us. I presume that as South Yorkshire Police have
custody o f the Hillsborough archive that the C hief Constable can give permission for
disclosure or the waiver o f PII re West Midlands police material.

Perhaps you could arrange for a copy o f the schedule to be annotated as to:-
1.     Items subject to PII which is not waived.
2.     Item subject to PII which can now be waived.
3.     Item subject to PII which is known to be in the public domain (and therefore
       previously waived).
4.     Items not subject to PII which known to be in the public domain (and therefore
       previously waived).
5.     Item not subject to PII and not in the public domain which can be disclosed
6.     Any other claim for items.

I am mindful o f the rules concerning the disclosure o f witnesses’ addresses and their
statements without their consent. This is a point we may need to consider for those
statements not in the public domain.
♦
    I would be grateful if you could indicate today when you might be able to provide a
    substantive reply so that I can inform the parties to the private prosecution o f any delays in
    the making o f the CPS decision re voluntary disclosure.

    Yours sincerely




    George R. Croston
    Prosecution Team Leader
