30-WED-DEC-1998 01:34                              FAX:                                              PAGE 1

       MissD. H. Sharpling
                                                                                                                i m
       Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                  CPS
                                                                                                               CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hitt
                                                                                                               London EC4M TEX


                                                                                                    Stuilr.hb'iard: 0171-273 8000
                                                          1                                               nx No:           Ludgate EC4


             FACSIMILE                                                     Faciimih:        Vi/1-



                                                                         Tifm'l U n c       0J71‘

                                                                                                      273 1342/3
                                                                       (htr Reference:
                                                                                                      273 8450
        1.                                                J



             ATTENTION OF:           £


             ADDRESS:


             FAX NO:


             FROM:


             DATE:                I 12-                   TIME:       t2 S % ? 0




             This fax transmission consists of this page plus     J       others


             Please acknowledge receipt: Y/N
             Hard copy to follow:        Y/N


             If transmission is not properly received please call 0171 273              I



                                                                                                                       hn^
From:        Robin Booth
To:          CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC
Date:        30 December 1998 3:23pm
Subject:     Hillsborough.

Material held by CPS: categories and questions.

1. Categories:
a. material generated by Police for purposes of Public Inquiry;
b ditto for possible criminal proceedings;
c material under a or b which is already in the public domain, ie
published or available to HFS6.
d material generated by CPS ( and counsel, LSLO, etc.).

2. Questions:
aa. can CPS properly disclose material at b without the consent of the
statement maker? I think your broad public interest argument has some
force.
bb. re statements made for the purposes of the Public Inquiry (if not
available to the parties anyway): the public interest argument is even
stronger. But were these statements taken under terms as to disclosure
which were set by the Taylor Inquiry itself?
cc. how much of all this material is in fact already in the public domain?
dd. has the CPS generated material been considered in detail with a view
to deciding which items should properly be withheld on the grounds of
either LPP or PII ?
dd.  is there any material which should be disclosed but which requires to
be edited (apart from the possible exclusion of witness addresses, as noted
above)?

Thank you for your draft letters. I will speak to you about these shortly.


CC:          LENNONC
From:        Chris Enzor
To:          CPSHQL.CCU (BOOTHR)
Subject:     Hillsborough -Reply

A fly to add to the ointment I
Our policy is to seek consent from the individual witness first, in
practice we do this through the police.
Many of the witnesses are police officers. If we use the normal procedures,
we could end up with many refusals, as the police will be able to exert
some influence. Of course we can decide to go against the wishes of the
statement maker, but we would need strong grounds for doing so.
The policy also suggests that we should endeavour to agree a line with the
police for the sake of consistencyI
We could, of course, decide to give disclosure without seeking the consent
of the maker.
Possible grounds for acting otherwise in line with normal procedure might
be:
1. practicality, based on the number of witnesses (not a very attractive
ground)
2. The wider interests of justice and fairness in the circumstances of this
case at this stage, especially after we have decided not to intervene. This
would cover the obvious massive public interest in ensuring that
unnecessary obstacles were not put in the way of what is a very important
prosecution in a high profile case etc etc.
Am I on the right lines?
From:        Robin Booth
To:          CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC
Date:        30 December 1998 10:38am
Subject      Hillsborough

1. I discussed the issue of voluntary disclosure with Chris Newell on 23 &
24 Dec. We considered that there was no reason why we should not give
disclosure at this stage. We took the view that neither the proposed
Judicial Review proceedings nor the different stance taken by the South
Yorkshire Police provide a reason why the CPS should delay in giving
disclosure.

2. I have promised that we would write to HFSG by 31 Dec.Before we can do
so, there are a number of practical issues on which we need to be clear, as
noted below.

3. SYP do not have a veto on our decision to make voluntary disclosure at
this stage, but much of the material in CPS possession has been generated
by the SYP or the West Midlands Police acting on behalf of the SYP. This
material was provided to the CPS for the purpose of advising on a possible
(public) prosecution, and the original witness statements and exhibits are
presumably in the custody of the SYP. Does this limit our ability to make
disclosure? and has there been any detailed discussion of this question
between George Croston and the SYP's lawyers?

4. GC has said that he has previously sent to HFSG, and others, the two
schedules of material in the possession of the CPS. Has the HFSG been asked
what material listed on the schedules they do not already have?

When you have had a chance to look at the Hillsborough papers, can we
discuss, please?

CC:          LENNONC
3G-WED-DEC-1998 01:35
#
                                               , FAX:                               PAGE 2
    A




                                              Draft letter to HFSG


             Thank you for your letter of 21 December about the disclosure of statements and
             exhibits relevant to this case which are in the possession of the CPS.

             Having considered your representations and those received from solicitors acting for
             the defendants, as well as from solicitors acting for the Chief Constable of South
        Xs   Yorkshire, I have decided that it would be right to make voluntary disclosure at this
             stage of case material in the possession of the CPS.

             You have previously been provided with schedules of the case material in the
             possession of the CPS. You will appreciate that most of this material has not been
             generated by the CPS, and that others need to be consulted before the CPS can
             properly disclose it.

             Disclosure of material that is not subject to either legal professional privilege or a
             claim of public interest immunity will be given as soon as practicable by Mr Croston
             at the York office of Central Casework.

             Any voluntary disclosure of material by the CPS will be carried out even-handedly as
             between the parties: all material disclosed to the prosecutor will be disclosed to the
             solicitors acting for the two defendants, to whom this letter is copied.



        (CMfi)                       -ft)                  <\SL<K/C 'ik&Jt          iUsi.     Q fZ


                       "I


                                  CLTS. U            (Uixiws            not         -fo
                   ^                                         ^       . ‘u       ^


                                     ^        ^                                      pvtJCPAolwkf
