      I



i c U-Lf

     From:   G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
             CHIEF CONSTABLE                                        HEADQUARTERS
                                                                    PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                    Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                    Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                    Telephone: 021-236 5000




             P Wright Esq CBE                                      GJD/AMS
             Chief Constable
             South Yorkshire Police
             Police Headquarters
             Snig Hill
             Sheffield
             S3 8LY                                                 11 August 1989




              I am writing following your letter of 9 August 1989, and I have already
              telephoned your Deputy, Peter Hayes, to bring him up to date. I
              understand that you are back in the office on Monday but it maybe that
              he will have briefed you before you have had a chance to read the
              letter. The position is as follows.

              I have not contacted you about the progress of the investigation over
              the last couple of weeks because future developments turned very much
              on the decision whether a criminal investigation should now ensue or
              whether the enquiry to service HM Coroner should make first call on my
              team.

              Today, I attended the Director of Public Prosecutions' office in Dacre
              Street, London with Mervyn Jones and met Mr Christopher Newell to
              discuss the current position. This was in the absence of Mr Allan
              Green, Director of Public Prosecutions, who is currently on holiday but
              will return to his office on Monday 14 August 1989. He was quite clear
              that he believed that a criminal investigation should now ensue and I
              must say that I agree with that decision. He was in possession of a
              letter from Dr Popper, HM Coroner for Sheffield and I understand that
              Dr Popper's view coincided with ours. Accordingly, I agreed (as you
              had already indicated) that we should conduct a criminal investigation
              at your request and this will now take place.   It follows automatically
               that our contract to service HM Coroner will still continue but only
               concerning enquiries that are imperative to this purpose, it being
               clearly understood that the Inquest will not take place until all
               matters concerning the criminal investigation have been resolved.


                                                                                  cont



                                   J
It did seem clear to us that the question of the complaint by Mr Hicks
against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield would now be better handled by
this Force, and again, it is clear that your view is accepted by other
parties - certainly by myself. This will apply equally to any other
alleged disciplinary offences which are disclosed during the course of
our enquiries, and from now on we will be in touch immediately with
your office if that proves to be the case.  I take your point, well
made, in your letter of 9 August 1989, concerning the need for speed in
the service of Regulation 7 notices.

I understand from Mr Newell that the Director of Public Prosecutions
will write to you on Monday 14 August, setting out from his point of
view what I have already incorporated in this letter so far as it
applies to his sphere of influence.   It would be very helpful to me if
you could write and formally invite me to take on board the
disciplinary enquiries, since costs will again be well to the fore of
future discussions. It would appear that the usual arrangement should
prevail, viz that South Yorkshire would bear the usual proportion of
expenditure incurred when an outside Force is invited to undertake an
investigation. This pre-supposes that your negotiations with the Home
Office do not embrace disciplinary matters when considering the
remainder of the "Hillsborough Inquiry".   If they do, of course, then
we could go no further on this point.

I have already discussed with Peter Hayes that it would seem appropriate
that a statement be made from Headquarters to the effect that we are now
investigating possible criminal culpability against any parties (not
only South Yorkshire Police) and possible disciplinary considerations in
addition. You might agree.
