                                OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                         MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                   WATERY STREET,
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                 (West District)                   SHEFFIELD
                                                                                   S3 7ET
S T E F A N L. P O P P E R . LL.B.,B.MED.Sci.,B.M.,B.S.,M R.C G P
                                                     CORONER


                          Telephone: SHEFFIELD (07421 738721                             9th .Nov,    1990.

 Your Ref: PGK.3341.89


 Mr. M.G. Kennedy,
 Crown Prosecution Service,
 Headquarters Casework,
 10 Furnival St.,
 London,
 EC4A 1PE
                                                                    ■x        >Qt,
                                                                    t, ,#>■
 Dear Mr. Kennedy,                                                            .v



                            Re; Hillsborough Football Stadiuff Disaster.


 I refer to your letter of 30th August 1990 and my telephone
 conversation with you on 7th Nov. 1990 in which I spoke to you about
 Rule 28 of the Coroner's Rules 1984.

You will of course recollect that in August you notified me that
having considered the evidence the Director of Public Prosecution
had come to the conclusion that criminal prosecutions should not be
commenced against various specified parties. In the light of that
the provisions of Section 16 of the Coroners Act 1988 did not apply
and I have fixed the date for the start of the resumption of the
inquests into the deaths of the various persons concerned as 19th
November 1990.

Under the provisions of Rule 28 I have to adjourn for 14 days
in certain events unless I have been previously notified by the
Director of Public Prosecutions that an adjournment is unnecessary.

In order to avoid procedural hiccups and unnecessary adjournments and
in view of the fact that you have already considered evidence in these
cases I would be grateful if you could let me have the Director's
notification as outlined above as soon as possible. I understand that
notifications in such terms were provided in the Zeebruggen disaster
inquests and I expect in other cases as well.

I look forward to hearing from you as soon as possible.




H. M. Cordfiei^'^^


P.S. Letter faxed to 071 430 0154.
                                 STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS                                        A2.38

attend or otherwise given notice of the holding of the inquest, the inquest shall be
adjourned to enable him to be present, if he so desires.

Request by chief officer o f police for adjournment
                                                                                                            A2.34
  if , _ m   If the chief officer of police requests a coroner to adjourn an inquest on the
               a m a y be ctarg ed with »n offence w ithin p aragraph (3), the cor
                                    for tw enty-eight days o , fo, such longer penod as he




 causing the death of the deceased and an offence under section 2(1) of the_Suicide Act
 1961 consisting of aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring the suicide of
 deceased.

 Request by Director o f Public Prosecutions for adjournment
                                                                                                            A2.35
    77            If the D irector of Public Prosecutions requests a coroner to adjourn an
 in a u esto n the S o u n d that a person may be charged w ith an offence (w hether or no
 involvingdie death of a person other than the d e c e a s e d ) c o m m 1t t e d m c u c m n s a n c e s
 connected w ith the death of the deceased, not being an offence w ithin Rule 26(3), th
 c o r a i e r shall adjourn the inquest for twenty-eight days or for such longer p enod as he


        A ttn v 'u m e before the date fixed for the holding of the adjourned inquest, the
  D irector of Public Prosecutions may ask the coroner for a further adjournm ent an
  the coroner may comply with his request.

  Coroner to adjourn in certain other cases
                                                                                                             A2.36




   the coroner may comply w ith his request.

   Coroner to furnish certificate after adjournment
                                                                                                              A2.37
      29 A certificate under the hand of a coroner stating the particulars which under the


   five days from the date on w hich the inquest is adjourned.

   Coroner’s interim certificate o f the fact o f death
                                                                                                              A2.38
      10 W hen an inquest has been adjourned for any reason and section 20(4) of the Act
                           the cotoner .h all on application supply to any , » » * ■
    S ™ . Z L ™ « r , i s a properly interested person an m tenn . cem ficate of the
    fact of death.

                                                     387
