                           JOINT ADVICE



1.   We are asked to advise on an appropriate response to the

requests made to the West Midlands Police by Messrs Davies

Arnold Cooper and Messrs Hammond Suddards for the release of

further material for use in the civil proceedings (Mr Foster's

letter to those instructing us of 21st May 1990).



2.   Davies Arnold Cooper, for the Club, seek release of

barrier 124A subject to the conditions laid down by Mr Mervyn

Jones in his letter of 4th December 1989, together with the

test data (but not the findings or conclusions) of the Health

and Safety Executive experts who examined the barrier for the

purposes of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry (see Report, Part

II, Documents, Doc 89 et seq). We can see no reason why these

requests should not be granted.



3.   Hammond Suddards, for the South Yorkshire Police, seek

disclosure of (1) the plan showing the locations of the

deceased,   (2) the testing and any opinions expressed by the

experts following further examination of the barrier by the HS

& E in association with Professor Smith, and (3) file number

8945 taken from Eastwoods' files concerning work carried out

in 1987 as a result of the Football League's anti-hooligan

initiative.




                                  1
     We can see no reason why requests (1) and (3) should not

be granted. So far as the testing results referred to in (2)

are concerned we advise as above.



5.   As to the opinions of the experts, we have considered

whether the release of these at this stage might prejudice

either the criminal investigation or any prosecution that

later results. In our view, however, these particular opinions

do not have a significant bearing on the assessment of

criminal liability in the circumstances of the case as a

whole, and we think it would not be proper to withhold them.




Farrar's Building                         GARETH WILLIAMS QC
Temple,
LONDON EC4Y 7BD                           PETER BIRTS QC
5 June 1990




                                                   2
                            #
RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




        JOINT ADVICE




                       Ip 'h /'




Crown Prosecution Service
Headquarters
4/12 Queen Annes Gate
London
SW1H 9AZ




               3
