To:   Chris Newell                                         Ref:   YBF/3341/89
      Director Casework
      Ludgate Hill

cc:   Robin Booth




RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.    An update of the Hillsborough Log is being sent by e-mail within the next two
      days.

2.    Enclosed are copies of recent correspondence between the HFSG and the
      South Yorkshire Police Authority. Recipients will note that the group is
      attempting to cut off what appears to be unlimited legal funding by the
      Authority for the two defendants.

3.    The Authority is considering the HFSG representations on Friday 14 January
       1999. If they are successful then it may mean that the application for leave to
      move for judicial review of our decision will not proceed, unless other suitable
      funding is obtained. The Legal Aid Board would want to look at the merits of
      any such application to be funded by them.




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
12 January 1999
                                 RECEIVED                                              ‘15 JAN 1999
To:   fChris Newell                13 JAN 1999               Ref:     YBF/3341/89
       Director Casework
       Ludgate Hill               DIRECTOR
                                (CASEW ORK)
cc:   Robin Booth
      Chris Enzor



RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.    An update of the Hillsborough Log is being sent by e-mail within the next two
      days.

2.    Enclosed are copies of recent correspondence between the HFSG and the
      South Yorkshire Police Authority. Recipients will note that the group is
      attempting to cut off what appears to be unlimited legal funding by the
      Authority for the two defendants.

3.    The Authority is considering the HFSG representations on Friday 14 January
       1999. If they are successful then it may mean that the application for leave to
      move for judicial review of our decision will not proceed, unless other suitable
      funding is obtained. The Legal Aid Board would want to look at the merits of
      any such application to be funded by them.



                                                                    Ha . C ^ c n \                              fn

George R Croston                                                           c Vu.                           tL
Prosecution Tearn Leader                                                                     ^ ^
12 January 1999                                                                                        1


                                           ^/Vv*     La-               . IW                        •

                 i                          LftX't         X-C-*-                   I t ——fS
                                                              _        U ^


                                           ■b*     A&y L ,        W        U ^ IU ^            IL o -i-w .'?

                                           AJL.                                   (^ A A .                       ^




                                                    /l) 4u                    \
                                                                      'V
                                 RECEIVED
To:   ?Chris Newell                13 JAN 1999             Ref:     YBF/3341/89
       Director Casework
       Ludgate Hill               DIRECTOR
                                (CASEW ORK)
cc:   Robin Booth
      Chris Enzor



RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.    An update of the Hillsborough Log is being sent by e-mail within the next two
      days.

2.    Enclosed are copies of recent correspondence between the HFSG and the
      South Yorkshire Police Authority. Recipients will note that the group is
      attempting to cut off what appears to be unlimited legal funding by the
      Authority for the two defendants.

3.    The Authority is considering the HFSG representations on Friday 14 January
       1999. If they are successful then it may mean that the application for leave to
      move for judicial review of our decision will not proceed, unless other suitable
      funding is obtained. The Legal Aid Board would want to look at the merits of
      any such application to be funded by them.




George R Croston                                                      c_ C    Vu.            fcL
Prosecution Team Leader                                                                        n.
12 January 1999                                                                            1


                                            L.<X\        X-c-*-               It—
                                                                                —pS
                                           J to J tX o               U w l'      H a I/



                                                         L |   Ik      U ^ L U ^          1Ls r - ^ l

                                           AJL,                   &u.S        V-zt-A           ^
    \£ B0*0%

i
                         Hillsborough Family Support Group




    W J Wilkinson BA(Econ) CPFA
    Clerk and Treasurer
    South Yorkshire Police Authority
    PO Box 37
    Regent Street
    Barnsley
    South Yorkshire S70 2PQ

    22 December 1998

    Dear Sir


    Adlington v Murray: Adlington v Duckenfield


    1.    I am the prosecutor in the above case, in which the defendants are charged before the
           Leeds Magistrates Court with serious offences arising out of the disaster at the
           Hillsborough Football Ground in April 1989. I write on the advice of leading counsel,
           as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group to express concern about the
           decision to fund the defence of these two men. As you know, the defendants were
           senior police officers on duty at the ground when the disaster occurred. Both are
           charged with manslaughter of two representative victims, and with misfeasance. Mr
           Duckenfield is also charged, with attempting to pervert the course of justice.

    2.    It has recently been admitted publicly by Mr Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable,
           that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has agreed to fund the defence of these two
           men. We have suspected this for some time. The purpose of this letter is to argue that
           the decision to provide finance appears to have been made irrationally and unlawfully.

    3.    We refer to the following documents, all of which are in your possession.

             A.      The Home Office Circular of 4,h December 1987 No 7.7/87
             B.      The Home Office Circular of 17,h February 1998 HOC 4/1998
         •*. C.      Minute 38 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 1stAugust
                      1997
           D.        Minute 62 o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 19th September

                                                   -1


                    Phone 0151236 1919. Fax 01512 3 6 1936. E M ail info@hfsg.org
                  1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
         1097.
E.      Minute 151 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 27th February
         1098.
F.    ' Minute 174 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 24th April
         1.998.
G.      The letter of 25"' September 1998 from Maureen Oades to me.
H.      Minute 86 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 30th October
         1998.
I.      The South Yorkshire Police Authority Scheme of Delegation.
J.      A document headed “Standing Orders. Interpretation. Issued January 1996"
         on the headed paper of the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

The Home Office Circular No 77/87, suggests that, in the case of a private
prosecution, where a police officer has been acquitted and has not been awarded all his
costs, the police authority may make up the difference. It also suggests that, in the
case of a private prosecution, the authority should provide or fund legal advice and/or
representation if the authority is “satisfied" that the officer has acted “in good faith"
and has exercised his judgment “reasonably”.

The Home Office Circular of 17"’ February 1998, 4/1998, replaces with immediate
effect the 1987 circular, and suggests that under the very wide terms of section 111(1)
of the Local Government Act 1972, “it could be argued” that payment of money to
“officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some
way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority s broad functions. The Circular
emphasises that a police authority must take its own advice. It is noticeable that the
“guidance” has been prepared after consultation with “ACPO , the Superintendents
Association, the Police Federation, and the Association of Police Authorities; it does
not purport to be an independent legal opinion.

 This Circular seems to have coincided almost exactly with the report of the Scrutiny
 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in February of this year. I note that on 27lh February this
 year, your authority agreed to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to consider
 applications from officers; serving or retired, for financial assistance in relation to
 possible private prosecutions arising out of the “Scrutiny”.

 For a reason which is not clear, the Resolution was taken under the replaced 1987
 Circular. There is therefore no lawful authority to validate the decision taken on that
 day. The assertion, recorded in the minutes, that the members of the Authority
 “remain of the opinion*that the officers acted in good faith” is extraordinary. The
 Enquiry of Lord Justice Taylor of 1989 found that there had been negligence, and
 blamed the two defendants (among other police officers). 1 he failure of these two to
 seal off the tunnel to the central pens at the Leppings Lane end of the ground was a
 “blunder of the first magnitude”, and the immediate cause ot death. The then Chief
 Constable of South Yorkshire Police, unequivocably accepted these findings.

’ Further, Lord Taylor found, at page 16, paragraph 98 of his Interim Report that Mr
  Duckenfield misled Graham Kelly and G len 'Kirton of the FA and Graham Mackrell of
  Sheffield Wednesday, at a time when he knew there were fatalities (and that there
  would therefore be an inquest and no doubt other formal inquiries). Duckenfield
  indicated that a gate had been forced and there had been an inrush of supporters, and
  pointed out to them the fate allegedly forced on the screen.

  In 1998, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith upheld these findings after.his “Scrutiny”, referring
  scathingly to Duckenfield's “disgraceful lie”.

  In July 1991, the Police Complaints Authority directed that charges of neglect of duty
  be preferred against both men. These charges were never determined because the
  Chief Constable of South Yorkshire retired Mr Duckenfield on “health grounds”, and
  it was thought to be unfair to try Mr Murray,

  It is impossible in the light of this history to understand how your authority could have
  been satisfied in February 1998 that “the officers had acted in good faith”; and also
  impossible to understand how the other condition in the 1987 Circular, namely, that
  the officers had exercised their judgment reasonably, could be thought to have been
  satisfied. The minutes show that this condition was not even considered.

IVM Circular     -------

  The 1998 Circular was not applied. If it had been, it wou]d have, become clear in my
  view that its terms were not met, and thatjherewas no lawful authority for the
  provision of tax-payers’ money in this way to fUnd the defence in this case. There is
  no statutory authority. There is a limited power in relation to civil proceedings to pay
  damages and costs; but no power even in civil proceedings .to fund an action brought
  against an individual officer. Section 88 of the Police Act 1996 deals with “Liability
  for wrongful acts of constables”, and allows for the provision of costs incurred and not
  recovered.       '

  Parliament has not provided for the payments of any fines incurred by constables; or
  for reimbursenfeivf o f costs incurred and not recovered. To have done so would have
  been surprising, since criminal liability is individual and personal. You will note that
  the Circular indicated at the highest that “it could be argued” that to allow the payment
  to be made to officers, (either former or retired) involved in criminal proceedings
  would “in some way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority’s broad functions.
  For example, failure to provide financial assistance could adversely affect the morale of
  the force if officers had to meet their costs after acquittal.”

  This is legal nonsense. The case law indicates that section 111(1) of the 1972 Act
  cannot be used in this way. The practice in relation to costs incurred by an acquitted
  person is set out in the Practice DirectiotLCLlasts in Criminal Proceedings) .93 Cr.
  App.R.8 which provides that a person acquitted after trial bn indictment should
  normally have his costs paid out of central funds except where the defendant has
  brought suspicion upon himself and"ha's misled the prosecution into thinking the case
  against him is stronger than it is;' or where he has been acquitted on a meritless
  technicality. How can it be said that police morale would suffer if the officers of a
       force heard that one of its members had been refused its costs on one of the reasonable
       grounds set out in this direction?


15.   In any event the South Yorkshire Police Authority seems to have gone way beyond
       this highly dubious guidance in the 1998 Circular and authorised, in February 1998,
       any financial assistance to be given by the Clerk and Treasurer in respect of
      applications from serving or retired officers for potential and future criminal
      proceedings, in which, of course, a defendant could be convicted. (Is counsel
      instructed on this basis able to advise that a defendant plead guilty?).


Delegation and Exclusion o f the public

16.   Maureen Oades’ letter to me of 25"' September 1998 says that the public were
      excluded from that part of the meeting when this matter was dealt with as it was a
      matter relating to “any action taken in connection with the prevention, investigation or
      prosecution of any crime.” It seems to have been the basis for granting the financial
      assistance that there was no crime at all, and that the officers had acted in good faith.
      In any event it is submitted that paragraph 14 of Schedule 12A to the Local
      Government Act 1972,*refers to prosecutions by South Yorkshire Police and not by a
      private prosecutor against two former police officers.

17.   Furthermore, 1 do not understand how such a decision, even if it could be lawfully
      made, could be delegated to the Clerk and Treasurer. The Authority resolution of 27
      February 1998 purports to delegate, absolutely, the decision making process to the
      “Clerk and Treasurer” who is one and the same person. -The report presented to the
      Authority on 30"' October was a joint report of the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief
      Constable. 1 understand that the Clerk and Treasurer is not a Solicitor. It is implicit in
      your standing order 5.2.5, that any consideration of applications for financial assistance
      for legal proceedings ought to be undertaken by a person who is legally qualified and
      would thus understand the danger of granting open-ended financial provision.

Somefeatures o f the current criminal proceedings

18.   You also suggest in that letter that thiscfelegation “was not viewed as a delegation
      which would extend beyond six months”. This may have been because Mr Daines,
      Assistant Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police, publicly asserted earlier this
      year that he believed that any private prosecutions would “fall at the first hurdle”. Did
      he repeat this at the meeting of 2 7th’February? We do not know what applications have
      been made by Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield, but we assume, for reasons that appear
      below, that authority has been given for any judicial review proceedings of the CPS
      decision not to discontinue the case, and for leading and junior counsel to appear at
      old style committal proceedings, as well as"at trial.

19.   On 18lh December 1998, the Crown Prosecution Service, after five months of careful
      study, rejected the applications of the defendants to take over and discontinue the

                                      .        r



                                           &
prosecutions. It is clear that the criminal proceedings are now likely to be protracted,
complex and very expensive.



The prosecutions are straightforward. We enclose for your guidance a copy of the
informations presented to the Leeds Magistrates Court last July on the basis of which
the summonses were issued. You will see that the allegations are based upon the
findings of the Taylor Enquiry in 1989, supported by evidence that has come to the
Family Support Group in 1997-98. Negligence has been admitted again and again by
the Chief Constable in court proceedings. It has never been disputed that the acts
alleged against the defendants were the acts of negligence that caused the deaths of the
96 people.

Before the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service was announced on 18"'
December, the solicitor for Mr Murray indicated that it was highly likely that an
adverse decision of the CPS would be challenged by judicial review proceedings. At
the hearing of the case before the Leeds Magistrates Court on 21s1December, it was
made clear by leading and junior counsel for Mr Murray, in the presence of his
solicitor, Mr Manning, and by junior counsel for Mr Duckenfield, that a decision had
already been made to seek judicial review of the CPS decision. The magistrate was
told this by counsel for the defendants when he was dealing with the questions of
timetable and voluntary disclosure of documents.

However, it was also made clear, although a concluded decision had been made to
apply for judicial review, that the defendants had asked the CPS for their “reasons”;
alternatively, llieir “policy” behind the decision, and that those reasons'or policy might
be received by 2 4 December.

No legally-aided lawyers could proceed in this way. Professionial obligations exist
which require that a lawyer must assess the prospects of success before committing
hard-pressed public funds to an expensive application for judicial review. I am advised
by leading counsel that the prospects of quashing the CPS decision in such proceedings
are small on the following,, among other, grounds. The CPS have told us all what
criteria they were applying; the defendants argued that the CPS were in a good
position to assess the public interest involved in the prosecution; the CPS, Police
Complaints Authority and Coroner were all'misled by a cover-up by the South
Yorkshire police, the magnitude of which has become apparent only after the Home
Office ordered the release of documents this year; and the defendants have alternative .
remedies in the Magistrates’ court.

The fact that the court was assured that applications for judicial review would be made
suggests that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has already agreed, before the CPS
decision, to fund these applications, irrespective of their merits. Counsel would not
have told the court that the applications would be made, if funding was not in place.
Neither would they have told counsel for South Yorkshire Police of their decision to
apply to the High Court; they knew that the fact of impending applications was

                                        -5 -
       material to decisions that the South Yorkshire police and the CPS were making that
       day about voluntary disclosure to the prosecution of documents in their possession. It
       is clear that both those bodies decided to defer any decision on voluntary disclosure
       because of the assurance from counsel that judicial review applications would be
       lodged (“in the first two weeks of January”) on behalf of both defendants.


25.    The prosecution and the Court have also been told that both defendants have estimated
       that four weeks at least will be needed at committal proceedings. The court has set
       aside four weeks beginning 19lh April 1999, and the time was chose to accord with the
       convenience of leading counsel for the defence. The court has been told that two
       leading counsel will appear, one for each defendant. No doubt two juniors will also
       appear, and two solicitors. Leading counsel for Mr Murray has indicated that there
       will also be an abuse of process application to the magistrate to stay the proceedings.
        He intends to argue that this should be heard on a different occasion from the
       committal, and before it. I suspect that the defendants will seek leave to move for
       judicial review of any adverse decision upon this issue. This is hardly surprising as
       your Authority does not appear to have placed any restriction as to the amount or
       duration of the financial assistance to the defendants.

26.    1 am advised by leading counsel that the prosecution has Fsirong prima facie case on
       the charges alleged; and that an abuse of process application is likely to fail. We have
       a mass of evidence w our possessioirwhich has come to us in the last year, indicating
       that the South Yorkshire Police force hascovered up facts which are embarrassing as
       to the nature and extent of its admitted negligence, and that the CPS, Coroner and
       Police Complaints Authority, inter alia, were misled when they were pursuing their
       various enquiries between 1989 and 1992. I shall willingly help you further about this
       on request.

27.    Of course, tiie trial of this matter could take many months. From all these facts, you
       will see that the exposure of the South Yorkshire taxpayer (in relation to its own costs,
       let alone ours) is of the order of millions of pounds. I should make it clear that neither
       I nor the Hillsborough Family Support Group, on whose behalf I act, wish in any way
       to deprive either defendant of the means to conduct a proper defence to these charges.
       They should surely apply, like anyone else, for legal aid if they are unable to fund the
       costs of the defence themselves. In that event they would be subject to the usual
       restraints and disciplines of the legal aid system. I believe that the defence, with access
       to public funds'from your authority, are seeking at present to inflict unnecessary
       expenses upon us by recourse to every possible type of legal hearing, in the knowledge
       that we do not have such access, and are instead dependent on private donations and
       fund-raising events. Neither defendant lives in South Yorkshire, but the South
       Yorkshire Police has a strong interest of its own in the discharge or acquittal of these
       defendants.

( '(inclusion

28.    The decisions taken pursuant to the Resolutions of the South Yorkshire Police

                                                -6 -




                                             ©
       Authority appear, on the information available to.me, to be unlawful, irrational, ultra
       vires and procedurally improper on various grounds. We have an interest, as do you
       and South Yorkshire taxpayers, in ensuring that public money is not wasted or spent
       wrongly in the course of this criminal litigation. I look forward to your reply. You
       will appreciate that we are obviously considering an application for judicial review
       ourselves, supported by some South Yorkshire tax-payers, and an approach to the
       District Auditor. We invite you to reply by the 15th January 1999.


Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
              Hillsborough Family Support Group


    All members of the South Yorkshire Police Authority
    South Yorkshire Police Authority
    P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
    Barnsley, South Yorkshire
    S70 2PQ

    5 January 1999

    Dear Member,

Adlin^ton v Murray: Arilington v DiidcenfiPlH



    1     Groun r m ? r “!0 r t h i S °aSe'   the S0lici,0r ,0 the HiH^orough Family Support
          O oup ( HFSG ), an association whose members are families of the victims of the
          Hillsborough disaster of April 1989. The prosecutions were commenced in the Leeds
         to the R^68! t°Urt f JUly 19u8' 1 am Writing t0 y° U about the decision taken Pursuant
         fo r^ r ,          ° f youruauthonty of Februaiy 1998 to fund the defence of these two
             mer senior officers m these criminal proceedings. Much of the contents of this
         tetter is based upon submissions and facts that have been supplied by the HFSG to the
         the0Z ^ r t SfiCUHtl0n SerV1°T ° n thC advi°e ° fleading counse1’ who has also advised on
         the present funding issue. I understand that the subject matter of last February’s
         Resolution, and other discussions and decisions later in the year, are to be considered

         s wh- c h T 2 roe; 8r s          r       A,,ached *°,his ie,,er is a bundk


!        ™
         ™
                    3
                 hT ?
                       CT   0 f a !etter that 1 sent t0 Mr W- J - Wilkinson, Clerk and Treasurer
                           •' SettmS ° Ut obj ec,lons in law t0 the grant of the funding, and to the
         way in which decisions were taken. That letter may conveniently be read first At
         Annex B are copies of earlier correspondence between Miss Oades and myself and the
         ™ d e ln “       m        H° me 0fHCe “ rela' i0n ,0 thMe iSSUeS’ *° which F e r e n c " w ^


                             that my argur ni is that aecisions ,o grant &ndi"* pursua"< the
        f W hl       t .,      0 ' w*re unIawfil1- “rational and procedurally improper, and that
          further such decision would now be unlawful in any event.
      -Thefacts of the case; Manslaughter andMisfeasance


               (“SYPA”T ^e!^rded^a«                                             Police Authority




                        That m the light of the findings of Lord Just^* S+uart Q^Jth’c • •
                      comments on the outcome members Ho not u r                T s mcW and his
                      to cause them to reconsider theAuthnritv*’ e“®ve *~at t“ere          evidence
                      opinion that the officers acted’in good                     “ ** rema“ o t * e

      5       LordJustice Stuart-Smith reinforced the finding o f w , . t . .      u
              interim report was published in A u -w 198Q h L ™            y J ’ whose on» na!
             course, that you have regard to            i"'               guidance requires, of
             does not seem to have been r ^ o e r ^                        °f the Case’ ^though this
             decisions were made in p r i r ^ u ^ T w    i  '^solution of Iast Februaiy, when
             prosecuted, and, more                                       * '" V° ne WaS g0^ to be


             that Mr Daines m a d ^ a p re s e m S in n ^ f* 6^     °fIaSt Febpjar37>Part of Annex B,
             Authority made its decisioTMembers of the?YPA                h*      fa°tUaI basis the
            attitude of the South Yorkshire police ac e " « h                * refore t0 be aware o f the
            Court on 21st December 1998 in « l L "            P* ““e“ t0 the Leeds District Magistrates
            the South Yorkshire force «hou!d disc>o«^doT 311 aPPhcation by the prosecution that
            Louise Varty, instructed b y l ^ t d S ^ d d ^ “ “ SP°SSeSSi°n' C" “ * ^

                    2             u             e            ^             of 1" * prosecution and the
                    relevant”            “ ~r~'~re are not able to say or agree what is or is not


              i S      “       ^ Z * T £ f ° tthe              « " « " con&*ence, and from
           manslaughter and Misfeasance c & U T sT n n T P '^ iT ^ “7 ? 0" ^             of
           the Taylor Report as Annex D. The Jha^es aTe sJtmdly b S fa
a .             „ / * , Smnh yorhhtre PoUce to fhe aikgmwn o/m g!i^




          the nsk of death involved the c o n S t of i Jel drfqU? ^i0n, 1S whether          regard to
          circumstances as to am ounTfnT - /               defendant was so bad in all the
          Mackay LC [1995] 1 A.C. IS T E .^JU               t0 * CrimilJal act or omission.” per Lord

              submitted that all elements but the last have never been seriously disputed. The
         remaining element is for the jury. Lord Taylor found, and it is inherent in the
         acceptance of liability by South Yorkshire police in the various negligence cases that
         L.e pojce were under a duty of care, and that there was a breach of that dut"
                  A
                  C; death'_ See a!so ElOSt v. Chief Constable of the South Y o rk sh ireP ^ ^
         [19y/] 1 Ali.E.R. 540, 544b-c, in the High Court action brought by police officers at
         the ground, per Rose LJ; •

                “The immediate cause of the disaster was a senior officer’s decision to open
                the outer gate without cutting off access to the pens. Liability for thedeaths
                and injuries o f those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants the
                first o f whom is the Plaintiffs Chief Constable.”

         and per Lord Steyn in the House of Lords appeal in the same case fWhitev rht>f
         Constable of the South Yorkshire Polios) ( r v ^ m W i qq«^


                “It is admitted by the Chief Constable that the events were caused by the
                negligence of the police in allowing the overcrowding of two spectator pens.”
 10
        ; ^ Tayl; rrep0rt was ac.cePted by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in Au°ust
        1989, and after the Scrutiny, Mr Richard Wells accepted that Mr Duckenfield had°been
        rightly blamed as negligent. On Yorkshire Television’s “Camera” on 18thFebruarv
        1998 this exchange took place;

                Interviewer; “Well if somebody has been to blame, who is that person7”

               Wells;         “David Duckenfield has been blamed, by Lord Justice Taylor.
                               The South Yorkshire police are culpable, in the sense of, that
                               they lost senior officer control that day. We’ve said that
                               repeatedly.”

 11
                          report’ 11 shou!d be Pointed out, rejected claims made on behalf of
        t~e HFSG that there was important new evidence. However, it supported the original
       Taylor findings strongly, and emphasised the criticisms of the police tha+had b ^ "
       made. Copies o f relevant parts of the report will be made available on req-est 7tm ust
       be appreciated that the charges brought by the HFSG do not in any way contradict the
       btuart-Smith report. They are based upon the original findings of the Taylor report as
       S S t?1! by the Stuart_Smith report. For this reason, it is puzzling to read that on
       27“ February 1998, the SYPA relied on the Stuart-Smith findings to confirm a view
       previously he.d that the officers had behaved in good faith. As set out below, Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith referred in withering terms to Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lie”.

Attempting to pervert the course o f justice

12     It is important to set out the extent o f the evidence in support of this charge, because it
       wiL not be apparent from previous Reports and documents on the case. The charge
       against Mr Duckenfield is that he lied to a number of people, either himself or throu<*
        others, in the hour after the disaster, in a careful and calculating way, as the bodies
        were being carried away from the field and terraces. He did so to influence falsely the
        persons or courts who would investigate the circumstances of the disaster. He alleged
        that the supporters had burst the gates opened, whereas he had himgplf after
        consideration, ordered that they be opened. He failed to correct this lie'after the event,
        and continued, together with many senior officers of the South Yorkshire police, to
        allow the lie to have effect for several weeks. The evidence in support of this charge is
        summarised at Annex E.                                                                °

 The decision o f the Crown Prosecution Service

 13    At the beginning of July 1998 the solicitors for the defendants asked the Crown
        Prosecution Service to take over the prosecutions and discontinue them The CPS is
        entitled in lav/ to take over any prosecution begun by a private individual, and it will
        discontinue any prosecution of which it has the conduct (including those which it has
        taken over) if there is clearly no evidence, or if there are public interest factors such as
        ill-health, unacceptable delay, or if the prosecution is likely to damage the interests of
       justice.

 14    The CPS conducted a most painstaking and professional review over a period of nearly
       six months, before deciding on 18th December 1998 that they would not take overbid
       discontinue the case. The ability of the CPS to make an informed and balanced
       decision was recognised by Winkworth Sherwood for Mr Duckenfield, when they
       wrote to the CPS on 9* October 1998 in these terms;

              “It is submitted on behalf of Mr Duckenfield that the power of the Director is
              far wider than a mere assessment of the evidence, and embraces a consideration
              of the wider public interest. The Director is well placed to assess where the
              public interest lies having had involvement in the case over a period of nine
              years and having seen the Taylor report, the Stuart-Smith report, the coroner’s
              verdict, the judgement o f the Divisional Court and the review o f evidence, and
              the advice of leading counsel obtained when the Director made the decision/to
              prosecute.”                                                             ~~ \ ~

15     The representations put forward by the prosecution included the above assertions
       about the strength of the evidence. Contrary arguments were put forward by the
       defendants, but were obviously rejected. It is very doubtful that the facts were set out
       in detail before the SYPA last February, or indeed thereafter. Mr Daines wrote in a
       published article last spring that “It is hard to imagine a private prosecution getting
       past the first hurdle.” Presumably he ventured a similar opinion to the SYPA in
       February 1998, but was not aware of the full facts about the prosecution, nor the
       public interest factors set out below, the existence of which has allowed the
       prosecution to clear the first hurdle and face the next hurdles with confidence.

Widerpublic interest considerations.

       The SYPA will no doubt wish, in accordance with paragraph 6 o f the Circular
         HOC/1998, to “decide in the particular circumstances o f the case, and on the basis
         of legal advice, whether to make financial assistance available to officers in criminal
         proceedings. (Emphasis added.) It is obviously doubtful that such detailed
         coraderation was given on 27* February 1998, but the SYPA, in considering whether
         to fund the defence in this case, might wish to be aware of the wider public interests
         matters that were put to the CPS before the review was decided in the prosecution’s
         favour. It may also wish to consider whether the advice given by the South YorkchirA
         police themselves is dispassionate and detached.

 17      It was argued by the prosecution to the CPS that reliance could not be placed on
         previous inquiries that had exculpated the defendants, such as the coroner’s inquest
         which had returned verdicts o f accidental death, and the DPP’s decision in 1990 not to
         bring prosecutions. The prosecution argued that evidence has been available to the"
         HFSG since the publication of the Stuart-Smith report in February 1998 which showed
        that the previous inquiries had been misled. These wider considerations, are set out in
        Annex F, and documents referred to therein at Annex G and Annex H. The^show
        the South Yorkshire police has maintained a tight and unjustified control of the
        papenvork; that previous investigations were misled; and that the proclaim^
        independence of the West Midlands police was false. That force was in reality actin®
        as an agent of the South Yorkshire police, a force which put the protection of its own
        interests at all time before the public interest.

 The interest o f the prosecution in the funding issue

18     I have akeady set out in Annex A that the HFSG has no wish to deny the defence
       access to proper legal representation. I drew attention in that letter to th^ fa 't thnt th^
       defence seemed able to call upon the SYPA for unqualified and indefinite funding f
       should inform you that I have had since then received written confirmation t^at Mr
        p T a^ o a^ erS       bdeed SoiGS to apply for judicial review, whatever the'reasons
       o the CPS. I have presumed that this decision to apply for judicial review was made
       pursuant to funding arrangements made pursuant to the Resolution of the SYPA last
       February. It is not reasonableio believe that that firm decision was made in the mere
       hope that the SYPA would agree to fund it on 8* January next.

19               co“cem is the cI°seness of the connection between the defence and those who
       rfi ^            ^ the °aSe' At three COurt hearinos at the Leeds Magistrates Court
             ~           December and 2 1st December) the lawyers for the defence have
       refused to support the prosecution in calling for the disclosure of papers held in the
       case by the South Yorkshire Police. I am in no doubt that this is because they believe
       with every good reason, that the archive will assist the prosecution more than the          ’
       defense. However, it is clear that it will be difficult for the defence in this case to ask
       tor the disclosure of information which is embarrassing to the South Yorkshire police-
       the police argued successfully last year that the SYPA should fund that defence.

20     From the outside it looks as if a decision has been made to close ranks. It w’ould be
       usual in decisions such as this to inquire what financial consequences would flow to
       the authority if funding were not granted, ifevould have been quite wrong for

                                                5^
       agreement to have been made on the basis that funding by the SYPA was the best way
       to ensure that the South Yorkshire force would not face farther civil actions.

21    Winkworth and Sherwood, who represent Mr Duckenfield, represented the South
      Yorkshire Police in the “Scrutiny” last year. It is not known whether they, or
      Hammond Suddards advised the SYPA last February, upon this funding question.
      Generous funding arrangements have been sought and granted in an apparent attempt
      to exhaust the resources of the prosecution, who do not have access to legal aid, and
      who have not applied for funding to the SYPA. If the prosecution did so apply, asking
      for funding to maintain the morale of the force, on the ground that junior officers
      would know that the negligent actions of the senior officers of the force would not be
      protected from a proper criminal inquiry, its claim would surely be more attractive than
      the present claim to fund the defence.

22    So far, the substantial decision to authorise the funding in the two individual cases has
       been taken in private. Both the defence and the SYPA. has an interest in keeping as
       much of the archive private as possible. The interest of the public and the prosecution
       is different. The force is sitting on material'that is deeply discreditable to the integrity
       of the previous investigations. That is why it has refused to disclose it to the
       prosecution, and why it now seeks to insist on the most demanding conditions.

The alternative o f legal aidfunding

23    It is submitted that there is no reason why the South Yorkshire taxpayers should
       provide such potentially large and apparently unlimited funds to defend people who are
       entitled, like every other citizen, subject to means, to the provision o f legal aid. Those
       taxpayers would surely be disturbed if they were given full information about this.
       The lawyers that would be instructed under legal aid would be subject to the ususal
       constraints and disciplines of the scheme, but would at least be able to give
       independent advice; even, if appropriate, to plead guilty. There can be no doubt that
       the legal aid fund would be less profligate with its public money than it appears the
       SYPA has decided to be. The-legal aid authorities would certainly have demanded
       down payments by way of contributions from the defendants. They would have
       required a certification by the defendants’ lawyers that there v/ere solid prospects of
       success for a judicial review, before authorising expenditure.

24    No doubt you will wish to show a copy of this letter and the enclosures to your
      lawyers and to the police. Of course, I have no objection, and would encourage you to
      ask them to deal with the matters I have set out in detail, and for which evidential
      references have been given. A good test of the strength of the arguments I have
      presented is whether the police will be able to answer them. Since millions of pounds
      are potentially at stake, a proper and informed public debate can be expected, even if
      you have to postpone your hearing on 8th January. Members of the HFSG will wish to
      attend that meeting, whenever it occurs, and I request that we be kept informed of
      relevant dates. I shall be pleased to deal with any queries in advance that any member
      of the SYPA might have, or supply copies o f any documents to which I have referred.
      I shall myself send a copy of these representations to the defendants’ solicitors, so that

                                                6*
that they can make their own submissions.



Yours sincerely,



Ann Adlington.
Solicitor
#




                              IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE




    THE INFORMATION of ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
    Support Group, who states that


                THE DEFENDANT


                DAVID G O D FR EY DUCKEN FIELD of



                 On the 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

                 (1)    Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                        Contrary to Common Law

                 (2)    Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                        Contrary to Common Law

                 (3)    Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                        Contrary to Common Law

                 (4)    With intent to pervert the course of justice did an act which had a
                        tendency to pervert the course of justice in that he lied about the
                        circumstances in which gate C became open.
                        Contrary to Common Law




                 DATED THE 10THDAY OF JULY 1998




                                                     (D
                          IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE


THE INFORMATION of ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, who states that



            THE DEFENDANT


            BERNARD DEAN M U RRAY


            On 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

             (1)   Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                   Contrary to Common Law

             (2)   Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                   Contrary to Common Law

             (3)   Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                   Contrary to Common Law




             DATED THE 10TH DAY OF JULY 1998
B B H ONLINE NETWORK                      HOMEPAGE| SITEMAP |TV LISTINGS [RA D IO LISTINGS [ BBC EDUCATION [ 88C W O R 1D SERVICE



             NEWS
                   &P*?t;ISUWvfc*?
   Front Page       Monday, November 30.1998 Published at 2137 GMT                               Relevant Stories
       World                                                                                     16 Nov 9 8 1UK

           UK
                    UK                                                                           Police chief rejects
                                                                                                 Hillsborouoh claims
   UK Politics      Taxpayers to foot                                                            06 Nov 9 8 1UK
     Business                                                                                    Straw backs
     Sci/Tech
                    Hillsborough court costs                                                     Hillsborough officer
                                                                                                 05 Nov 98 | UK
        Health                                                                                   Two ouit over
    Education                                                                                    Hillsborough policeman
         Sport
Entertainment
 Talking Point                                                                                   Internet Links
                                                                                                 Merseyside Police
                                                                                                 The Home Office
          On Air
       Feedback                                                                                  Hillsborouoh Family
    Low Graphics                                                                                 Support Group
            Help    Police tried to Oft fans out of the stadium crush
                                                                                                 The BBC is net responsible for the
                    Taxpayers are to pay the defence costs of two former                         content of external internet sites.
                    police officers accused of the unlawful killing of fans at
                    the Hillsborough disaster, it has been confirmed.
                                                                                                 In this section
                    South Yorkshire Police Authority says it will pay the                        From UK Politics
                    legal costs of former Chief Superintendent David                             Mandelson backed in
                    Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard                                loan row
                    Murray, who are due in court to face a private
                    prosecution brought by relatives of the 96 Liverpool                         Man chamed with Jade
                    fans who were crushed to death in the 1989 tragedy.                          murder
                                                                                                 From Special Report
                     For ’long-term morale’                                                      China lets Branson flv on

                     Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines, who was not                            Gulf criticism for UK
                     involved with Hillsborough policing that day, said it was                  • action
                     standard practice under the circumstances and                                From UK Politics
                     necessary to maintain morale among officers who                              Lord Sober dies
                     have to make "split-second crucial decisions".
                                                                                                  Shopkeeper in court over
                                                                                                  Thomas murder
                     "South Yorkshire Police Authority is meeting the cost
                                                                                                  From Spoit
                     of legal advice for these long-retired police officers and
                                                                                                  Angry Gooch tears into
                     will continue to do so until this case is concluded,” he
                                                                                                  England
                     confirmed.
                                                                                                  Hostage remains
                     T h e two men are fully entitled to have their costs met.                    handover delaved
                     It is necessary for the long-term morale of the force."                      Unions hail back-to-work
                                                                                                  scheme
                     First private prosecution                                                    RUC could face ’new
                                                                                                  beginning’
                     The private prosecutions follow the decision by Lord
                                                                                                  Football stars remanded
                     Justice Stuart Smith who headed a fresh inquiry, which
                     found there was no new evidence to justify action by                         Christmas strip prompts
                     the state.                                                                   BBC probe
                                                                                                  Firm faces railway
                     The first allegation the two formeF officers face is that                    accident charge
nttp://news.Dbc.co.uK/ni/engusn/uK/newsiayo5Jf225UUU/Z23iyy.stm                                                                 z z n im
ts ti^ iNews | ujs. | laxpayers 10 rooi jtimsoorougn court cosis                                           ra g c z u io




                  on id Apni, iyey, tne two aeTenaants umawruny Kinea
                  John Alfred Anderson and James Gary Aspinall.                      Lottery donations hit
                                                                                     £1bn
                  It is also alleged that the former senior officers "wilfully       From Entertainment
                  neglected to carry out a public duty on that day"..                Jonathan Ross to host
                                                                                     BBC film show
                  Mr Duckenfield, of West Parley, Bournemouth, and Mr                Murder quash woman's
                  Murray, of Pontefract, West Yorkshire, are due to                  inquest to start
                  appear at Leeds Magistrates Court on Monday,                       Driver killed in 23-car
                  December 7.                                                        pile-up
                                                                                     Court bid to stop tube
                  A spokesman for relatives of the disaster victims
                  declined to comment on the announcement made by                    strikes
                  South Yorkshire Police Authority.                                  Iona's sad farewell to
                                                                                     boat victim
                                                                                     Murder charge trio freed
                                                                                     for appeal
                                                                                     From Education
                                                                                     Truancy rates
                                                                                     unchanged
                                                                                     Lockerbie ultimatum for
                                                                                     Libva
                                                                                     From Business
                                                                                     Scope for UK rate cuts -
                                                                                     IMF
                   Back to too | BBC News Home [ BBC Homepage         ® B $ E IG i
                                                                                     From Health
                                                                                     Patients urged to pick u p
                                                                                     the phone
                                                                                     Drive to cut house fire
                                                                                     deaths
                                                                                     £9.2m for road crash
                                                                                     victim
                                                                                     From Special Report
                                                                                     Furbies in wilderness at
                                                                                     Christmas
                                                                                     From Health
                                                                                     Inequalities in cancer
                                                                                     support services
                                                                                     Justice pledge as
                                                                                     Lockerbie mourns
                                                                                     From Special Report
                                                                                     White Christmas iust a
                                                                                     dream
                                                                                     Blair We hit every target

                                                                                     Schoolboy murder Man
                                                                                     re-arrested
                                                                                     Former Saudi nurse
                                                                                     ouiltv of theft
                                                                                      From Business
                                                                                      Newcastle directors defy
                                                                                      small shareholders
                                                                                      From Business
                                                                                      UK out of the red
                                                                                      From UK Politics
                                                                                      Buo problems to start in
                                                                -r»                   weeks
                                                                                      Murder suspect dies on
 nttp://news.DDc.co.uK/ni/engusn/uk/newsiayo3Jt,22DUUU/2'23iyy.stm


                                                     dp
