                                                                            S o li c it o rs
                                                                                                                                                              7 iUL 1998
%
                                                                                                                                                                  Pat*
                    Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL, Telephone 0113 2832500,
                Facsimile 0113 2459412, Docum ent Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris,co,uk
                                          Web: http://www.walkermorris.co.uk


    For the attention of Mr. Chris Enzor                                                       Our ref              r b m /m t /m u r r a y
    Crown Prosecution Service
    Central Casework                                                                           Your ref
    United House
    YORK
    YOl 9PQ                                                                                    6 July 1998




    Dear Mr. Enzor

    BERNARD MURRAY
    SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES COURT 17TH JULY 1998

    I refer to our long conversation on the 3rd July and I note that this investigation is being
    dealt with at your Offices on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecution, although the
    ultimate decision will be made within the Director’s Office in London. As requested I
    enclose herewith a copy of the letter sent to the Director, which I understand has not yet
    reached you. Also enclosed is a copy of the letter from Watts Leather, Solicitors to
    Winkworth & Pemberton. You are aware that Winkworth & Pemberton act for David
    Duckenfield and Watts Leather act for the Prosecutor. This follows a joint approach by
    Winkworth & Pemberton and this Firm. We have asked the Clerk to the Justices at South
    Sefton to consider our submission that the Summonses have not been validly issued and
    should be quashed.

    To complete the picture, I attach a copy of the response from this Office to that letter from
    Watts Leather, and also to the South Sefton Magistrates Court.

    The only disappointment that came from our conversation is the intimation that no quick
    decision was likely from your Office. That we would regret and we hope that early re­
    consideration will ensure that this case gets high priority.

    If there is any other information or documentation that you feel could be supplied by us,
    then we should be more than happy to try to facilitate the same.

    Yours faithfully



    R.B. Manning
    Partner

    Enel:




    H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVIEW\MURRAY22.LET\6 July 1998




            A list o f the partners’ names is open to inspection at the above address. Regulated by The Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
Dame Barbara Mills QC                            Our ref    RBM/BQW/MURRAY
Director of Public Prosecutions
Crown Prosecution Service                        Your ref
50 Ludgate Hill
LONDON
EC4M 7EX                                         3 July 1998




Dear Madam

OUR CLIENT : MR BERNARD MURRAY

We refer to our letter of 2 July 1998, which for ease is copied herewith.

We attach to this letter a copy of the summons dated 26 June 1998, issued against our
Client Bernard Dean Murray. It alleges three offences all of which are said to arise
from events at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield on 15 April 1989.

We are aware of a letter of 1 July 1998 delivered by hand to you by Winckworth and
Pemberton Solicitors acting on behalf of David Duckenfield. As indicated in our
letter of 2 July, Mr Owston of Winckworth and Pemberton has been good enough to
provide us with a copy of his letter to you. We too have sent by fax, a letter to the
Clerk o f the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court. We attach a copy of that letter.

In our submission, the matters that we have set out in our letter to the Clerk to the
Justices at South Sefton provide a clear statement of law and we believe that the
summonses should be quashed.

We also believe that even if the present summonses are quashed, the Solicitor acting
on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group will simply seek to issue
proceedings in the appropriate petty sessional division in Sheffield. The purpose of
this letter is therefore to ask you to invoke the provisions of Section 6 of the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. You will be fully familiar with your ability under
Section 6 (2) of that Act to take over conduct of proceedings instituted by a private
prosecutor which you may have instituted yourself. Our request to you is then to
consider the issues in this case so that you can properly arrive at a decision under
Section 23 (3) of the same Act that the proceedings should be discontinued. The
discontinuation under Section 23 may be because the evidence is insufficient or if the
proceedings would be contrary to the public interest. As you will undoubtedly be
aware, the report or the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (1981) (Command
8092) Page 161 Para 7.50 says “it provides a useful and effective safeguard against
“improper action” by the prosecuting authority.
I DOuH-Tiw*
                                                            Dame Barbara Mills QC
                                                                      3 July 1998
                                                                           Page 2



May we respectfully draw your attention to the following facts:

1.      Following the tragedy on 17 April 1989 by 15 May 1989 Lord Taylor had
        begun his public enquiry. 174 witnesses gave evidence. There were 72
        hours of video film and much other material in written form. The interim
        report of Lord Taylor was published on 4 August 1989.

2.      W est Midlands Police investigated as an independent investigating force.
        They took 3,776 statements from witnesses.

3.      The Director of Public Prosecutions considered all of the evidence that had
        then been gathered. Advice was taken from two very experienced Queen’s
        Counsel who advised that there was not sufficient evidence to justify criminal
        proceedings against any person.

4.      On 19 November 1990 the adjourned Coroner’s Inquest resumed and at the
        Inquest some 200 witnesses gave evidence and the Inquest also received
        documents, the Jury saw videos and inspected the ground including the
        control room.

5.      In 1992 the Attorney General was invited to order new Inquests on the basis
         of new evidence. The Attorney General refused.

6.      In April 1993 application was made by families for Judicial Review to quash
         the Inquest verdict and seek a fresh Inquest which application the Divisional
         Court dismissed.

7.      Civil claims were made and the litigation concluded. These included claims
        by Police Officers as well as by families.

8.      Lord Justice Stuart Smith was appointed to scrutinise the evidence including
        to consider “new evidence”.

We invite attention to the summary to the scrutiny of evidence by Lord Justice Stuart
Smith and in particular the following paragraphs.

Paragraph 4.    Cannot allow compassion to cloud judgement.

Paragraph 5.    I do not consider that there is any material which should be put
                 before the Director of Public Prosecutions which may cause her to
                 reconsider the decision already taken.

Paragraph 6.     None of the evidence that I was asked to consider added anything
                 significant to the evidence before Taylor or the Inquest.
3   *
                                                             Dame Barbara Mills QC
                                                                       3 July 1998
                                                                            Page 3


Paragraph 7.     There is no new video evidence.

Paragraph 8.     The suggestion that the Police failed to spot overcrowding was due
                 to faulty CCTV is wrong.

Paragraph 9.     The Police did not give false evidence about CCTV. The evidence
                 of Holdsworth is not accepted.

Paragraph 11.    Not considered that the inquest was flawed.

Paragraph 12.    No improper attempt to interfere with witnesses.

Paragraph 16.     Miss Martin “vague and confused”.

Paragraph 18.     Paul Taylor changed versions in various ways over the years.

Paragraph 22.    No South Yorkshire Police statement rendered misleading. Taylor
                 not inhibited or impeded.

Paragraph 24.     Exclusion of comments in witness statements, did not affect the
                  outcome of the inquest or the decision of the DPP.

Paragraph 25.    No further enquiry involving the examination of witnesses could
                 help after this lapse of time.

Paragraph 32.    Neither of the new points about the height of the crush barriers and
                 capacity of Leppings Lane Terrace would give grounds for re­
                 opening of Judicial Enquiry or any other proceedings.

At Page 9 Paragraph 52 of the scrutiny of Lord Justice Stuart Smith, he confirmed
that he had read the joint opinion of Leading Counsel dated 6 August 1990 which
gave the advice to the Director of Public Prosecution on possible criminal proceedings
against Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield. At Paragraph 53 Lord Justice Stuart Smith
said that he had not found any error or omission in the resume set out by Counsel nor
in his view was any particular aspect understated or exaggerated. The Lord Justice
also considered the statement of law as contained in the opinions of Queen’s Counsel
and said they were plainly correct.

In our respectful submission having regard to all of these actions and particularly the
scrutiny of evidence by Lord Justice Stuart Smith and his conclusion that “I do not
consider that there is any material which should be put before the Director of Public
Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause them to reconsider
the decisions that they have already taken”, we would submit that under Section 23
o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 you must conclude that the evidence is
insufficient.
ft
                                                             Dame Barbara Mills QC
                                                                       3 July 1998
                                                                            Page 4


As to the limb which allows you to discontinue if the proceedings would be contrary
to public interest or for any other good reason, may we refer you to the possible
single most important cause for Lord Justice Stuart Smith to be asked to scrutinise the
evidence. This relates to the program on Granada Television “Hillsborough”,
broadcast on 5 December 1996, which incidentally was repeated without any
amendment. It was described as “highly emotive”. Lord Justice Stuart Smith said
that it was “not accurate as to the suppression of Police video tapes”. “It was not
always easy for the viewer to tell what is reconstruction and what is original” and
finally that the program “also relies on Mr Holdsworth’s assertions.... I do not accept
this evidence”. This was only one of a number of television programs. There has
been a huge amount of other media interest.

In addition to the finding by Lord Justice Stuart Smith at Page 37 Paragraph 99 that
he was “unable to accept Mr Holdsworth’s recollection of events as now being
accurate”, Lord Justice Stuart Smith also comments on two witnesses who he saw,
namely Miss Martin who he described as “vague and confused” and Paul Taylor
whose “ version changed in various ways over the years”. It is inconceivable that
witnesses nine years after the unhappy event could now be relied upon as to their
memory. This has been made particularly difficult having regard to the highly
charged and emotional state of so many people and the media involvement with the
points above being some of the worrying factors.

The Taylor report made a large number of recommendations, the vast majority of
which have been implemented so as to both address the causes of the disaster itself
and prevent repetition and for the safety of the public at large in attending sporting
occasions.

Our Client, Bernard Murray, behaved with great fortitude during the whole of the
enquiries until a time came when his body could take no more pressure. He was a
career Police Officer who intended not to retire until at least he had 30 years Police
service. The consequence was a complete breakdown in his health such that he was
obliged to retire from the Police Force on medical grounds some two and a half years
before his earliest intended date of retirement. He has not worked since his retirement
from the Police Force.

In assessing whether the continuation of these proceedings would be contrary to the
public interest we would also respectfully refer to two final points.

a.       Paragraph 5 Chapter 7 of the Lord Justice Stuart Smith scrutiny at page 103.
         Here he says that he has come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis
         upon which there should be:

         1.       A further Judicial Enquiry;

         2.       A reopening of Lord Taylor’s enquiry;
f-lea
                                                  Dame Barbara Mills QC
                                                            3 July 1998
                                                                 Page 5


3.     A renewed application to the Divisional Court;

4.     The exercise by the Attorney General of his powers under the
       Coroner’s Act;

5.     Any material to put before the Director of Public Prosecutions which
       might cause her to reconsider the decisions she has already taken;

6.     Any material that should be put before the Police Complaints
       Authority which might cause them to reconsider the decision that
       they have already taken.

When the Home Secretary, Mr Jack Straw, addressed the House of Commons
on 18 February 1998 he made the following comments.

        1.     I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public
                Prosecutions have considered Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s
                report very carefully. We have no reason to doubt his
                conclusions.

        2.     The entire country is united in sympathy with those who
                lost loved ones at Hillsborough. We cannot take the pain
                from them but I hope that the families will recognise that
               the report represents, as I promised, an independent
               thorough and detailed scrutiny of all the evidence that was
               given to the committee.

In his statement to the House of Commons on 8 May 1998, the Home
Secretary made the following remarks.

        1.     Lord Taylor’s enquiry and report were as thorough and
               impartial as one would expect of the work of such a great
               judicial figure.

        2.     The Granada documentary “Hillsborough” presented a
               powerful picture of the tragedy. It suggested that fresh
               evidence that had not previously been considered called
               into question the verdict so the inquest and other decisions.

        3.     Lord Justice Stuart Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the
                Court of Appeal was eminently qualified to conduct and
                independent and thorough scrutiny of the evidence. I gave
               him very wide terms of reference that enabled his to
               establish conclusively whether any material evidence had
                been overlooked and to recommend appropriate action.
                                                              Dame Barbara Mills QC
                                                                        3 July 1998
                                                                             Page 6


                   4.    Anyone who has read the report thoroughly will, I believe,
                         be bound to reach the same conclusion as he did that
                         reopening the enquiries would serve no useful purpose
                         whatsoever.

                   5.    The causes o f the disaster were clearly identified by Lord
                          Taylor in his 1989 report. It was right to consider as I
                         have done whether there was any subsequent information
                         that cast doubt on earlier decisions. It was for that reason
                         that I established Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s thorough
                          scrutiny and I am satisfied that he has, after that rigorous
                          examination reached the correct conclusions.

                   6.    I do not believe that a further enquiry could or would
                          uncover significant new evidence or provide any relief for
                          the distress o f those who have been bereaved. Although I
                          know that it is difficult for the families to accept that, such
                          a conclusion must be in their best interests. To hold out
                          the possibility of a further enquiry, only and inevitably to
                          have that hope dashed when the enquiry reported would
                          lead simply to further anxiety and a deepening of the
                          wounds of grief. That would be no kindness to the families
                          or to their communities of Merseyside and elsewhere.

We would ask you to agree to take over the conduct of these proceedings under
Section 6 (2) of the Prosecution of Offenders Act 1985 and then to discontinue these
proceedings under Section 23 (3) of that same act.

Yours faithfully




R B Manning
PARTNER
Messrs. Watts Leather,                             Our ref     RBM/MT/MURAY
Solicitors
1st Floor Central Buildings                        Your ref DRL/H29
41 North John Street
LIVERPOOL
L2 9RR                                             6 July 1998




Dear Sirs

ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

We acknowledge your letter of the 3rd July providing us with a copy o f the letter of
the same date to Winckworth & Pemberton. We have very carefully considered the
various points that you have set out. At this moment we intend to confine ourselves
simply to the fundamental starting point. The Summonses have not been validly issued
and therefore must be quashed.

We believe that the reason that the Clerk to the Justices at South Sefton has copied
you with the correspondence, is to invite you to agree that the Summonses have not
been validly issued. We would invite that course of action, and seek your confirmation
as quickly as possible.

If you persist with the view that South Sefton Magistrates Court have validly issued
the Summonses, then if the Clerk to the Justices is not himself to quash the
Summonses upon the submissions before him, there is no alternative but to make an
application to the Divisional Court.

We do regret the fact that you have copied your letter to the Clerk to the South Sefton
Justices and the Director of Public Prosecutions, since it contains so many matters
which are wholly extraneous to the single point which must be decided by the Clerk
to the Justices as to the law. In the circumstances, we have similarly copied this letter.


Yours faithfully



R.B. Manning
Partner
4




    D.Luty, Esq.                                     Our ref    RBM/MT/MURRAY
    Clerk to the Justices
    South Sefton Magistrates’ Court
    The Court House                                  Your ref
    Merton Road
    Bootle
    MERSEYSIDE                                       6 July 1998
    L20 3BJ

    Dear Mr. Luty

    BERNARD MURRAY - SOUTH SEFTON MAGISTRATES COURT 17TH
    JULY

    We are told that Watts Leather, Solicitors who act for the Prosecutor, have copied you
    with a letter of the 3rd July addressed to Winkworth & Pemberton. We regret to say
    that the Solicitor for the Prosecution believes that it is possible to overcome a
    “technical jurisdictional argument because of the substance of the allegations”.

    That proposition of course is wholly flawed.

    In our respectful submission they offer no answer in law to the submissions contained
    in our letter of the 3rd July, and we look for you to accept that the Summonses have
    not been validly issued and should be quashed, that is if you have to make that
    decision because you do not get that concession from the Solicitor for the Prosecutor.

    Yours faithfully



    R.B. Manning
    Partner
                  WATTS LEATHER SOLICITORS
                       Partners: Karen M Watts and David R Leather



    3 July 1998                                      .       • •                      DRL/H29

                                                     ' * i
    Winckworth and Pemberton                             f
    Solicitors                                           |
    35 Great Peter Street
    Westminster
    London SW1P 3LR

    Ref: NAFO/24332-1


    Dear Sirs
                                                                      r


    Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

    1.     We act for the prosecutor in this case who has laid the;informations with the support
           of the Hillsborough Family Support Grjup (“HFSG”)' The Clerk to the South Sefton
           justices has sent us a copy o f youf letter o f 1“ July 1998. The point you make is not
           that the court has no jurisdiction 16 hear the case if either defendant were to appear
           before it; it is rather the technicalfjurisdictional argument, which has nothing to do with
           the substance o f the allegations, that the court has no means o f compelling Mr
           Duckenfield and Mr Murray to appear before it. We do not agree with your
           construction o f the sections or your interpretation o f M v Blandford. The evident
           purpose o f section 1(2) and 2(3) of the 1980 Act is to: deal with practicalities and there
           is clear acknowledgment o f this in Bfimdford.i We have instructed counsel to advise
           further on the point. However, we regard it as essential to set out the practical reasons
           that led us to commence these proceedings in Liverpool and we invite Mr Duckenfield,
           through you, to appear at the court so that, on either View o f the law, the court has
           power to hear the matter.

    The reason fo r commencing proceedings in Liverpool                           \

    2.     In the last nineteen months, we have been in regular contact with the Home Office on
            matters relating to the disaster which formed the subject matter o f the “Scrutiny”
            conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, o f which you are no doubt aware. In this
            period the Group have been supplied with a large number of witness and other
            statements about the events o f IS* April 1989, which ks members had never seen
           before. The witnesses who made these statements willform a very substantial part of
           the evidence which we intend to present against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.

                                                             -   1-               .


1ST Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 9RR. Tel Ol’Sl 236 1919. Fax 01S1 236 1936


                                  R E C E I V E D T I ME     JUL.         14:27
                                       UiJl^uiJuu




3.     A large proportion o f these witnesses come from Liverpool. We intend to call them to
        prove that the decision to open Gate C at the ground was the responsibility o f both
        defendants; was causative o f the deaths o f 96 people; and was grossly negligent. The
       two named victims are representative o f all. The prosecution case will be simple, but
        many witnesses will be tendered. The allegation o f misfeasance is based on the same
        facts. The allegation o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice refers to Mr
        Duckenfield’s allegation that the Liverpool supporters forced the gate.

4.     The committal proceedings will of course be .Held at the court at which the proceedings
        are instituted. It is strongly arguable that those proceedings fall within the old
       committal scheme. The amendments in Schedule 1 to the Criminal Procedure and
       Investigations Act 1996 weref brought into effect on 1“ April (“the appointed day”) by
       virtue o f the Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 (Commencement)
       (Section 65 and Schedules 1 and 2) Order 1997, and apply to any alleged offence in
       relation to which Part 1 o f that Act applies. Section 1(3) o f that Act makes provision
       in respect o f “alleged ofFenceslnto which no criminal investigation has begun before
       the appointed day”.              -;

5.     It seems to us the better view; is that the present proceedings fall within the exception.
        Although no police investigation was in progress in April 1997, a police investigation
        “began” in 1989. and it would therefore appear that either o f the defendants, or indeed
        the prosecution, would be ehtitled to call live evidence at committal. If either
        defendant required us to prove a prima facie c^se, w e should have the task o f calling a
        large number o f eye witnesses whose statements will form part o f the substantial
        bundle o f evidence that we shall serve on you in due course in order to justify
        committal for trial.

6.     It will therefore be apparent to you that the factor o f convenience tells overwhelmingly
        in favour o f committal proceedingsf'in Liverpool. Among our witnesses, some are in
        dubious health. Not all are youngs Many have little money, and would need the
        reimbursement o f travel and accommodation expenses if the proceedings are held
        Outside Liverpool. We doulbt that^ve would be required to call evidence o f forensic
       pathologists, or the witnesses whd produce the transcripts o f the evidence that the two
       defendants gave to the inquest or Ihe Taylor Inquiry.

Submission to the jurisdiction                   \

7.     Whatever the court chosen,'there will be inconvenience to some. We accept o f course,
       that attendance at committal proceedings will be inconvenient for Mr Duckenfield if
       held anywhere other than near his home. Your client may decide to submit to the
       South Sefton jurisdiction in the interests o f saving time and money. It is undoubtedly
       open to him, or Mr Murray to do so. If either “appears” or is “brought before” the
       court by virtue o f section 2(3)f, and seeks to join issue with the other party on the
       merits, as opposed to some arid technicality as to the efficacy of the summons, the
       court has jurisdiction on any basis; and by virtue o f section l(2)(b) the court would
       have jurisdiction over the other defendant, however widely or narrowly the two

                                                        -   2-




                           R E C E I V E D T I M E ' 3 . JUL.    14:27
                                          01512361936X
                                                          •i
                                                      /


              subsections fall to be construed.

              In a matter o f such importance as the Hillsborough disast.r
              prosecution and defence concentrate On the substalice o f                  'T      that
              technicalities. Do you suggest that s l h l £ » t l ^        '“          c 'u ^ “ P'i0US
      Alternatives to Liverpool
                                                  f
      9-      If; contrary to our view, section ,i o f the Magistrates Court Act 1osn ;c, u
              construed as you contend, it would be ogen to the infonnant to commence
             proceedings m the County o f South Yorkshire, where the alleged offences were
             committed (section l(2)(a); or where either defendant resides that is West Yorkshire
             m the case o f Mr Murray, and Dorset in the case o f Mr Duckenfield (section l(2)(c)
             We are inclined not to lay the informations in Sheffield, because, among other reasons-
             (a) proceedings m that city would revivfe painful memories for relatives o f the victims ’
             (b) it is unlikely that many witnesses from Sheffield would be called at the committal ’
             and (c) neither defendant lives there                                      6 commi“ai>

  10.
                          WOUlu appueart° be’ therefore^ Sheffield or some other part o f South
             Yorkshire even though neither defendant resides in that area, and few witnesses do
               ntefract or some other p§rt o f West Yorkshire; or Dorset It is hard to imaain*
             another location in Dorse, if Dorse, were chose* -
             An important factor would be cost. We sfiould wish the proceedings to be heldTn a
            B ou m lm outh T ta° f 0mm0datl9n W° Uld ^e'cheap “ d P,entiftl1- For this reason,
            ^ r i n Y o rth       hS6l S0n' T r . a? ,°bvi0US P°ssibility- and there may be other
            locals in Yorkshire which may be'suitable on the same grounds.
 11.
                   WOU'd be the further advantage that a court at Bournemouth would commit for
                    a s,«>ng o f the Crown Coun on the Western Circuit; and no doubt both
                              defence wouid      'hat h would be fairer to all parties if the trial
            teU vou that w e’w T " ?         Yorkshire.              and Lancashire. We should
            in erests r f f Z ^      h " “ t “ ” 80!nent by the defen" in d“<=™urse that, in the
            plac^in Merseyside.          “ ^             Wm         the ,riiU i«elf should not take

12 .
           I h' “ 't™ ” no mf e ,han suggestions. We have not yet weighed the pros and cons
           » m L ^ m !,         f ' C° nStIUCt'Vely mV ^SSestions you or Mr Murray might wish
           to make as to venues for committal proceedings away from Sheffield where
           informations might sensibly be laid.

13.
           We invite you to keep u , informed o f your intentions. If you decide to apply for
           •      r^ lew o f the South Sefton summonses, we shall have to consider whether it is
            dS^rtned   Z 7t,er      t0 ^ f ‘>yed f°-r SevCTal momhs' 80 that a technicality can be
           vvenue
             e n ^ to
                    o wnich
                      wwih your
                            v™leXPe"Se'
                                argument” cannot
                                              WCapply.
                                                 C°^ d be Pr0CMdinS expeditiously a, another

14.        We are sending a copy o f this letter, with uncontroversial covering letters, to the
solicitors for Mr Murray, who support your position to the r w t - c                 «
Justices and to the Director ofPublic Prosecutions, whom l e h l l    f           h!^ ° n
the existence o f the summonses. The return date at the South Seftn ^ ^
S     7     0U '° rcP'y ” ,WS Ietter ^ I0* My- 50            we Can «<*» o u rd e'liL s1^


Yours faithfully




                   R E C E I V E D T I M E ? JTT1.   U '?7
