C+Jtf*SCo*»C                    o,7> 273 Zttx
                                 &                             ?


M <n(50 fy ic                  Oill      273          2*4-37
     W   e r e    m h S   c Q T to    p a f a /io ,   H 'f l i y t ) .


T7 C             123^     to
 ■                                                       0'
0 5 - AUG, ’ 9 9 (THU) 1 6 : 2 4      S, Y, P, CHI EF DEPT                T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1     8481                  P,

                              South Yorkshire
                              POLICE                                     Ian Dames,                 b a   ( H ods>
                                                                                   Assistant ChiefConstable
                                                                                                                     Dip.Ed.
                              JUSTICE        with     COURAGE




              Ref: ACC/ID/VE

              21 July 1999


              Mr G Croston
              CPS Special Casework
              Crown Prosecution Sen/ice
              Ryedale Building
              60 Piccadilly
              YORK Y011NS


              Dear Mr Croston

              Confidential Hillsborough Matters

              I refer to our telephone conversation of 4 August 1999, on the above subject. You will recall
              that we discussed a report of a conversation which is alleged to have occurred in April 1989
              between two eminent people.

              I would be obliged to receive your advice on whether I should disclose the records of this
              matter to the defence and/or prosecution.

              Yours sincerely




              Ian Daines
              Assistant Chief Constable




                              Police H eadq uarters
                              S nlg H ill
                              Sheffield S3 8LY
                                                 I
                              Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243



                                                                      0 5 /0 8   ' 9 9 THU 1 6 : 3 1          [T X /R X NO 5 0 2 8 ]
                                                                                     C(*~L(




Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 528                                                                  273 8050
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London                                                                    273 1225
SW1H 9AT



                                                                          7 August 1997




Dear Sir

RE: THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

I am writing in connection with recent correspondence detailing schedules of material
currently held or viewed by the CPS.

As indicated, I am in possession of a police report dated 22 April 1990 and associated
documents stemming from the remarks allegedly overheard by a                  made in
conversation between the late Lord Chief Justice and a Chief ConstaDie.

The report does not relate to evidential material pertinent to the Hillsborough disaster.

I have taken the opportunity to discuss the matter with the Director (who is currently away
from the office) who would, of course, be happy to discuss the matter with you.
Alternatively, the material is available for inspection at this office or can be forwarded at
your convenience. I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours faithfully




Dru Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework
                                                                          CONFIDENTIAL

                                     FILE NOTE

                         HILLSBOROUGH CASE


4 August 1999

RE:     CONVERSATION BETW EEN LORD TAYLOR AND G DEAR IN 1989

Points for Discussion

1.     A conversation between the above two persons was overheard by                   who was
       their driver on 18 April 1989, three days after the disaster.

2.                    made a report dated 12 April 1990 which went to the Chief Constable of
        SYP (Richard WELLS).              [rad discussed the conversation with his wife
                        and an undisclosed number o f close work colleagues. At the time he was
        angry at the injustice but decided that he would not be listened to. He then discussed the
        matter with Supr, BETTINSON (presumably in 1990) and felt that the record should be
        put straight.

3.     On 4 July 1990, Richard WELLS wrote to the DPP, Alan GREEN, enclosing a copy o f
       the report, desiring that "truth is served" and requesting advice.

4.     A police file note o f 9 May 1990 of a conversation between the ACC and Peter Metcalf
       (Hammond Suddards solicitors) with the latter suggesting that as criminal offences could
       be involved it should go to Richard WELLS who had not been involved in the disaster.

5.     On 9 May 1990 the DPP wrote back to RW expressing the view that he did not think
       that there was prima facie evidence of a criminal offence. The offences he considered
       were conspiracy to PCOJ and bribery of a public official.

6.     On 18 July 1990, Hammond Suddards wrote to RW with their review o f the law. They
       reluctantly agreed with the conclusions o f the DPP but considered that if there was such
       an offence as "effecting a public mischief then it was committed here where there was
       deliberate prejudgement of the conclusions o f the Inquiry. They suggested the obtaining
       o f an opinion from leading counsel.

7.    On 23 July 1990 this letter was passed to the DPP by RW.
8.    Anthony Hooper QC provided an opinion dated 27 July 1990. He advised that, on the
      basis that the conversation was accurately recorded, there was insufficient evidence to
      support a prosecution for a conspiracy to PCOJ or for misconduct in a public office.

9.    There is no further correspondence on the subject until 23 July 1997 when CE flagged
      up the matter to Dru Sharpling (CCP Central Casework) as part of disclosure to the
      Hillsborough Scrutiny, In the end Dru wrote to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 7 August
      1997 with the details of the information held and offering him an inspection of the
      material, There is no record o f a reply on the file. Matthew Pyne at the Home Office
      holds all the Scrutiny documents. He has informed me by telephone that Dru's letter is
      on file, however he has not found either a copy reply or a file note on the point. He will
      do a further search.

10.   Key Issues:-

          Ian DAINES, the ACC at SYP who is in charge the Hillsborough Archive, is
          concerned about disclosure of these sensitive papers in his possession. He is asking
          for the advice o f the Director. Quite rightly he wants to ensure that the police act
          fully in accordance with their duty of disclosure under the common law.
          The first main issue to consider is whether or not to disclose the details o f the
          conversation. Is it relevant? If it is, is it so sensitive that PII applies? Do the police
          or we have a duty o f disclosure?
          Media interest: This matter does not yet appear to have brought to the attention of
          the press. Those officially aware of the conversation are the SYP, the CPS, the now
         Mr Justice Hooper, the police solicitors Hammond Suddards, and presumably the
          Hillsborough Scrutiny team. A leak from those sources should not be expected. The
          complainant,                spoke to his wife and a number of colleagues. There is a
          possibility that when the trial begins and receives the likely national coverage, that
         the memories o f police officers may be jogged and occasion press reports o f an
          establishment cover-up.
          There is no reason to reconsider the 1990 decision that there was insufficient
          evidence of any criminal offence.
         Relevance?: Whether or not the material is relevant to any o f the issues in the private
         prosecution. If it is not relevant, as the 1997 minutes from CE and Dru would
          suggest, then with the courage o f our convictions behind us we can withstand the
          onslaughts of the press and the media if (or more probably when) the conversation
         comes to light.
          Duty o f disclosure?: See the 1992 Guidelines re disclosure to third parties. The
         Crown Court can grant the HFSG a summons requiring the police to produce
         relevant statements and exhibits so as to permit the private prosecutor to comply
         with the general responsibilities of a prosecutor. There is no reason why that should
         not apply to us as well. Under the present policy it must be that we would have a
         duty to disclose relevant 'material or make a PII application to the court.
         If either the material is now seen as relevant and/or we wish an independent view on
         disclosure, then there are a number of avenues to consider. We could first obtain
         advice from Treasury Counsel, and then if required the police, by themselves or
         jointly with the CPS, could make an ex parte PII application, with or without notice,
         to the trial judge.
       •Does PII apply?: Is there a need to maintain the confidentiality o f the information
        because disclosure would be damaging to the public interest? If there is to be a PII
        application to the trial judge in accordance with the normal procedure should it be
        type I, II or III?
      • At this stage it should be noted that the Circuit presiding judge has reserved the case
        to himself He is Mr Justice Anthony HOOPER!
      • An advantage o f an early PII application to the trial judge is that it deals with three
        main issues. The first of disclosure, the second that the trial judge has already been
        involved in giving an opinion on the material in question and the last to show (if the
        media make a meal of it) that the CPS and the SYP have behaved properly and in
        accordance with the interests o f justice.
      • The next hearing at the Crown Court on 3 September 1999 is to hear argument on
        disclosure.


George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
                                                             CONFIDENTIAL

                               FTI F NOTF

                   HILLSBOROUGH CASE


4 August 1999

RE: CONVERSATION BETWEEN LORD TAYLOR AND G DEARE IN 1989

Points for Discussion

       A conversation was overheard by              who was the driver for the above
       two persons on 18 April 1989, three days after the disaster

2.                made a report dated 12 April 1990 which went to the Chief
      Constable of SYP (Richard WELLS). 1          fiad discussed the conversation
      with his wife                          and an undisclosed number o f close
      work colleagues. At the time he was angry at the injustice but decided that he
      would not be listened to. He then discussed the matter with Supr.
      BETTINSON (presumably in 1990) and felt that the record should be put
      straight.

3.    On 4 July 1990, Richard WELLS wrote to the DPP, Alan GREEN enclosing a
      copy o f the report, desiring that "truth is served" and requesting advice.

4.    A police file note of 9 May 1990 o f a conversation between the ACC and
      Peter Metcalf (Hammond Suddards solicitors) with the latter suggesting that
      as criminal offences could be involved it should go to Richard WELLS who
      had not been involved in the disaster.

5.    On 9 May 1990 the DPP wrote back to RW expressing the view that he did not
      think that there was prima facie evidence o f a criminal offence. The offences
      he considered were Conspiracy to PCOJ and bribery of a public official.

6.     On 18 July 1990, Hammond Suddards wrote to RW with their review of the
       law. They reluctantly agreed with the conclusions o f the DPP but considered
       that if there was such an offence as "effecting a public m ischief' then it was
       committed here where there was deliberate pre-judgement of the conclusions
       of the Inquiry. They suggested the obtaining of an opinion from leading
       counsel.

7.     On 23 July 1990 this letter was passed to the DPP by RW.
8.    Anthony Hooper QC provided an opinion dated 27 July 1990. He advised
      that, on the basis that the conversation was accurately recorded, there was
      insufficient evidence to support a prosecution for a conspiracy to PCOJ or for
      misconduct in a public office.

9.    There is no further correspondence on the subject until 23 July 1997 when CE
       flagged up the matter to Dru as part of disclosure to the Hillsborough Scrutiny.
      In the end Dru wrote to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 7 August 1997 with the
       are details o f the information held and offering an inspection o f the material.
       There is no record o f a reply on the file. I am awaiting a telephone call from
       Chris BONE, who was the secretary to the scrutiny.

10.   Key Issues

      •    Ian DAINES, the ACC at SYP who is in charge the Hillsborough Archive,
           is concerned about disclosure o f these sensitive papers in his possession.
           He is asking for the advice of the Director. Quite rightly he wants to
           ensure that the police act fully in accordance with their duty o f disclosure
           under the common law.
      •    The first main issue to consider is whether or not to disclose the details of
           the conversation. Is it relevant? If it is, is it so sensitive that PII applies?
           Do we or the police have a duty of disclosure?
      •    Media interest: This matter does not yet appear to have brought to the
           attention of the press. Those officially aware of the conversation are the
           SYP, the CPS, the now Mr Justice Hooper, the police solicitors Hammond
           Suddards, and presumably the Hillsborough Scrutiny team. A leak from
           those sources should not be expected. The complainant,                          ,
           spoke to his wife and a number of colleagues. There is a possibility that
           when the trial begins and receives the likely national coverage, that the
           memories o f police officers may be jogged and occasion press reports of
           an establishment cover-up.
       •   There is no reason to reconsider the 1990 decision that there was
           insufficient evidence o f any criminal offence.
       •   Relevance?: Whether or not the material is relevant to any o f the issues in
           the private prosecution. If it is not relevant, as the 1997 minutes from CE
           and Dru would suggest, then with the courage o f our convictions behind us
           we can withstand the onslaughts of the press and the media if (or more
           probably when) the conversation comes to light.
       •   Duty o f disclosure?: See the 1992 Guidelines re disclosure to third parties.
           The Crown Court can grant the HFSG a summons requiring the police to
           produce relevant statements and exhibits so as to permit the private
           prosecutor to comply with the general responsibilities of a prosecutor.
           There is no reason why that should not apply to us as well. Under the
           present policy it must be that we would have a duty to disclose relevant
           material or make a PII application to the court
       •   If either the material is now seen as relevant and/or we wish an
            independent view on disclosure, then there are a number o f avenues to
           consider. We could first obtain advice from Treasury Counsel, and then if
           required the police, by themselves or jointly with the CPS, could make an
            ex parte PII application, with or without notice, to the trial judge.
      •   Does PII apply?: Is there a need to maintain the confidentiality of the
          information because disclosure would be damaging to the public interest?
          If there is to be a PII application to the trial judge in accordance with the
          normal procedure Should it be type I, II or III?
      •   At this stage it should be noted that the Circuit presiding judge has
          reserved the case to him self He is Mr Justice Anthony HOOPER!
      •   An advantage o f an early PII application to the trial judge is that it deals
          with three main issues. The first o f disclosure, the second that the trial
          judge has already been involved in giving an opinion on the material in
          question and the last to show (if the media make a meal o f it) that the CPS
          and the SYP have behaved properly and in accordance with the interests
          of justice.
      •   The next hearing at the Crown Court on 3 September 1999 is to hear
          argument on disclosure.


George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
*
                                                                                               T £ ,t>          C nJ
                                                                                                                          re
    %       ^        f      u l fr       CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE                               rk ~         Qk / c .

              C A by U     ffe                           casew o * Directorate                   fu ^ ftg A                  aK
        &tfe x t (P —                p&Ltci                 United House                       Cs-1 L O O ^ Ce>          H&,
dMdht Ik DK^flOicuv c/                          A ii- ? ' .   pi^ lly                                     W   jux   fcQ K
    I a-lldO    tittt/H      ft/ te ^ J -                     YOl 9PQ
                                                                                                                       a c   (
                         O G tM tb                     Facsimile 01904 545501                         ^          (jT T Y ^ U ic o v ,
                                                         DX: 65204 York 6
                                                                                                 S i /         d iia J x A .^

                   Attention of         Mr C Newell
                   Fax No                8650
                   From                  Chris Enzor
                   Tel                   01904 545503
                   Date & Time           16/08/99 09:37
                   No. of Pages


                   MESSAGE

                   (Please note the phone and fax numbers which changed recently)

                   HILLSBOROUGH - CONFIDENTIAL MATERIAL
                   I quote the entire contents o f a letter from ACC Daines:
                   “Confidential Hillsborough Matters
                   I refer to our telephone conversation of 4 August 1999, on the above subject. You will
                   recall that we discussed a report of a conversation which is alleged to have occurred
                   in April 1989 between two eminent people.
                   I would be obliged to receive your advice on whether I should disclose the records of
                   this matter to the defence and/or prosecution”.
                   Clearly there has been telephone contact. The file does not reveal the contents o f that
           £       contact. Unfortunately, George Croston is away from the office at the moment.
                   You have a bundle of documents which includes copies o f all the material in our
                   possession which relates to this matter. In my view, the only document which falls to
                   be considered for disclosure is the report                   in question. All the other
                   documents flow from it. With the possible exception o f the police file note o f 9 May
                   1990, all the other documents can fairly be said to be akin to reports sent from the
                   police to the DPP, in the sense that there is a strong public interest in retaining
                   freedom o f communication between police forces and the DPP (see Archbold
                   paragraph 12-41). As to the file note of 9 May 1990, this is a note o f the conversation
                   between the Acting Chief Constable and the Force’s solicitor. Surely there must be a
                   similar public interest in the non-disclosure of this document on similar grounds. In


                      This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                                                  Unauthorised use may be unlawful
any event, I doubt that it contains anything of relevance given that everything flows
from                 -eport in the first instance.
You asked whether the Taylor Report was critical of the police. I have checked it (ie.
the Interim Report) very quickly and confirm that the Report does indeed criticise the
police. Others were criticised too, such as Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Note
that the Interim Report covered the aspects of the Inquiry which interest us. I
understand that the Final Report dealt with broader issues, such as safety in sports
grounds more generally.
You ask what was the nature of the abuse argument.
I have trawled through George’s notes of the hearing as best I can. I can find no
reference to a challenge to the findings of the Taylor Inquiry. However, the defence
would not be prevented from challenging those findings at the Crown Court.
The abuse argument at the committal proceedings was based around:
       •      press coverage since the disaster;
       •      oppression - decision to prosecute 10 years on;
       •      DPP advice was consistent with Taylor findings;
       •      inquest verdict of accidental death;
       •      judicial review of inquest failed;
       •      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny did not consider that there was new
               material;
       •      the evidence is the same now as it was in 1990;
       •      some witnesses have died, recollections of others will have failed, some
               cannot be traced.

I hope this is helpful.
I shall be at the SFO tomorrow in the morning, and in Ludgate Hill in the early
afternoon.

Chris Enzor




  This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                              Unauthorised use may be unlawful
                                                                                             m
C^WP N ew ell
/irector, Casework                                                                           CPS
                                                                                             Headquarters
                                                                                             50 Ludgate Hill
                                          CONFIDENTIAL                                       London EC4M 7EX

                                                                              Direct Line:   0207 796 8553
 r                                                  i
                                                                              Switchboard:
                                                                                Facsimile:
                                                                                             0207 796 8000
                                                                                             0207 796 8680
        David Seymour Esq                                                         d x No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
        Legal Secretary
        The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
        Attorney General’s Chambers
        9 Buckingham Gate
        London SW1E 6JP
L                                                 J                         9 August 1999




       HILLSBOROUGH

       I write following our telephone conversation this morning. I am very grateful to the
       Attorney General for agreeing to see me at such short notice.

       I attach a bundle of papers which concludes with a recent internal discussion paper by
       George Croston, one o f my Prosecution Team Leaders, who has responsibility for
       dealing with Hillsborough. It was under cover of this discussion paper that the
               •vas drawn to my attention last Thursday, 5 August. The                  tself is
       the iirst document in the bundle and it is this document alone, I beneve, mat gives rise
       to the current issue about disclosure.

       The sensitivities are clear. Counsel who originally advised the then Director is now
       the judge currently dealing with the private prosecution. I have not discussed the
       matter with David Calvert-Smith, because he was previously instructed to represent
       Mr Duckenfield in relation to the private prosecution.

       I have little doubt in my mind that the                   should be disclosed to the
       prosecutor and that the prosecutor should in turn disclose it to the defendants. I
       should be happy to expand on this in consultation with the Attorney.

       I am more troubled by the handling - in relation both to the judge, who may well have
       forgotten about his earlier involvement with this matter, and to Sir Geoffrey Dear,
       who (as far as I know) has no knowledge of the                  md has therefore never
       had the opportunity to comment on it.

       I am sorry that time does not allow me to write at any greater length. I am anxious to
       bring these papers with me when I accompany the Director to see the Attorney this
       afternoon. I trust that there is enough here to enable you to brief the Attorney
)
    adequately, but of course I shall be happy to speak to you again as soon as you have
    had a chance to read the papers.




                           0




    C W P NEWELL
                                                                                                                        m
     C W P Newell                                                                                                       CPS
     Director, Casework
                                                                                                                        Headquarters
                                                                                                                        50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                        London EC4M 7EX

(a               .* . /       i/^0^4Q-                            J c lJ u L o j           t .
                                                                                I          |             Direct Line:   0207 796 8553
 •           N      >                                                    |      .   X            .       Switchboard:   0207 796 8000
 I                              A ( ^> T— g                   S —        l / ' v) GL-'V K i L              Facsimile:   0207 796 8680
                                          I                                                          I        d x No:   300850 Ludgate EC4



                          (    LnX «\L A           >\<ws. j                                      I   —C~
                                               r      v /     .        11        ,,                                     With Copapfiments
                              <P^Uv«\ ,        I                                                            v               /


                                              V*
                                                                                                 m
C W P Newell
Director, Casework                                                                               CPS
                                                                                                 Headquarters
                                             CONFIDENTIAL                                        b J ^E O M T E X

                                                                                 Direct Line:     0207 796 8553
 p-                                                                              Switchboard:    0207 796 8000
                                                        \                           Facsimile:   0207 796 8680
      David Seymour Esq                                                              dx   no:    300850 Ludgate EC4
      Legal Secretary
      The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
      Attorney General’s Chambers
      9 Buckingham Gate
      London SW1E 6JP
 [_                                                 j                              13 August 1999




      HILLSBOROUGH

      Since discussing this matter with the Attorney General and you on Tuesday, I have spoken to
      Assistant Chief Constable Daines of the South Yorkshire Police and then to Sue Ross of the
      Treasury Solicitor’s Department.

      Mr Daines was pleased with my immediate indication that in my view the
      should be disclosed to the prosecutor and to the defendants. He was firmly oi me same
      opinion. I explained that, in our view (and I did indicate to him in strict confidence that I had
      consulted the Attorney General), it would be sensible for all concerned (that is, for the South
      Yorkshire Police and for the Crown Prosecution Service) if the handling of the disclosure
      were conducted on behalf of both parties by the Treasury Solicitor. Mr Daines agreed at once
      that that would be advisable and is therefore content for me to proceed accordingly. Once I
      had secured his agreement, I then consulted Sue Ross, who now acts on our behalf.

      It became apparent during my conversation with M r Daines that neither I, nor - as far as I can
      tell - anyone else within the CPS, had seen all the relevant material in his possession. He
      then faxed to me his complete set of papers and I am enclosing with this letter to you copies
      of the further documents, so that you have a complete file.

      The further documents are copies of:

            1.    Mr Daines’ letter to me of 12.8.99.

            2.    Acting Chief Constable’s Note For File of 9.5.90, with manuscript
                  comments not on the copy already supplied to you.
      3.   Page I of Chief Constable’s letter to DPP of 4.7.90, with manuscript
           comments not on the copy already supplied to you.

      4.    Hammond Suddards’ covering letter to Chief Constable of 18.7.90.

      5.    Chief Constable’s letter to DPP of 23.7.90, with manuscript comment not on
            the copy already supplied to you.

      6.   HMCIC’s letter to Chief Constable of 23.7.90.

      7.   Chief Constable’s letter to Hammond Suddards of 2.8.90.

      8.    Chief Constable’s File Note to Deputy Chief Constable of 2.8.90.

      9.   Deputy Chief Constable’s Note For File to Chief Constable of 16.8.90.

Documents 6 to 9 are the interesting ones: in particular, Document 6. You will see from this
that the Chief Constable acted on the advice contained in the final paragraph o f Allan Green’s
letter to him of 9 July 1990 and drew the matter to the attention of Sir John Woodcock and Sir
Clive Whitmore. Sir John and Sir Clive subsequently saw Lord Justice Taylor; and Sir John
on his own saw Geoffrey Dear. In short, both Lord Justice Taylor and Geoffrey Dear denied
the comments attributed to them by

Documents 7 to 9 describe the subsequent handling within the South Yorkshire Police.

I have drawn these further documents to Sue Ross’ attention and have asked her to consider
whether we should not also disclose document 6 to the parties in the criminal proceedings.
My view is that we should: it completes the picture. The            ilone would present an
incomplete - and possibly misleading - picture.

There may be an issue as to whether Sir Geoffrey should be formally consulted before
disclosure is made of a document that records an interview (albeit an informal interview) with
him. Sue Ross is looking into that. Of course, to consult him about document 6 would
necessarily alert him to the fact that we were going to disclose the                itself. We
covered this particular point in our meeting with the Attorney; but i uhiik inai me position
might have changed, since we now know that Sir Geoffrey has previously been made aware
of the allegation (and has quite possibly seen the             and has rejected it.

I wonder, in these circumstances, whether there would now be any objection to informing Sir
Geoffrey of our intention to disclose the                  with or without document 6 and
whether or not Sue Ross advises that he should oe consulted about the latter. I am inclined to
think that there would not be, but I should welcome any comments that you or the Attorney
might care to make. I should add, of course, that I would also welcome any comments on the
question of disclosing document 6 to the parties. My view, as I have said, is that it should be
disclosed.

I have rung Mr Justice Hooper’s clerk, whose answerphone says that “we” are on vacation
until 16 August. I have done no more, but am accordingly hopeful that Sue Ross will be able
to contact the Judge by letter next week. Clearly, depending on our final decisions in relation
to document 6 and Sir Geoffrey, the letter as presently drafted may need amendment.
I am copying this letter, without enclosures, to Sue Ross.




C W P NEWELL
1 2 - A U G . 1 9 9 ( THU) 1 4 : 4 0   S. Y. P. CHI E F DEPT                      T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1   8481


                                 South Yorkshire
                                 POLICE                                          Ian Daines,                b a (H ods)
                                                                                           Assistant Chief Constable
                                                                                                                          Dip.Ed.
                                 JUSTICE with C O U R A G E




              r ^ N! T "      , c   ■                                                                       12 August 1999
              Crown Prosecution Service Headquarters
              50 Ludgate Hill
              London
              EC4M 7EX


              Dear Mr Newell

              We spoke on the telephone yesterday about the disclosure of an alleged
              conversation. I have previously asked your advise about this subject and during the
              course of the conversation it becam e apparent that the papers which I hold may be
              more extensive that those which you hold. In order to ensure that we are both in
              possession of the sam e material I forward herewith everything in my possession.

             You should receive the following documents;

              1.      A two page report dated 12 April 1990 b                    y             l             0 the Chief
                      Constable.

             2.      A one p age note for file by Acting Chief Constable Peter Hayes dated 9 May
                     1990 with hand written annotations by Richard Wells, Chief Constable.

             3'       * tw° pa9e hand written letter from Richard Wells to Alan (probably Alan Green
                      then Director of Public Prosecutions) dated 4 July 1990.

             4.       A two page letter from Alan Green, Director of Public Prosecutions to Richard
                      Wells dated 9 July 1990.

             5.      A three p age letter dated 18 July 1990 from Peter Metcalfe (Solicitor with
                     Hammond Suddard) to Richard Wells.

             6.     A one page letter dated 23 July 1990 from Richard Wells to Alan Green.

            7.      A four page fax containing an opinion by Anthony Hooper QC dated 27 July


            8.       A one p age letter dated 23 July 1990 from Sir John Woodcock, Chief HMI to
                     Richard Wells.


                              Police Headquarters
                              Snig Hill
                              Sheffield S3 8LY
                              Tel: 0114 220 2020 ^   £   3 ^ 4 3   D te ,   „ 2 m 4 !]
1 2 - A U G . ' 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 4 1   S. Y. P. CHI E F DEPT           T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1   8481   P. 0 0 2




             9.       A one page letter dated 2 August 1990 from Richard Wells to Peter Metcalfe.

              10. A two page file note dated 2 August 1990 from Richard Wells to the Deputy
                  Chief Constable.                                                     H y

             11.      A one page file note dated 16 August 1990 by Peter Hayes, Deputy Chief
                      Constable.

                                           ^                  in South Yorkshire Police and he is


             Please telephone me when you have had a chance to consider these papers.

             Yours sincerely




            Ian Daines
1 2 - AUG. ’ 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 4 2       S. Y. P. CHI EF DEPT                    TEL:0114 2523481                 8481      P. 0 0 5



                                                          STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL


                                                                                      DCC/
                                                                                      9   M 3^       ±z / 3 Q



              NOTE FOR PILE;


              D IS C L O S U R E



              Was contacted by Peter Metcalf this date concerning the above, who said
              that on reflection he thought it would be wrong and perhaps even dangerous
              for me or South Yorkshire Police to "consume its own smoke" regarding the
              disclosure.

              His view is that this matter ought to be considered by someone other than
              the South Yorkshire Police as it may indicate possible criminal offences,
              for example, 'conspiracy to pervert the course of justice' or 'misuse of
              public office'.

              Mr Metcalf suggested that one way forward would be through Mr Wells who
              has been uninvolved in Hillsborough, then possibly through the Chief HMI
              to another Chief Constable, who may take Counsel's opinion or deal with
              the matter as he sees fit.

              I told him that I regarded his comments above as absolutely confidential
              to me as Acting Chief Constable as his client and he agreed this was so.




              Acting Chief Constable




                               T vvjivuv-


                                                                                                                  Cp*-.


                                                       H c.tc.AaJP' 3                S£C_/
                                   fV i-c v ^   H r> \C -vc_   3 —              -   — - «        ■

                                                                        A?- ’ L(- M£rr£fi: 'T=- >
                                                                       TFXKPHONE:                          S O U T H VOKKS1I5RK P O LIC K

                                                                       SHK.FFIELD (07J 2) 76S52Z             p o l i c f : h f ; a d q i / a r t f ;b s

                                                                       Tfci.KX: M799ti                          SNIG H IL L

                                                                       FAX: 10742) S23243                          S H K F T I E U ) S3 Hl.Y
8481




                                                                       R B WLLLS QPM MA                                 j '-n    ■3     d
                                                                       Cl HICK COfSSTABLF.
TEL:01 14 2523481




                                                                            V u,            K

                                                                                                   \/V ^

                        G*v.                          CA     ?v>
                                       _✓___

                         {/IvVA^            ^ Cr^PwKWwU-
                             *W X £.**£e              c .^ - f
                                                                                                                       V                  w-t Vcjb

                         ^           ^ V;_ ^w-V_ S
S. Y. P. CHIEF DEPT




                             tl'V*   >2..V.vV/(lA,iY(iK- /         -




                      V -      \ ’r
                        l-\ 'i <'-•(_
14:43
AUG. ’ 9 9 (THU)




                                                  *
1 2 - A U G . ' 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 4 4            S, Y, P, CHI E F DEPT                                    T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1     8481                    P, O i l




           HAMMOND SUDDARDS
                                             S OLI CI TORS
                                                                                                                                         EMPIRE HOUSE
                                                 PETER C- METCALF           DAVID W. K, ARMTTAGE       CONSULTANTS:
           ALAN 1. BOTTOMLEY                                                                                                             10 PICCADILLY
                                                 CHAlSTOPHEft W. JONES      J. PATRICK MITCHELL        ROGER W- SUDDARDS c at
           D, TREVOR LEWIS                                                                                                               BRADFORD B 01 3LR
                                                 ANDREW R. JORDAN              CHRISTOPHER MARKS       SIR DESMOND HEAP
           MICHAEL E. GREGSON
                                                 SIMON R. B- STELL             MICHAEL S. HENLEY        IAN W. WHITSON                   TELEPHONE (0Z74) 734700
           JOH N D . DE MAIM
                                                 SIMON R. INMAN                ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMITH
            m ic h a e l l s h e p h e r d
                                                                                                                                         TELEX 517201
            PETER N. WILBRAHAM                   RICHARD W. WADE-SMTTH         PH1UP W. HARLING

            J. RICHARD ARCHER                     JOHN & BECKETT               WILLIAM N. DOWNS                                          D.X. NO. 11720
            BARBARA W. FRANCE                     a N. IAN GREENFIELD          LUCCl DAMMONE
                                                                                                                                         FAX (0274) 737547
                                                  STEPHEN GALE                 ANDREW H. McDOUGALL
            C. NOEL HUTTON
            JO H N H .G . HELLER                  MARK W. HILTON
            IAN R SHUTTLEWORTH                    RICHARD BURNS



            OUR REF-                 PCM/P AB                      YOUR REF.                                          DATE        1 8 th    J u lY '      1990




             Dear Richard,

             Hillsborough
             Further to our telephone conversation, I attach the formal letter
             of advice to which I referred.
              Please let me know if there is anything further I can do.


              Yours sincerely,




              Peter C. Metcalf




                R. Wells Esq.,
                Chief Constable,
                South Yorkshire Police,
                Police Headquarters,
                Snig Hill,
                SHEFFIELD S 3 8LY.
            *                                                                             *
                 LEEDS OFFICES:              BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/S OXFORD PLACE UEEDS IS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                                             JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426068________________

                                                        THIS RBM IS REGULATED BY W E LAW SOCIETY N THE CONCTJGT OF rA/ESTMENT BUSINESS
1 2 - A U G . ' 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 4 4   S. Y. P. CHI E F DEPT   T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1   8481           P. 0 1 0



                                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
               TELEPHONE:
                                                                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS
               SHEFFIELD (0742) 168522
                                                                                   SNIG HILL
               TELEX: 547996
                                                                                      SHEFFIELD S3 8LY
                FAX: (0742) 523243


                R B WELLS QPM MA
                                                                                             23 July 1990
                CHIEF CONSTABLE


                                                                    personal and             cokfidential




                A Green Esq QC
                Director of Public Prosecutions
                4/12 Queen A n n e 's Gate
                London SW1H 9A2




                 Thank you, again, for your letter of 9 July.  1 understand clearly what
                 you say and can now confirm that there was no original note made of
                 conversation in question.

                 Would you be kind enough to run your professional eye across the attached
                 letter provided by our solicitors?

                  The last paragraph suggests that, with a view to the matters being seen
                  to be thoroughly examined, you might seek Counsel's opinion on the angle
                  now introduced, which I perceive to be fresh.   This thought is offered,
                  I ’m sure, only in the spirit of canvassing the widest of independent
                  view.

                  1 am due shortly to go back to                 Originating the report and
                  would  like   to do  so   with  the   maximum   possible   collateral for
                  open-handedness. I do hope that this final enquiry will not prove       e
                  last straw on the burden of your office.      I anticipate publicity when
                  I have s e e n a n d    we should be seen to have tried our best.




                   Richard Wells




                   Enc
12-AUG. ’ 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 3 3   S. Y. P. CHIEF DEPT                      TEL--01 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1          8481                      P. 002
                                      v. -y         a         ■   ..   ■: i   \
                                 Fromt Sir John Woodcock CBE, QFM, CBIM.
                                                                                               H o m e Office
                                                                                  hm   chief in s p e c t o r of c o n s t a b u l a r y
                                                                                               QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                                                LONDON SW1H 9AT



                                                                                                      23rd July 1990.




                                              HR‘   WTT.T-snnprtTTCK D ISA STER

                 Thank you for bringing to my notice the details of the
            report submitted by         I               Itouching upon remarks
            alleged to have been made in his presence by the Rt Hon Lord
            Justice Taylor to Geoffrey Dear {then Chief Constable of the West
            Midlands Police) on "isth April 1990 at Hillsborough.

                 As agreed, sir Clive Whitmore, Permanent Under Secretary of
            State at the Home Office, and myself saw Lord Justice Taylor by
            appointment at 9.30am on Friday, 20th July 1990, at the Royal
            Courts of Justice in London.     Sir Clive outlined the details
            contained in the report which Lord Justice Taylor immediately
            rejected and described as nonsense. Understandably he could not
            recall the details of what was discussed but was perfectly clear
            that there had been no comment as alleged by the


                 At 4.30pm the same day I saw Hr Geoffrey Dear, H.M.
            Inspector of Constabulary, in his Worcester Office.         After
            outlining the allegations, he stated that he could not recall
            details of the conversation that took place but was emphatic that
            had there been any suggestion of bias, either then or later, he
            would have remembered and would have objected to it. He further
            emphasised that at all times Lord Justice Taylor was scrupulously
            fair, absolutely correct and quite unequivocal in his pursuit of
            the truth.

                 X feel that this matter cannot be taken any further.
            However, it is worth mentioning that although Lord Justice Taylor
            carried out” the inquiry alone, " he did have the benefit of
            advisers, one of whom was Mr Brian Johnson, the Chief Constable
            of Lancashire.

                  X trust this information will
             issue in question.




            R B Wells Esq. , QPM.
            Chief Constable,
            South Yorkshire Police.
12- AUG. ’ 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 3 3   S, Y. P. CHI EF DEPT              TEL:0114 2523481      8481     P. 0 0 1




          TELEPHONE:                                                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

          SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                         POLICE HEADQUARTERS

         TELEX: 547996                                                      S M C HILL

          FAX: (0742) 523243                                                  SHEFFIELD S3 8LY



          R B WELLS QPM MA
          CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                        2 August 1990




          P Metcalf Esq
          Hammond Suddard
          Empire House
          10 Piccadilly                                                          CONFIDENTIAL
          Bradford BDl 3LB




          It   was good to speak to             you on the telephone yesterday morning about
          the   latest  developments             in the confidential report we    have been
          discussing.

          I now enclose a letter to me from Sir John Woodcock dated 23 July 1990#
          in    which he describes what happened when the detail of thereport from
                    was presented     toLord Justice Taylor and, similarly#to Geoffrey
          Dear.    I also enclose, as promised, the opinion of Counsel sought by
          the Director of Public Prosecutions at your suggestion, and you will see
          that, in Anthony Hooper's view, the conduct alleged would amount to an
          offence if it were seen by a court as an agreement to conduct an
          investigation in a biased way.   The opinion goes on to say that the words
          reported, even if accurately remembered, would not araour.t to such an
          agreement and prosecution, therefore, is not viable.

          My next stage is to have            seen to let him know the full extent
          of what we have done on his behalf.    The last line of            | report
          indicates that he respects the confidence of the circumstances and I
          will see that this is reinforced when he is seen, though in a way which
          encourages him to confidence of his own volition; I have discussed with
          you already my fear that an arbitrarily imposed 'gag' will only add insult
          to injury.   Much of what            reported is now out and about since
          his discussion with colleagues (which he also reports) and I think that
          this development will be too much for one man to hold unto himself.




           Richard Wells




           Encs
1 2 -AUG. ’ 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 3 6   S . Y . P. CHI EF DEPT              T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1     8481          P. 0 0 7



             FILE NOTE TO DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                     2 August 1990



             You have        been following with me my      pursuit    of            report dated
             12 April        1990 to the point where                  should now be seen and told
             the outcome.

             Unfortunately, |         | is on annual leave                   and when
             he comes back I shall be away.    I do not think that this matter should
             be held until my return and we are agreed that you will see him in my
             place as soon after his resumption as possible.

             The following are the points which I think you should make to

              1.    From the moment that, encouraged by Superintendent Bettison, he made
                    his written report, the substance of that report was taken seriously-
                               .._  I         I     _ 1 . >1 < T..    1J      Ua K/>11
                    Notwithstanding __________ own doubts that he would not be believed
                    (because of his junior rank) you and I have acted on the assumption
                    that his report was an accurate and honest recollection of a
                    conversation which took place-

              2.    You felt that the gravity of the allegation warranted my personal
                    knowledge and intervention as the new Chief Constable as soon as
                    practicable after my taking up office, and that you did so.

                    We discussed                         report and agreed that it needed                            action.
                    In the first instance, it was to be one of the subjects covered in
                    a Senior Command discussion of the various aspects of the Hillsborough
                    aftermath.   In the event, that discussion h as not yet been able to
                    take place and so I took action in respect of           report outside
                    the framework of any general Hillsborough deliberations

                     On 2 July I telephoned Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddard, and Sir
                     John Woodcock the HMC1C, to discuss the merits of what I intended
                     to do with [          report, namely to send it to the Director of
                     Public Prosecutions. Both parties agreed.

              5.     X sent a copy         of the reportin confidence for the personal attention
                     of the DPP in         advance of a private meeting with him on 9 July 1990,
                     by which time         he would have had time to absorb the contents and to
                     have formed an        opinion.

               6.    When I met the Director, it was his professional view that no criminal
                     offence was disclosed.   In a letter to me, dated the same day, he
                     confirmed that opinion in writing, saying in effect that it was now
                     a matter for me.

                     After further conversations with Peter Metcalf and, as a courtesy,
                     with our own HMI Mr SampSon, I determined to see Sir John Woodcock
                     and did so on 18 July.    Sir John's view on hearing the detail of
                     the report and of the Director's opinion was that we should both
                     consult Sir Clive Whitmore, the Permanent Under-Secretary of State
                     at the Home Office, since Lord Justice Taylor had been appointed
                     by the Home Secretary.

               a.    In discussion with Sir John and Sir Clive that same day, and on two
                     occasions, it was determined - and 1 agreed - that the best approach
                     would be for Sir John (representing an independent police approach)
12-JUG.' 99(THU| 1 4 :3 6   S. V. P. C H I E F DEPT     TEL:0114 252348 1 8481         P. 0 0 8



               and Sir Clive (representing the Home Secretary's     concern) to see
               Lord Justice Taylor in order to acquaint him with          report.

          9.   On 20 July 1990 Sir Clive and Sir John saw Lord Justice Taylor.
               Sir John reports, in a letter dated 23 July 1990 to me, that Lord
               Justice Taylor immediately rejected the detail of the report and
               described it as nonsense.

          10. On the same day Sir John, alone, saw Geoffrey Dear.     Mr Dear's
              response was that he could not recall details of the conversation
              that had taken place, but that he was emphatic that had there been
              any suggestion of bias, then or later, he would have remembered it
              and would have objected to it.

           11. While this process was in train, Peter Metcalf had suggested that
               there might be one more angle to explore in respect of possible
               criminality, and he wrote me a letter dated 18 July 1990 suggesting
               that I explore with the DPP the further possibility of an offence
               of effecting a public mischief.

           12. I wrote, as a consequence of Peter Metcalf's letter, °n 23 July 1990
               to the Director of Public Prosecutions asking him to consider this
               further suggestion and to ask if he would seek independent Counsel's
               opinion on the point of law.     This was now, of course, after the
               Judge and Geoffrey Dear had been seen.       It meant that, had the
               Director or the independent Counsel come back with an acknowledgement
               that a criminal offence could have been committed, then I would have
               had to have caused Lord Justice Taylor and Geoffrey Dear to be seen
               and a statement taken under caution.

           13. In the event, independent Counsel in the person of Anthony Hooper
               QC reviewed the facts as reported and concluded that they, as
               reported, fell short of a criminal offence.

           14. My remaining actions    have been confinedto telling parties involved
               of this final   opinion and to having          seen in order that he
               may know the     amount of energy we have put into following up his
               report, and the outcome.

           15. That outcome is not altogether satisfactory; a blunt denial of
               something equally strongly asserted seldom brings satisfaction to
               either party.    I can honestly, and with the best interests of the
               Force at heart, see no obvious further avenue to explore.

           16. I would like you to thank           ^ for having the courage to make
               the report.   I see no evident reason why he should have done so had
               it not been the truth as he heard it.

            17. Short of further, unexpected light being shed on the inconclusive
                result - in which case 1 will happily take up the cudgels again -
                I think, with regret, that we must regard the matter as closed.




            Chief Constable
12- AUG. ’ 9 9 (THU) 1 4 : 3 7    S. Y. P. CH I E F DEPT     T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1   8481             P. 0 0 9


                                                                        DCC/
                                                                        16 August 1990



           NOTE FOR FILE;




           With reference to your 'Note for File' of 2 August 1990 concerning                         the
           earlier revelations from             in respect of Lord Justice Taylor                     and
           Mr Geoffrey Dear, as requested 1 saw          this date.

           I informed him in some detail of the action taken since the submission of
           his report and of the outcome.

            I told him you applauded him for bringing this information to light                        and
            saw it as a responsible and, in some ways, courageous act on his part.

                      was extremely grateful for the       action      taken.          He   agrees   there
            appears now nothing further which can done.

            He told me that when the purported comments were made the car was stationery
            and he is absolutely clear that his version of the conversation is correct.




                                 Constable
       HILLSBOROUGH - CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS SURROUNDING
                       REPORT OF


Date            Item
12 April 1990   Report bj
9 May 1990      Police file note by Assistant Chief Constable
4 July 1990     Letter: R Wells, Chief Constable, to DPP (Alan Green)
9 July 1990     Letter: DPP to R Wells
18 July 1990    Letter: Hammond Suddards to R Wells
23 July 1990    Letter: R Wells to DPP
27 July 1990    Opinion of Anthony Hooper QC
23 July 1997    Minute: C Enzor to D Sharpling
30 July 1997    Minute: D Sharpling (recipient unknown)
7 August 1997   Letter: D Sharpling to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
4 August 1999   Discussion paper: G Croston
                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                              R e f:

                                                                              Station/Dept:
        To:       Chief Constable                                             Date:
                                                                                              12 April 1990



              SUBJECT:     HILLSBOROUGH D IS A S T E R   - 15   A P R IL   1989


                  I have to report that on Tuesday, 18 April 1989, having been
                  cancelled from a                                     at ;     ;
                                   I was deputed to work a duty of 9.00 am to 5-00 pm
                  driving the black Staff Granada motor vehicle.  My initial duty was
                  to attend at the Police Headquarters, Sheffield, and to be at the
                  disposal of Lord Justice Taylor and the officers from West Midlands
                  who were coming up to conduct enquiries into the Hillsborough
                  Disas t e r .

                  Together with the other Staff car, I attended at the Midland Train
                  Station to collect Lord Justice Taylor, and conveyed him to the
                  Police Headquarters for a meeting with the Chief Constable.  Later
                  that date, I again transported Lord Justice Taylor to Hillsborough
                  Football Ground in the black Staff Granada.   I waited outside the
                  stadium for his return, together with the other Staff cars and
                  after he had received a conducted tour of the Leppings Lane end at
                  Hillsborough Football Ground, he returned to the vehicle, briefly
                  speaking to the press that were gathered outside, prior to again
                  sitting in the rear of the car.

                  At this time he was joined by Mr Dear, the then Chief Constable of
                  West Midlands Police, both men being seated in the rear of the
                  Staff car.   Prior to the vehicle setting off back to Headquarters,
                  Lord Justice    Taylor and Mr Dear started a conversation, which I
                  clearly heard, Lord Justice Taylor saying to Mr Dear, "I SUPPOSE
                  YOU REALISE THAT TO GIVE THIS INQUIRY ANY CREDIBILITY WE HAVE TO
                   APPORTION THE MAJORITY OF THE BLAME ON THE       POLICE?"    Mr Dear
                  acknowledged   this by saying, "I SUPPOSE WE DO."   I then drove them
                  around to Leppings Lane where Lord Justice Taylor alighted from the
                  vehicle  for    a short time to look at the       turnstiles,   before
                  returning to the vehicle - after which both gentlemen were returned
                  to Headquarters.   The general conversation throughout this journey
                  revolving around the logistics of setting up the Inquiry and where
                  they were going to site their offices to run the Inquiry from.

                  During the course of my duties that day, I also transported the ACC
                  of West Midlands, Mr Jones, to Hammerton Road Police Station, where
                  the Incident Room was.

                  On concluding duty at 6.00 pm that night, I returned home and
                  discussed the conversation I had overheard with my wife,
                                       , and although angry at the time about the comment
                  that was said, I decided there was little point in submitting a
                  report about this matter for what good is it - a mere                word
                  against an eminent Judge and a Chief Constable - and I believe that
                  little        good   would  have   come   out from me  disclosing    this
                   . .-,.. - ,- - - ->          :    ^    v   n  -       - - "’q.jo . t was




                  realise what an injuscice was likely to be done.
Gen/2
                              - 2 -




Subject -   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989



However, having discussed this matter recently with Superintendent
Bettison, I feel it only right that the record be put straight.  I
still believe that no one will take my word against the other two
gentlemen but pass the information for your consideration.

I have been asked to treat this matter in the strictest confidence and
I will do so.
                            STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL



                                                     DCC/
                                                     9 May 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:



DISCLOSURE



Was contacted by Peter Metcalf this date concerning the above, who said
that on reflection he thought it would be wrong and perhaps even dangerous
for me or South Yorkshire Police to "consume its own smoke" regarding the
disclosure.

His view is that this matter ought to be considered by someone other than
the South Yorkshire Police as it may indicate possible criminal offences,
for example, 'conspiracy to pervert the course of justice' or 'misuse of
public office'.

Mr Metcalf suggested that one way forward would be through Mr Wells who
has been uninvolved in Hillsborough, then possibly through the Chief HMI
to another Chief Constable, who may take Counsel's opinion or deal with
the matter as he sees fit.

I told him that I regarded his comments above as absolutely confidential
to me as Acting Chief Constable as his client and he agreed this was so.




Acting Chief Constable




                                                ^    cv_
TELEPHONE:
                                                                                SO U T H Y ORKSH IR E P O L IC E
S H E F F I E L D (0742) 768522
                                                                                     PO LICE HEADQUARTERS
T E L E X : 547996
                                                                                      SNIG H ILL
FAX: (0742) 523243
                                                                                        S H E F F I E L D S3 SLY


R B W E L L S QP Vl M A

C H IE F CONSTABLE
                                                                                 A- ■             -3c




         IV                       V'Vt—^                                                   V=»

                                                                          v> CvTv.


     T *                           c \^           «a.      ' b o —X T ’

        c C fo                     in                   “jJ r O S   '



        \




                                                           s



    ■V>»             <r~v ^                      -^ (W O

                                           W^_   5r-e_ri <                  ^ Cj—-a <jwo^A.VI-

    u                                                                                                 \\
V             V-s—




       v * l_ ^         crs/tS "'i ^




    C O N F I D E N T ! 1!
                                                      D IR E C T O R O F P U B L IC P R O S E C U T IO N S
                                                              4-12 Q U E E N A N N E S G A T E
                                                                  L O N D O N SW 1H 9 A Z

                                                                    T e l e p h o n e 071-273 8098
         (fjwojy
                                                                    Fax           071-222 0802

 Allan D . G re e n Q C




                              PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


Richard Wells Esq QPM MA                                                           9 juiy 1990
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY




D       l*     *


                             RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



Thank you very much for coming to see me today about this
matter on which you have sought my advice.


I have considered the report by           It is dated 12 April
1990 but relates to an incident which occurred on 18 April
1989. I assume that          who was driving the Staff car,had
no opportunity to make any note of the fragment of conversation
at the time. When did he first make any written note ? Plainly
it is vital to assess how accurately ________ heard and
remembered the precise words used,since a small difference in
what was heard or recalled may be crucial to the interpretation
of what was said.


On the assumption that ]      ~~| heard and recalled the words
spoken accurately and that they expressed an improper intention
(and on the further assumption that two very senior public
figures would have expressed such an intention in front of a
third party who was a South Yorkshire police driver) the
question arises whether there is any prima facie evidence of a
criminal offence. I do not believe that there is.I think that a
conspiracy to pervert the course of public justice must relate
to the course of actual or potential civil or criminal
proceedings,and not to the conduct of a non-statutory inquiry
set ud bv the Home Secretary.There is no evidence here of any



                    Oy    H.GiuQ     I    . ;;   .■
criminal proceedings (ibid.para.24-49).
It is therefore a matter for you to decide what further action
you should take. Plainly it would be open to you to consult Sir
John Woodcock or Sir Clive Whitmore at the Home Office. If you
wished to show this letter to Sir John or Sir Clive,I would
have no objection whatever.
H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s
                             S O L I C I T O R S
ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY               PETER C. METCALF               DAVID W K. ARMITAGE   CONSULTANTS:              EMPIRE HOUSE
0 . TREVOR LEWIS                CHRISTOPHER W. JONES           J. PATRICK MITCHELL   ROGER W. SU00ARDS cae     10 PICCADILLY
MICHAEL E. GREGSON              ANDREW R JORDAN                CHRISTOPHER MARKS     SIR DESMOND HEAP          BRADFORD 8 0 1 3LR
JOHN 0 . 0 6 MAIN               SIMON R. B. STELL              MICHAEL S. HENLEY     IAN W. WHITSON
MICHAEL L SHEPHERD              SIMON R INMAN                  ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMITH                      TELEPHONE (0274) 734700

PETER N. WILBRAHAM              RICHARO W. WADE-SMITH          PHIUP W. HAfiUNG                                TELEX 517201
J. RICHARO ARCHER               JOHN G. BECKETT                WILLIAM N. DOWNS
                                                                                                               D.X. NO. 11720
BARBARA W. FRANCE               G. N. IAN GREENFIELD           LUCCI DAMMONE
C. NOEL HUTTON                  STEPHEN GALE                   ANDREW H. McDOUGALL                             FAX (0274) 737547
JOHN H. G. HELLER               MARK W HILTON
IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH             RICHARO BURNS



o u rre f.          PCM/PAB                     y o u rre f.                                    o a te       18th July,            1990



Dear         Sir,

Hillsborough

We refer to re c e n t tel e p h o n e d i s c u s s i o n s and,                                having       reviewed          the
authorities, we have the following comments:


             1.      T h e c o m m o n law o f f e n c e of c o n s p i r a c y was a b o l i s h e d
                      by t h e C r i m i n a l L a w A c t 1977, s a v e s p e c i f i c a l l y in
                      r elation to conspi r a c y to d e f r a u d and conspiracy
                      to e n g a g e in c o n d u c t w h i c h w o u l d t e n d t o c o r r u p t
                      public morals or outrage public decency.

             2.      Subject to the exceptions above the statutory
                     o f f e n c e of c o n s p i r a c y c a n o n l y b e c h a r g e d in
                     r e s p e c t of a c o n s p i r a c y w h i c h n e c e s s a r i l y involves
                     the commission of an individual criminal offence.

             3.      In o u r view, the c o n d u c t u n d e r c o n s i d e r a t i o n w o u l d
                     n o t n e c e s s a r i l y h a v e i n v o l v e d t h e c o m m i s s i o n of
                     t he o f f e n c e of p e r v e r t i n g the c o u r s e of justice.
                     As has b e e n p o i n t e d out, the i n q u i r y to be
                     c o n d u c t e d was n o t j u d i c i a l in n a t u r e .

             4.      U n t i l 1974, it wa s w i d e l y b e l i e v e d t h a t t h e r e was
                      a c o m m o n l a w o f f e n c e of " e f f e c t i n g a p u b l i c
                     mischief".          This was often used to charge persons
                     making false statements to the Police about
                      imaginary crimes, but convictions were also


                                                                                                                   / __         contd.


The      Chief Constable,
           ’/ y- t y ,3 p n 1 1 r*o


             r’ -i- - -L,
SHEFFIELD               S3    8LY.

LEEDS OFFICES:          BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                        JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426860
I0MMOND SUDDARDS                                                                                   RW3E N O .    2




               o b t a i n e d for\ s u c h d i v e r s e a c t s a s d i s s e m i n a t i n g
               rumours calculated to cause w i d e s p r e a d alarm and
               building defective air raid shelters.

         5.    W e h a v e n o d o u b t t h a t if t h e r e w a s s u c h a c o m m o n
               law o f f e n c e as e f f e c t i n g a p u b l i c mischief, then
               t h e c o n d u c t w i t h w h i c h w e a r e c o n c e r n e d (if it
               c o u l d be m a d e out) w o u l d i n v o l v e a c o m m i s s i o n of
               that crime.               We reach this c o n c l u s i o n because the
               i n q u i r y w a s c o m m i s s i o n e d b y t h e S e c r e t a r y of State,
               e x p r e s s l y for the p u r p o s e of p r o d u c i n g
               r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s i n t e n d e d t o e n s u r e t he. f u t u r e
               p r e s e r v a t i o n of h u m a n life.          In o u r view, to
               c o m m e n c e t h e i n q u i r y needed' t o p r o d u c e s u c h
               recommendations, having d e l i b e r a t e l y pre-judged the
               co n c l u s i o n s , m u s t a m o u n t to t h e e f f e c t i n g of a
               public mischief.

         6.    H o w e v e r , in t h e c a s e of D P P v W i t h e r s (1974)
               3AER984, the H o u s e of L o r d s r u l e d t h a t c o n s p i r a c y
               to e f f e c t a public m ischief, in t h e s e n s e of an
               agreement to do an act which, a l t h o u g h not
               u n l a w f u l in itself, w a s e x t r e m e l y i n j u r i o u s to t h e
               p u b l i c , is n o t a n o f f e n c e k n o w n t o t h e law.         That
               case concerned impersonation of o f f icials by
               i n q u i r y a g e n t s a t t e m p t i n g to o b t a i n s i g h t of
               government and financial records.                           The Judgments
               of t h e v a r i o u s l a w L o r d s m a d e c l e a r t h a t t h e
               o f f e n c e c o u l d s t i l l b e c h a r g e d i f , a n d o n l y if ,
               the c o n d u c t c o m p l a i n e d of w a s of a t y p e w h i c h had
               a lready been recognised at comm o n law.or
               s t a t u t o r i l y d e f i n e d as a crime.


We are, therefore, d rawn to a g r e e w i t h                  t h e c o n c l u s i o n s of the DPP,
albeit reluctantly, because we do feel                          t h a t if s u c h c o n d u c t w e r e
m a d e out, t h e n it o u g h t to d i s c l o s e a n        offence.

Finally, we sh o u l d say that we do not h o l d our s e l v e s out as experts
on c r i m i n a l law.       It, t h e r e f o r e , o c c u r s t o u s t h a t if, f r o m t h e
p o i n t o f v i e w o f S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e , t h i s m a t t e r is t o b e s e e n
a s h a v i n g b e e n t h o r o u g h l y e x a m i n e d , t h e D i r e c t o r m i g h t b e a s k e d if
h e w o u l d be p r e p a r e d to o b t a i n a n e x t e r n a l o p i n i o n f r o m L e a d i n g
Counsel.


Yours     faithfully,
TELEPHONE:                                              S O U T H Y O R K S H IR E POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                   P O L I C E HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                               SNIG HILL

FAX: {0742) 523243                                            SHEFFIELD S3 8LY



R B WELLS QPM MA

CHIEF CONSTABLE                                                      23 July 1990



                                                   PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL


A Green Esq QC
Director of Public Prosecutions
4/12 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AZ




Thank you, again, for your letter of 9 July.  I understand clearly what
you say and can now confirm that there was no original note made of the
conversation in question.

Would you be kind enough to run your professional eye across the attached
letter provided by our solicitors?

The last paragraph suggests that, with a view to the matters being seen
to be thoroughly examined, you might seek Counsel's opinion on the angle
now introduced, which I perceive to be fresh.   This thought is offered,
I'm sure, only in the spirit of canvassing the widest of independent
view.

I am due shortly to go back to |   _____________ | originating the report and
would   like  to  do   so  with   the   maximum     possible   collateral for
open-handedness. I do hope that this final enquiry will not prove the
last straw on the burden of your office.         I anticipate publicity when
I have seen          ind we should be seen to have tried our best.




Richard Wells




Enc
                                                                O P I NI ON


1.         I have          been        asked            to    advise        whether           certain           evidence          in    a
report dated                12th April                  1990 could s u pport                  a prosecution                 for any
criminal             offence.              I      shall        proceed           on     the       assumption               that    the
writer          of    the       report             has        recorded           that     evidence             with        complete
accuracy.


2.         I    have        considered                   whether           the        evidence               could    support           a
prosecution                for        an    offence             of    perverting              the       course        of    justice
or    conspiracy                to     commit            such        an'offence.              Perverting              the    course
of     justice             is     a        common            law     offence           and        has        been     accurately
described             as        contempt                of    court        under        another              name     (Archbold,
Criminal             Pleading Evidence and Practice,                                      43rd Ed.,             para.       24-39.)
It h a s b e e n e s t a b l i s h e d b e y o n d a n y d o u b t                        that      t h e l a w of c o n t e m p t
does       not       apply        to       commissions                or     committees                 of    enquiry        of    the
kind       set       up    in    this            matter,           with     the       statutory              exception        of       an
enquiry             under       the Tribunals                   of E n q u i r y        (Evidence)              Act    1921:       see
Lutchmeeparsad                   Badry             v.    D.P.P.           [1983]        A.C.        297       (P.C.)        and    see
s e c t i o n 19 of t h e C o n t e m p t                     of C o u r t A c t 1 9 8 1 as c o n s t r u e d b y L o r d
Donaldson M.R.                   i n R.          v. L i v e r p o o l D a i l y p o s t            [1990]       2 W.L.R.          494,
at    501       (C.A.).               It       follows          that       the    evidence              could        not    support
a p r o s e c u t i o n f o r t h e o f f e n c e of p e r v e r t i n g t h e c o u r s e of j u s t i c e
or    conspiracy                thereto.


3.         I have further considered whether the evidence could support
a p r o s e c u t i o n f o r t h e o f f e n c e of m i s c o n d u c t b y a p e r s o n i n p u b l i c
office, a l s o an o f f e n c e a g a i n s t t h e c o m m o n law,                                    or fo r c o n s p i r a c y
to     commit             such        an         offence.            The     offence              has        been    defined           as
foilows:
           "It is an i n d i c t a b l e o f f e n c e at c o m m o n law for a p u b l i c
           officer            wilfully         and     without         reasonable            excuse      or
           j u s t i f i c a t i o n to n e g l e c t to p e r f o r m a d u t y i m p o s e d u p o n h i m
           either         by common          law or s t a t u t e . "     ( H a l s b u r y ’s L a w s   of
           E n g l a n d , 4 t h Ed., v o l u m e 11(1) r e - i s s u e , para. 292)
In    R.       v.    Dytham           [1979]             i'Q.B.        722       (C.A.        C.D.)           (which       provides
modern         authority               for        the        above definition),                    the        Court    said       that
the    offence             involves'
           "an       element:              o z      c u ip a o iiitv          w .u c r.      is     not        re s tric te d          to
        d i s h o n e s t y but w h i c h m u s t be of s u c h a d e g r e e that the
        m i s c o n d u c t i m p u g n e d is c a l c u l a t e d to i n j u r e t h e p u b l i c
        i n t e r e s t so as to call fo r c o n d e m n a t i o n a n d p u n i s h m e n t . "
        (At pp. 7 2 7 - 7 2 8 )
(The     editors           of    Archbold,             43rd         Ed.,        para          24-49           describe            the
offence        too    narrowly).


4.      In     R.    v.    Whitaker             [1914]         1        K.B.     1283          (C.C.A.),             a      public
officer        is    described            as:
        " a n o f f i c e r w h o d i s c h a r g e s a n y d u t y i n t h e d i s c h a r g e of
        w h i c h t h e p u b l i c a r e i n t e r e s t e d , m o r e c l e a r l y if h e is p a i d
        ou t of a f u n d p r o v i d e d         b y t h e p u b l i c . If t h e t a x e s g o t o
        supply his payment and                    the p u b l i c h a v e an interest in the
        d u t i e s h e d i s c h a r g e s , h e i s -a p u b l i c o f f i c e r . " ( A t p. 1 2 9 6 )
In     that     case       a     regimental               colonel              was       held           to    be    a       public
officer.        In D y t h a m        (above),            a police            officer          was       conceded            to    be
a       public       officer.             In    R.     v. L l e w e l 1 y n - J o n e s [ 1 9 6 8 ]             1    Q.B.         429
(C.A.       C.D.)     the       registrar            of    a   county           court          was       conceded            to    be
a    public     officer.             In    the       light         of     these          authorities                and      other
authorities           to be found in Russell                            on C r i m e 1 2 t h Ed.,               3 6 1 et seq.
and    Stephen's           Digest          of    the       Criminal             Law,          9th       Ed.,       p p.112-115
both persons              are public            officers.               However,           it m a y well               be    that,
for    reasons        of       public          policy,         a    person           in       the       position            of    the
first        speaker        mentioned             in       the          report           is i m m u n e         from         being
p u r s u e d in the ordinary courts:                          see Russell,                   above,          a t p.     362 and
Anderson        v.    Gorrie          [1895]         1 Q.B.         668.


5.      Any     public          officer          who      conducts             an    investigation                     with       the
deliberate           intention            of    concealing               the    truth           from the public                    by
falsely a t t r i b u t i n g b lame could, on the authorities, be convicted
of     the     offence          of     misconduct                  by     a     person             in        public         office
(subject        to a n y i m m u n i t y         from prosecution).                        Such a person would,
it s e e m s   likely,          be f o u n d to be u n d e r a legal                           d u t y to c o n d u c t           the
investigation              fairly         and     properly.               (As       to    the       duties          of      police
officers,           see    R.    v.       Commisioner               of     Police,             ex       parte       Blackburn
[1968]       2 Q.B.       118,       a t p.      135-136.)              Such conduct                would constitute
a    wilful     neglect,             without           reasonable               excuse             or        justification,
to p e r f o r m t h e duty.              An agreement              to c o n d u c t          an i n v e s t i g a t i o n in
that    way     could       constitute               a conspiracy                   t;    ■


6.      A     person       speaking             the       words         recorded              in    the        report        would
•
    not    thereby       commit        the    offence       of    misconduct         by     a       person   in
    p u b l i c o f f i c e or an a t t e m p t to c o m m i t t h a t o f f e n c e .    Talking about
    an    offence     that      one    might       commit    is   not,    of    course,         committing
    the    offence.       Nor    could       any    agreement       to   commit       the       offence      be
    inferred       from      those      words.       At     the   very     highest,             a    possible
    agreement       is   being        discussed.




                                                                               An'munjf tio o p e r y . u .
    5 Paper Buildings
    The Temple                                                                      27    July       1990
    London EC4
    071-583-6117
Dru Sharpling

    J ^       .
HILLSBOROUGH

          I enclose a bundle of papers comprising:

          •       letter from Chief Constable South Yorkshire Police to the then DPP of
                  4 August 1990;

                  Minute from Acting Chief Constable dated 9 May 1990;

                  Minute from                  of 12 April 1990;

          •       Letter from DPP to Chief Constable dated 9 July 1990;

          •       Letter from Chief Constable to DPP dated 23 July 1990;

          •       Letter from Hammond Suddards dated 18 July 1990;

          •       Counsel’s opinion dated 27 July 1990.

2         The issue is whether we should place the minute of 12 April 1990 on a schedule
           for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

3         Few people here know about the papers - they have been kept separately in the
           safe. As far as I know, they have not been referred to in the past and form no
           part of any decision making, recent or otherwise. I would not like to say for
           definite whether the material was seen by counsel who advised in 1990, but I
           doubt it.

4         I can not see that the information (assuming it to be were true), would have any
           impact on the case.

5         I suggest, as we discussed, that we are open with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
           that we say we have the item and, if necessary, copy it to him. We will need to
           explain how the minute came into our possession. We will need to consider
           whether any of the accompanying documentation needs to be mentioned. I think
           it is so unlikely to have any impact on the case that we do not need to bring it
           to the scrutiny’s attention.

Chris Enzor        •
Central Casework
23 July 1997_______
RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.   I attach a bundle of papers which upon reading will become self explanatory. Chris
     Enzor’s note sets out the position clearly.

2.   My own reaction is that we should be open with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and write
     separately indicating the nature of the material in our possession and its import.

3.   I agree with Chris that the information,'even if it were true, would have very little
      impact on the case.

4.   Before, however, I advise the Director I would be grateful if you could give an
     indication of the relationship between the CPS and the scrutiny for the purposes of
     disclosure. The nature of Mr Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny is informal but he
     will be talking to witnesses albeit in private.

5.   Although the decision will obviously be ours at the end of the day, I would be
     grateful for any advice on disclosure. My worry is that if we do not th en ________
     may (if he is still around) decide to break silence and we will be left holding the
     baby.

6.   Obviously these papers must have an extremely limited circulation.




Dru Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework
30 July 1997
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room *** r.j r
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT




RE:    THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


Further to the Director’s letter of 30 July 1997,1 enclose two schedules showing the material
held by the CPS.

As the Director indicated, the material falls into two distinct parts, the material relevant to
the 1990 decision not to prosecute and that relevant to the recent 1997 decision not to
prosecute.

The schedules are comprehensive and list all the material held at the CPS or viewed by the
CPS. All the material we hold is currently at United House in York. Rather than reproduce
in our own schedules all the lists contained in the West Midlands Police Report, I have
attached a copy of the master index of witnesses and documents as an appendix to the
schedule of pre August 1990 material.

You will no doubt wish to discuss access to the material. There is one further item which
is not covered on the 1990 schedule, about which the Chief Crown Prosecutor will be writing
to you separately.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                                 m
^Vliss D. H. Sharpling
 Thief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                         CPS

                                                                                                                r.ondon EC4M 7E X


                                                                                                 Switchboard:   0 1 7 1 -2 7 3 8 0 0 0
     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                          1                                             DX No:    3 0 0 8 5 0 Ludgate      EC4
     Hillsborough Scrutiny
     Room 528                                                                Facile nm.             273 8050
     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
     London                                                                D‘rect   L,’“: 017:- 273 1225
     SW1H 9AT
                                                                        Our Reference:


 L                                                      J               Your Referent*;


                                                                                                    7 August 1997



     Dear Sir

     RE: THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

     I am writing in connection with recent correspondence detailing schedules of material
     currently held or viewed by the CPS.

     As indicated, I am in possession of a police report dated 22 April 1990 and associated
     documents stemming from the remarks allegedly overheard by a                  made in
     conversation between the late Lord Chief Justice and a Chief Constable.

     The report d o es not relate to evidential material pertinent to the H illsborough disaster.

     I have taken the opportunity to discuss the matter with the Director (who is currently away
     from the office) who would, of course, be happy to discuss the matter with you.
     Alternatively, the material is available for inspection at this office or can be forwarded at
     your convenience. I look forward to hearing from you.

     Yours faithfully



       f^iw w L Sviw/mxLs



f * Dru Sharpling
     C h ief C row n Prosecutor
     Central Casew ork




                          Crown Prosecution' Service • Working in the interests of    jt*stice
                                                            CONFIDENTIAL

                              FILE NOTE

                   H ILLSBO R O U G H CASE


4 August 1999

RE: CONVERSATION BETWEEN LORD TAYLOR AND G DEARE IN 1989

Points for Discussion

      A conversation was overheard by               ivho was the driver for the above
      two persons on 18 April 1989, three days after the disaster

        made a report dated 12 April 1990 which went to the Chief
       _




      Constable of SYP (Richard WELLS).            had discussed the conversation
      with his wife                          and an undisclosed number of close
      work colleagues. At the time he was angry at the injustice but decided that he
      would not be listened to. He then discussed the matter with Supr.
      BETTINSON (presumably in 1990) and felt that the record should be put
      straight.

       On 4 July 1990, Richard WELLS wrote to the DPP, Alan GREEN enclosing a
       copy of the report, desiring that "truth is served" and requesting advice.

      A police file note o f 9 May 1990 of a conversation between the ACC and
      Peter Metcalf (Hammond Suddards solicitors) with the latter suggesting that
      as criminal offences could be involved it should go to Richard WELLS who
      had not been involved in the disaster.

5.    On 9 May 1990 the DPP wrote back to RW expressing the view that he did not
      think that there was prima facie evidence of a criminal offence. The offences
      he considered were Conspiracy to PCOJ and bribery of a public official.

6.    On 18 July 1990, Hammond Suddards wrote to RW with their review of the
      law. They reluctantly agreed with the conclusions of the DPP but considered
      that if there was such an offence as "effecting a public mischief' then it was
      committed here where there was deliberate pre-judgement of the conclusions
      of the Inquiry. They suggested the obtaining of an opinion from leading
      counsel.

7.     On 23 July 1990 this letter was passed to the DPP by RW.
Anthony Hooper QC provided an opinion dated 27 July 1990. He advised
that, on the basis that the conversation was accurately recorded, there was
insufficient evidence to support a prosecution for a conspiracy to PCOJ or for
misconduct in a public office.

There is no further correspondence on the subject until 23 July 1997 when CE
flagged up the matter to Dru as part of disclosure to the Hillsborough Scrutiny.
In the end Dru wrote to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on 7 August 1997 with the
are details of the information held and offering an inspection of the material.
There is no record of a reply on the file. I am awaiting a telephone call from
Chris BONE, who was the secretary to the scrutiny.

Key Issues:-

•    Ian DAINES, the ACC at SYP who is in charge the Hillsborough Archive,
    is concerned about disclosure of these sensitive papers in his possession.
    He is asking for the advice of the Director. Quite rightly he wants to
     ensure that the police act fully in accordance with their duty of disclosure
    under the common law.
•    The first main issue to consider is whether or not to disclose the details of
     the conversation. Is it relevant? If it is, is it so sensitive that PII applies?
    Do we or the police have a duty of disclosure?
•   Media interest: This matter does not yet appear to have brought to the
     attention of the press. Those officially aware of the conversation are the
     SYP, the CPS, the now Mr Justice Hooper, the police solicitors Hammond
     Suddards, and presumably the Hillsborough Scrutiny team. A leak from
     those sources should not be expected. The complainant,                           I
     spoke to his wife and a number of colleagues. There is a possibility that
    when the trial begins and receives the likely national coverage, that the
     memories of police officers may be jogged and occasion press reports of
     an establishment cover-up.
•   There is no reason to reconsider the 1990 decision that there was
     insufficient evidence of any criminal offence.
•   Relevance?: Whether or not the material is relevant to any of the issues in
     the private prosecution. If it is not relevant, as the 1997 minutes from CE
     and Dru would suggest, then with the courage of our convictions behind us
     we can withstand the onslaughts of the press and the media if (or more
     probably when) the conversation comes to light.
•   Duty of disclosure?: See the 1992 Guidelines re disclosure to third parties.
     The Crown Court can grant the HFSG a summons requiring the police to
     produce relevant statements and exhibits so as to permit the private
     prosecutor to comply with the general responsibilities of a prosecutor.
     There is no reason why that should not apply to us as well. Under the
     present policy it must be that we would have a duty to disclose relevant
     material or make a PII application to the court
•   If either the material is now seen as relevant and/or we wish an
     independent view on disclosure, then there are a number of avenues to
     consider. We could first obtain advice from Treasury Counsel, and then if
     required the police, by themselves or jointly with the CPS, could make an
     ex parte PII application, with or without notice, to the trial judge.
      •   Does PII apply?: Is there a need to maintain the confidentiality of the
          information because disclosure would be damaging to the public interest?
          If there is to be a PII application to the trial judge in accordance with the
          normal procedure Should it be type I, II or III?
      •   At this stage it should be noted that the Circuit presiding judge has
          reserved the case to himself. He is Mr Justice Anthony HOOPER!
      •   An advantage of an early PII application to the trial judge is that it deals
          with three main issues. The first of disclosure, the second that the trial
          judge has already been involved in giving an opinion on the material in
          question and the last to show (if the media make a meal of it) that the CPS
          and the SYP have behaved properly and in accordance with the interests
          of justice.
      •   The next hearing at the Crown Court on 3 September 1999 is to hear
          argument on disclosure.


George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
C j^ o r~ \

'^ V u ^ Q       ( p a p <£=3 i
VVJOo^ 3 0 ^            vj>c^   \               C iM gK V ~kb
\> Q       'C C L p V    iv _ v v M ^\ "JvV^O   CQ3<^>




  F     J W
      &S\ .*§>      i
 *


TELEPHONE:                                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                                 POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                                            SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


R B WELLS QPM MA
                                                                             u   -3 d
CHIEF CONSTABLE




                — ■'O'—       W    t— ^    ^-$~erb




     7*         l a .




                                                                                 \>—   5r


      <Xjsjw^


          U        S<wC^J>         -                 ^

     COa^           V<U                           ^W _^.                     S rs-^ Jr

     •W              C~v 'i        ^V"          >-*—^tY"W"0      ^ v—                  «—

     W . 'u r j ^         K   vA          V^_     SrCj-‘ <S^—7

                               ‘                  --•    -                             ^
                                      5 .R^fSLr^JS^_   .


 V       v jsjc v jO i        v -s—

oC b^ vZ^v .             *>     v_o^>.


     Vs_^*ifcr^     Va1_^>            r=^_^J^Ts
           ~ -   ■ -    .... -        ________________ -V-



      "'q .4 ; 1 o ■                                  ■             .




■■     Ll r l 5? 1 " •

     ■■ 1 : V ^ c       ■                                     ■ ■

       ,}.■'{ 't                  '

       I). 1 10

       2 1 . 1 ci‘ vi         1


       ,1.1- 'i 1 i                     •        ' ' "
       .! > ? W                               h V    c- ^ •
        ^ ■T i..                            JS * u ' a         .




      ~ .        '■         1 y ^ j.                         ■ '
                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                 Ref:
        From:                                                   Station/Dept:
    To:             Chief Constable                             Date:
                                                                                12 April 1990



                SUBJECT:     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989


                    I have to report that on Tuesday, 18 April 1 9 8 9 , having been
                    cancelled from a                                    at ____________
                                     I was deputed to work a duty of 9-00 am to 5-00 pm
                    driving the black Staff Granada motor vehicle.  My initial duty was
                    to attend at the Police Headquarters, Sheffield, and to be at the
                    disposal of Lord Justice Taylor and the officers from West Midlands
                    who were coming up to conduct enquiries into the Hillsborough
                    Disaster.

                    Together with the other Staff car, I attended at the Midland Train
                    Station to collect Lord Justice Taylor, and conveyed him to the
                    Police Headquarters for a meeting with the Chief Constable.  Later
                    that date, I again transported Lord Justice Taylor to Hillsborough
                    Football Ground in the black Staff Granada.   I waited outside the
                    stadium for his return, together with the other Staff cars and
                    after he had received a conducted tour of the Leppings Lane end at
                    Hillsborough Football Ground, he returned to the vehicle, briefly
                    speaking to the press that were gathered outside, prior to again
                    sitting in the rear of the car.

                    At this time he was joined by Mr Dear, the then Chief Constable of
                    West Midlands Police, both men being seated in the rear of the
                    Staff car.  Prior to the vehicle setting off back to Headquarters,
                    Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear started a conversation, which I
                    clearly heard, Lord Justice Taylor saying to Mr Dear, "I SUPPOSE
                    YOU REALISE THAT TO GIVE THIS INQUIRY ANY CREDIBILITY WE HAVE TO
                     APPORTION THE MAJORITY OF THE BLAME ON THE POLICE?"         Mr Dear
                    acknowledged this by saying, "I SUPPOSE WE DO."    I then drove them
                    around to Leppings Lane where Lord Justice Taylor alighted from the
                    vehicle for a short time to look at the turnstiles, before
                    returning to the vehicle - after which both* gentlemen were returned
                    to Headquarters.   The general conversation throughout this journey
                    revolving around the logistics of setting up the Inquiry and where
                    they were going to site their offices to run the Inquiry from.

                    During the course of my duties that day, I also transported the ACC
                    of West Midlands, Mr Jones, to Hammerton Road Police Station, where
                    the Incident Room was.

                    On concluding duty at 6.00 pm that night, I returned home and
                    discussed the conversation I had overheard with my wife,
                                     and although angry at the time about the comment
                    that was said, I decided there was little point in submitting a
                    report about this matter for what good is it - a mere _____ word
                    against an eminent Judge and a Chief Constable - and I believe that
                    little   good  would  have   come  out  from   me  disclosing  this
                    conversation prior to any Inquiry that was being made.        I was
                    however so annoyed that to left off steam I did mention it to my
                    close work colleagues for although I realised an official report
                    would have no ultimate benefit, what I needed was close friends to
                    realise what an injustice was likely to be done.
Gen/2
*




                                -   2   -




    Subject - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989




    However, having discussed this matter recently with Superintendent
    Bettison, I feel it only right that the record be put straight.  I
    still believe that no one will take my word against the other two
    gentlemen but pass the information for your consideration.

    I have been asked to treat this matter in the strictest confidence and
    I will do so.
                            STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL



                                                     DCCy
                                                     9 May 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:



DISCLOSURE



Was contacted by Peter Metcalf this date concerning the above, who said
that on reflection he thought it would be wrong and perhaps even dangerous
for me or South Yorkshire Police to "consume its own smoke" regarding the
disclosure.

His view is that this matter ought to be considered by someone other than
the South Yorkshire Police as it may indicate possible criminal offences,
for example, 'conspiracy to pervert the course of justice' or 'misuse of
public office'.

Mr Metcalf suggested that one way forward would be through Mr Wells who
has been uninvolved in Hillsborough, then possibly through the Chief HMI
to another Chief Constable, who may take Counsel's opinion or deal with
the matter as he sees fit.

I told him that I regarded his comments above as absolutely confidential
to me as Acting Chief Constable as his client and he agreed this was so.




Acting Chief Constable




                                                                  £
•
                                            D IR E C T O R O F P U B L IC P R O SE C U T IO N S
                                                    4 -1 2 Q U E E N A N N E S G A T E
                                                        LONDON SW 1H 9A Z

                                                         T e l e p h o n e 071-273 8098
                                                          F ax         071-222 0802

    Allan D. Green Q C




                         PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


    Richard Wells Esq QPM MA                                            9 July 1990
    Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
    Police Headquarters
    Snig Hill
    Sheffield S3 8LY




                         RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



    Thank you very much for coming to see me today about this
    matter on which you have sought my advice.


    I have considered the report by           It is dated 12 April
    1990 but relates to an incident which occurred on 18 April
    1989. I assume that         ^who was driving the Staff car,had
    no opportunity to make any note of the fragment of conversation
    at the time. When did he first make any written note ? Plainly
    it is vital to assess how accurately          heard and
    remembered the precise words used,since a small difference in
    what was heard or recalled may be crucial to the interpretation
    of what was said.


    On the assumption that          heard and recalled the words
    spoken accurately and that they expressed an improper intention
    (and on the further assumption that two very senior public
    figures would have expressed such an intention in front of a
    third party who was a South Yorkshire police driver) the
    question arises whether there is any prima facie evidence of a
    criminal offence. I do not believe that there is.I think that a
    conspiracy to pervert the course of public justice must relate
    to the course of actual or potential civil or criminal
    proceedings,and not to the conduct of a non-statutory inquiry
    set up by the Home Secretary.There is no evidence here of any
    bribery of a public official (see Archbold,43rd edition,volume
    2 at para.24-47) nor would there appear to have been misconduct
    by an officer of justice,since Lord Justice Taylor was not
    appointed by the Home Secretary to act as a judge in civil or
    criminal proceedings (ibid.para.24-49).
It is therefore a matter for you to decide what further action
you should take. Plainly it would be open to you to consult Sir
John Woodcock or Sir Clive Whitmore at the Home Office. If you
wished to show this letter to Sir John or Sir Clive,I would
have no objection whatever.
^ H a m m o n d Su d d a r d s
                        S O L I C I T O R S
 ALAN I. BOTTOMLEV           PETER C. METCALF              DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE           CONSULTANTS:                           EMPIRE HOUSE
 D. TREVOR LEWIS             CHRISTOPHER W. JONES          J. PATRICK MITCHELL            ROGER W. SUDDARDS ere                  lonccA onxY
 MICHAEL E. GREGSON          ANDREW R. JORDAN              CHRISTOPHER MARKS              SIR DESMOND HEAP                       BRADFORD BD1 3LR
 JOHN D. DE MAIN             SIMON R. B. STELL             MICHAEL S. HENLEY              IAN W. WHITSON
                                                           ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMITH
                                                                                                                                 TELEPHONE (0274) 734700
 MICHAEL L SHEPHERD          SIMON R. INMAN
 PETER N. WILBRAHAM          RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH         PHILIP W. HARLING                                                     TELEX 517201
 J. RICHARD ARCHER           JOHN G. BECKETT               WILLIAM N. DOWNS
                                                                                                                                 D.X. NO. 11720
 BARBARA W. FRANCE           G. N. IAN GREENFIELD          LUCC! DAMMONE
 C.   NOEL HUTTON            STEPHEN GALE                  ANDREW H. McDOUGALL                                                   FAX (0274) 7375 4 7

 JOHN H. G. HELLER           MARK W. HILTON
  IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH        RICHARD BURNS



 OUR REF.          PCM/PAB                     YOUR REF.                                                    DATE               18th July, 1990



  Dear Sir,

  Hillsborough

  We refer to recent telephone discussions and, having reviewed the
  authorities, we have the following comments:


            1.      The common law offence of conspiracy was abolished
                    by the Criminal Law Act 1977, save specifically in
                    relation to conspiracy to defraud and conspiracy
                    to engage in conduct which would tend to corrupt
                    public morals or outrage public decency.

            2.      Subject to the exceptions above the statutory
                    offence of conspiracy can only be charged in
                    respect of a conspiracy which necessarily involves
                    the commission of an individual criminal offence.

            3.      In our view, the conduct under consideration would
                    not necessarily have involved the commission of
                    the offence of perverting the course of justice.
                    As has been pointed out, the inquiry to be
                    conducted was not judicial in nature.

            4.      Until 1974, it was widely believed that there was
                    a common law offence of "effecting a public
                    mischief". This was often used to charge persons
                    making false statements to the Police about
                     imaginary crimes, but convictions were also

                                                                                                                                      /... contd.


  The Chief Constable,
  South Yorkshire Police,
  Police Headquarters,
  Snig Hill,
  SHEFFIELD S3 8LY.
                                                                      •

  LEEDS OFFICES;      BRITANNIA CHAMBERS 4 /5 OXFORD P U C E LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 5 572 0 2 FAX 444794/421199
                      JO S E PH S WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55365 FAX 426868

                                 THIS PRM IQ, REGULATED Bv "V-E LA1*; SOCIETY   THE C O -C 1 'CT C~ ^NV-3~VFNTr E 'J-M E S S
H ammond Suddards                                                                                 RAGENO.        2




               o b t a i n e d for such di v e r s e acts as d i s s e m i n a t i n g
               rumours calculated to cause widespread alarm and
               building defective air raid shelters.

               W e h a v e n o d o u b t t h a t if t h e r e w a s s u c h a c o m m o n
               law offence as effecting a p u b l i c mischief, then
               t h e c o n d u c t w i t h w h i c h w e a r e c o n c e r n e d (if it
               c o u l d be m a d e out) w o u l d i n v o l v e a c o m m i s s i o n of
               that crime.               We reach this conclusion because the
               i n q u i r y was c o m m i s s i o n e d by t h e S e c r e t a r y of State,
               e x p r e s s l y for the p u r p o s e of p r o d u c i n g
               r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s i n t e n d e d t o e n s u r e the. f u t u r e
               p r e s e r v a t i o n of h u m a n life.          In our view, to
               commence the inquiry needed to produce such
               recommendations, having deliberately pre-judged the
               conclusions, must am o u n t to the e f f e c t i n g of a
               public mischief.

               H o w e v e r , in the ca s e of D P P v W i t h e r s (1974)
               3AER984, the H o u s e of L o r d s r u l e d t h a t c o n s p i r a c y
               to e f f e c t a p u b l i c m i schief, in the s ense of an
               agreement to do an act which, alt h o u g h not
               u n l a w f u l in itself, w a s e x t r e m e l y i n j u r i o u s to the
               p u b l i c , is n o t a n o f f e n c e k n o w n t o t h e law.        That
               case co n c e r n e d impersonation of o f f i cials by
               inquiry agents attempting to obtain sight of
               government and financial records.                         The Judgments
               of t h e v a r i o u s law L o r d s m a d e c l e a r t h a t the
               o f f e n c e c o u l d s t i l l b e c h a r g e d i f , a n d o n l y if,
               the c o n d u c t c o m p l a i n e d of w a s of a t y p e .which had
               already been recognised at common:law,or                                  >   r
               s t a t u t o r i l y d e f i n e d as a crime.


W e are, t h e r e f o r e , d r a w n to a g r e e w i t h t h e c o n c l u s i o n s of t h e DPP,
a l b e i t r e l u c t a n t l y , b e c a u s e w e d o f e e l t h a t if s u c h c o n d u c t w e r e
m a d e out, t h e n it o u g h t to d i s c l o s e an o f f e n c e .

Finally, we s h o u l d s a y that w e d o not h o l d o u r s e l v e s out as e x p e r t s
on c r i m i n a l law.       It, t h e r e f o r e , o c c u r s t o u s t h a t if, f r o m t h e
p o i n t o f v i e w o f S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e , t h i s m a t t e r is t o b e s e e n
a s h a v i n g b e e n t h o r o u g h l y e x a m i n e d , t h e D i r e c t o r m i g h t b e a s k e d if
he w o u l d be p r e p a r e d to o btain an e x t e r n a l o p i n i o n f rom Le a d i n g
Counsel.


Yours     faithfully,
•
    TELEPHONE:                                           SO U TH YORKSHIRE POLICE

    SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                               POLICE HEADQ UARTERS
    TELEX: 547996                                           SNIG HILL

    FAX: (0742) 523243                                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY



    R B WELLS QPM MA

    CHIEF CONSTABLE                                               23 July 1990



                                                    PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



    A Green Esq QC
    Director of Public Prosecutions
    4/12 Queen Anne's Gate
    London SW1H 9AZ




    Thank you, again, for your letter of 9 July.  I understand clearly what
    you say and can now confirm that there was no original note made of the
    conversation in question.

    Would you be kind enough to run your professional eye across the attached
    letter provided by our solicitors?

    The last paragraph suggests that, with a view to the matters being seen
    to be thoroughly examined, you might seek Counsel's opinion on the angle
    now introduced, which I perceive to be fresh.   This thought is offered,
    I'm sure, only in the spirit of canvassing the widest of independent
    view.

    I am due shortly to go back to                 originating the report and
    would   like  to do   so  with   the  maximum   possible   collateral for
    open-handedness. I do hope that this final enquiry will not prove the
    last straw on the burden of your office.      I anticipate publicity when
    I have seen         and we should be seen to have tried our best.




    Richard Wells




    Enc
                                                             OPIN I O N


1.         I have          been        asked         to    advise        whether           certain        evidence          in    a
report dated 12th April                               1990 could support a prosecution                                for any
criminal             offence.             I     shall       proceed           on     the       assumption            that    the
writer          of    the        report         has        recorded           that    evidence            with       complete
accuracy.


2.         I    have        considered                whether           the        evidence            could     support          a
prosecution                for       an    offence          of    perverting               the       course     of    justice
or    conspiracy                to     commit         such       an    offence.            Perverting           the    course
of     justice             is    a        common          law     offence           and        has     been     accurately
described             as        contempt             of    court        under        another           name     (Archbold,
Criminal             Pleading Evidence and Practice,                                  4 3 r d Ed. , pa r a .          24-39.)
It h a s b e e n e s t a b l i s h e d b e y o n d a n y d o u b t t h a t t h e l a w of c o n t e m p t
does       not       apply        to      commissions              or       committees            of    enquiry        of    the
kind       set       up    in    this          matter,          with     the       statutory .exception                 of       an
enquiry             under       the Tribunals                of E n q u i r y        (Evidence)           Act    1921:       see
Lutchmeeparsad                   Badry          v.     D.P.P.         [1983]         A.C.        297    (P.C.)        and    see
s e c t i o n 19 of th e C o n t e m p t of C o u r t A c t 1 9 8 1 as c o n s t r u e d by L o r d
D o n aldson M.R.               i n R. v. L i v e r p o o l             Daily post             [1990]      2W.L.R.          494,
at    501       (C.A.).              It    follows          that        the    evidence              could     not    support
a p r o s e c u t i o n for the o f f e n c e of p e r v e r t i n g the c o u r s e of j u s t i c e
or    conspiracy                thereto.


3.         I have further considered whether the evidence could support
a p r o s e c u t i o n f o r t h e o f f e n c e of m i s c o n d u c t b y a p e r s o n i n p u b l i c
office,          a l s o an o f f e n c e a g a i n s t t h e c o m m o n law,                       or for c o n s p i r a c y
to     commit             such       an        offence.          The        offence         has        been    defined           as
follows:
           "It is an i n d i c t a b l e o f f e n c e at c o m m o n law fo r a p u b l i c
           officer            wilfully         and     without         reasonable           excuse       or
           j u s t i f i c a t i o n to n e g l e c t to p e r f o r m a d u t y i m p o s e d u p o n h i m
           either by common                  law or statute."             (Halsbury's           Laws     of
           En g l a n d , 4th Ed., v o l u m e 11(1) re-issue, para. 292)
In    R.       v.    Dytham          [1979]           1    Q.B.       722     (C.A.        C.D.)        (which       provides
modern         authority              for       the       above definition),                    the     Court    said       that
the    offence             involves:
           "an       element              of     culpability                which         is     not     restricted              to
'   #

                d i s h o n e s t y b u t w h i c h m u s t be of s u c h a d e g r e e t h a t the
                m i s c o n d u c t i m p u g n e d is c a l c u l a t e d to i n j u r e the p u b l i c
                i n t e r e s t so as to call for c o n d e m n a t i o n a n d p u n i s h m e n t . "
                (At pp. 7 2 7 - 7 2 8 )
        (The     editors          of     Archbold,             43rd        Ed. ,       para           24-49          describe             the
        offence        too narrowly).


        4.      In     R.    v.    Whitaker             [1914]        1       K.B.     1283           (C.C.A.),                a    public
        officer        is d e s c r i b e d       as:
                " a n o f f i c e r w h o d i s c h a r g e s a n y d u t y in t h e d i s c h a r g e of
                w h i c h t h e p u b l i c a r e i n t e r e s t e d , m o r e c l e a r l y if he is p a i d
                o u t of a f u n d p r o v i d e d b y t h e p u b l i c . If t h e t a x e s g o to
                supply his payment and the public have an interest in the
                d u t i e s h e d i s c h a r g e s , h e i s a p u b l i c o f f i c e r . " ( A t p. 1 2 9 6 )
        In    that      case       a     regimental             colonel              was        held           to    be        a    public
        officer.        In D y t h a m        (above),          a police             officer was                conceded             to be
        a    public      officer.            In    R.     v.    Llewellyn-Jones                           [1968]          1    Q.B.       429
        (C.A.    C.D.)        the       registrar          of    a    county           court           was      conceded             to    be
        a    public      officer.            In    the    light           of     these          authorities                   and    other
        a u t h o r i t i e s to be f ound in Russell                          on C r i m e 1 2 t h Ed.,                  361 et seq.
        and    Stephen's           Digest          of    the     Criminal              Law,          9th       Ed.,       pp.112-115
        both persons              are public            officers.              However,              it m a y well             be    that,
        for    reasons        of       public          policy,       a     person          in        the       position             of    the
        first        speaker        mentioned             in     the           report           is     immune             from       being
        p u r s u e d in the o r d i n a r y courts:                 see Russell,                     above,         a t p.        362 and
        Anderson        v.    Gorrie          [1895]       1 Q.B.          668.


        5.      Any     public          officer          who    conducts              an    investigation                      with       the
        deliberate           intention            of    concealing              the    truth           from the public                     by
        falsely attributing blame could, on the authorities, be convicted
        of     the     offence          of     misconduct                by      a    person              in        public          office
        (subject to any i m m u n i t y f r o m p r o s e c ution).                                  Such a person would,
        it s e e m s    likely,         be f ound to be u n d e r a legal                             duty to c o n d u c t the
        investigation              fairly         and     properly.              (As       to    the       duties             of    police
        officers,           see    R.    v.       Commisioner              of     Police,             ex       parte          Blackburn
        [1968]       2 Q.B.       118,       a t p.      135-136.)             Such conduct would constitute
        a    wilful      neglect,            without           reasonable              excuse             or        justification,
        to p e r f o r m the duty.                An agreement             to c o n d u c t an i n v e s t i g a t i o n in
        that    way     could       constitute             a conspiracy                 to       commit             the       offence.


        6.      A person           s p e aking          the words              recorded              in    the       report          w ould
*
    #
        not    thereby      commit      the   offence        of    misconduct      by     a       person   in
        p u b l i c o f fice or an a t t e m p t to commit that offence.                Talking about
        an    offence    that      one might        commit   is    not,   of    course,       committing
        the    offence.      Nor    could     any    agreement       to   commit    the       offence      be
        inferred    from        those    words.       At     the   very    highest,           a    possible
        agreement       is b e i n g   discussed.




                                                                               Anxnony wooper          y.c.
        5 Paper Buildings
        The Temple                                                                 27   July        1990
        London EC4
        071-583-6117
                                                              OPINION


1.         I have          been        asked           to    advise       whether           certain         evidence          in    a
report dated 12th April                                1990 could support                    a prosecution              for any
criminal             offence.              I     shall       proceed            on    the        assumption            that    the
writer         of     the       report            has       recorded           that     evidence           with        complete
accuracy.


2.         I    have        considered                  whether           the        evidence           could     support           a
prosecution                for        an    offence           of    perverting              the     course        of    justice
or    conspiracy                to     commit           such       an    offence.           Perverting            the    course
of     justice             is     a        common           law    offence            and    has         been     accurately
described             as        contempt               of    court        under       another            name     (Archbold,
Criminal            Pleading Evidence and Practice,                                     43rd E d . , para.              24-39.)
It h a s b e e n e s t a b l i s h e d b e y o n d a n y d o u b t t h a t t h e l a w of c o n t e m p t
does       not       apply        to       commissions               or       committees            of    enquiry        of    the
kind       set       up    in    this           matter,           with    the        statutory .exception                 of       an
enquiry             under       the Tribunals                  of E n q u i r y       (Evidence)            Act    1921:       see
Lutchmeeparsad                   Badry            v.     D.P.P.          [1983]       A.C.        297     (P.C.)        and    see
s e c t i o n 19 of t h e C o n t e m p t                   of C o u r t A c t 1 9 8 1           as c o n s t r u e d b y L o r d
Donaldson M.R.                   i n R.         v. L i v e r p o o l      Daily post             [1990]     2 W.L.R.          494,
at    501       (C.A.).               It       follows        that        the    evidence           could       not     support
a p r o s e c u t i o n f o r t h e o f f e n c e of p e r v e r t i n g t h e c o u r s e of j u s t i c e
or    conspiracy                thereto.


3.         I have further considered whether the evidence could support
a p r o s e c u t i o n f o r t h e o f f e n c e of m i s c o n d u c t b y a p e r s o n in p u b l i c
office,          a l s o an o f f e n c e a g a i n s t t h e c o m m o n law,                       or for c o n s p i r a c y
to     commit             such        an        offence.           The        offence        has         been   defined            as
foilows:
           "It is an i n d i c t a b l e o f f e n c e at c o m m o n law for a p u b l i c
           officer           wilfully         and     without-        reasonable           excuse       or
           ju s t i f i c a t i o n to n e g l e c t to p e r f o r m a d u t y i m p o s e d u p o n h i m
           either by common                 law or s t a t u t e . "     (Halsbury's           L a w s of
           England, 4th Ed., v o l u m e 11(1) re-is s u e , para. 292)
In    R.       v.    Dytham           [1979]            1   Q.B.        722     (C.A.       C.D.)         (which       provides
modern authority for the above definition), the Court said that
the    offence             involves:
           "an        element              of      culpability                which         is     not     restricted              to
4




            d i s h o n e s t y b u t w h i c h m u s t be of s u c h a d e g r e e t h a t the
            misconduct          i m p u g n e d is c a l c u l a t e d to i n j u r e the p u b l i c
            i n t e r e s t so as to call for c o n d e m n a t i o n a n d p u n i s h m e n t . "
            (At pp. 7 2 7 - 7 2 8 )
    (The     editors           of    Archbold,              43rd        Ed. ,       para           24-49            describe             the
    offence        too    narrowly).


    4.      In     R.     v.    Whitaker              [1914]       1    K.B.        1283           (C.C.A.),                  a    public
    officer        is d e s c r i b e d        as:
            " a n o f f i c e r w h o d i s c h a r g e s a n y d u t y in t h e d i s c h a r g e of
            w h i c h t h e p u b l i c a r e i n t e r e s t e d , m o r e c l e a r l y if h e is p a i d
            o u t o f a f u n d p r o v i d e d b y t h e p u b l i c . If t h e t a x e s g o t o
            s u p p l y his p a y m e n t and the p u b l i c h ave an interest in the
            d u t i e s h e d i s c h a r g e s , h e i s a p u b l i c o f f i c e r . " ( A t p. 1 2 9 6 )
    In     that     case        a    regimental              colonel              was        held            to     be        a    public
    officer.        In D y t h a m        (above),           a police             officer           was           c o n c e d e d to be
    a    public      officer.             In    R.     v.    Llewellyn-Jones                        [1968]               1    Q.B.       429
    (C.A.    C.D.)        the        registrar          of    a county              court           was       conceded              to    be
    a    public      officer.             In    the     light          of     these          authorities                     and     other
    a u t h o r i t i e s to be found in Russell                            on C r i m e 1 2 t h Ed.,                   361 et seq.
    and    Stephen's            Digest          of    the     Criminal              Law,          9th        Ed.,        pp.112-115
    both persons               are public             officers.             However,              it m a y well               be    that,
    for    reasons         of       public          policy,     a person                 in       the        position              of    the
    first        speaker         mentioned             in     the        report              is     immune               from       being
    pursued in the ordinary courts:                             see Russell,                       above,           a t p.        362 and
    Anderson        v.    Gorrie           [1895]       1 Q.B.          668.


    5.      Any     public           officer          who    conducts              an    investigation                        with       the
    deliberate           intention             of     concealing             the    truth           from the public by
    falsely attributing blame could, on the authorities, be convicted
    of     the     offence           of        misconduct           by        a    person               in        public           office
    (subject to any i m m u n i t y f r o m pros e c u t i o n ) .                                Such a person would,
    it s e e m s    likely,          be found to be under a legal dut y to conduct the
    investigation               fairly          and    properly.              (As       to        the    duties              of    police
    officers,           see     R.    v.       Commisioner              of        Police,           ex       parte           Blackburn
    [1968]        2 Q.B.       118,       a t p.      135-136.)             Such conduct would constitute
    a    wilful         neglect,          without           reasonable              excuse              or        justification,
    to p e r f o r m the duty.                 An agreement             to c o n d u c t an i n v e s t i g a t i o n in
    that    way     could        constitute             a conspiracy                    to    commit              the        offence.


    6.      A pe r s o n        s p e aking          the     words          r e c orded           in     the         report          would
4




    not    thereby      commit        the   offence        of    misconduct          by        a       person        in
    p u b l i c office or an attempt to commit that offence.                               Talking about
    an    offence    that      one    might       commit    is   not,   of     course,             committing
    the    offence.      Nor    could       any    agreement       to   commit         the         offence           be
    inferred    from        those      words.       At     the   very    highest,                  a    possible
    agreement       is b e i n g     discussed.




                                                                             A l l LiiUJ.ij'   nuupcL          y .    .


    5 Paper Buildings
    The Temple                                                                      27     July         1990
    London EC4
    071-583-6117
Dru Sharpling

 J     .
HILLSBOROUGH

      I enclose a bundle of papers comprising:

                letter from Chief Constable South Yorkshire Police to the then DPP of
                4 August 1990;

                Minute from Acting Chief Constable dated 9 May 1990;

                Minute from                 af 12 April 1990;

                Letter from DPP to Chief Constable dated 9 July 1990;

                Letter from Chief Constable to DPP dated 23 July 1990;

                Letter from Hammond Suddards dated 18 July 1990;

                Counsel’s opinion dated 27 July 1990.

      The issue is whether we should place the minute of 12 April 1990 on a schedule
      for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

      Few people here know about the papers - they have been kept separately in the
      safe. As far as I know, they have not been referred to in the past and form no
      part of any decision making, recent or otherwise. I would not like to say for
      definite whether the material was seen by counsel who advised in 1990, but I
      doubt it.

      I can not see that the information (assuming it to be were true), would have any
      impact on the case.

       I suggest, as we discussed, that we are open with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
       that we say we have the item and, if necessary, copy it to him. We will need to
       explain how the minute came into our possession. We will need to consider
       whether any of the accompanying documentation needs to be mentioned. I think
       it is so unlikely to have any impact on the case that we do not need to bring it
       to the scrutiny’s attention.

Chris Enzor      C   u   >   ■


Central Casework
23 July 1997                                            rrrrrr— —-[work
J
DX 65204 - York 6
                                                                 CCP
                                                            24 JUL 1997

                                                          RECEIVED
RESTRICTED - SENIOR MANAGEMENT




RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.   I attach a bundle of papers which upon reading will become self explanatory. Chris
     Enzor’s note sets out the position clearly.

2.   My own reaction is that we should be open with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and write
     separately indicating the nature of the material in our possession and its import.

3.   I agree with Chris that the information, even if it were true, would have very little
      impact on the case.

4.   Before, however, I advise the Director I would be grateful if you could give an
     indication of the relationship between the CPS and the scrutiny for the purposes of
     disclosure. The nature of M r Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny is informal but he
     will be talking to witnesses albeit in private.

5.   Although the decision will obviously be ours at the end of the day, I would be
     grateful for any advice on disclosure. My worry is that if we do not then         ~
     may (if he is still around) decide to break silence and we will be left holding the
     baby.

6.   Obviously these papers must have an extremely limited circulation.




Dru Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework
30 July 1997
Ext. 1225
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown P rosecutor
                                                                                                                                CPS
                                                                                                                                CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                                50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                                London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                         S w itc h b o a rd   ; 0171-273 8000
 f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                                                                   D X N o:         300850 Ludgate EC4
   Hillsborough Scrutiny
   Room 528                                                                   F a c sim ile :    0171-        273 8050
   50 Queen Anne’s Gate
   London                                                                  D ir e c t L in e :   0171-        273 1225
   SW1H 9AT
                                                                         O u r R eference:



 L                                                      J               Your R eference:



                                                                                                              7 August 1997



     Dear Sir

     RE: THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

     I am writing in connection with recent correspondence detailing schedules of material
     currently held or viewed by the CPS.

     As indicated, I am in possession of a police report dated 22 April 1990 and associated
     documents stemming from the remarks allegedly overheard by a                  made in
     conversation between the late Lord Chief Justice and a Chief Constable.

     The report does not relate to evidential material pertinent to the Hillsborough disaster.

     I have taken the opportunity to discuss the matter with the Director (who is currently away
     from the office) who would, of course, be happy to discuss the matter with you.
     Alternatively, the material is available for inspection at this office or can be forwarded at
     your convenience. I look forward to hearing from you.

     Yours faithfully




     Dru Sharpling
     Chief Crown Prosecutor
     Central Casework




                          Croum Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
TELEPHONE:                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522              POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                           SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                        SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


R B WELLS QPM MA
                                                'jv\   .
CHIEF CONSTABLE




                 M .

      IV    V—            ^            —




                                            V                      »V t3 h




                                                           —

                              C — o — -j u — O s.X 'V s.-2 _ ^ a   .
  CONFIDENTIAL   • .
                 #




CONFIDENTIAL
      V-

Ife i
■'.




       V &
CONFIDENTIAL




CONFIDENTIAL
                            STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL


                                                     DCC/
                                                     9 May 1990



NOTE FOR FILE:



DISCLOSURE



Was contacted by Peter Metcalf this date concerning the above, who said
that on reflection he thought it would be wrong and perhaps even dangerous
for me or South Yorkshire Police to "consume its own smoke" regarding the
disclosure.

His view is that this matter ought to be considered by someone other than
the South Yorkshire Police as it may indicate possible criminal offences,
for example, 'conspiracy to pervert the course of justice' or 'misuse of
public >office'.
      rf
      V
Mr Metcalf suggested that one way forward would be through Mr Wells who
has been uninvolved in Hillsborough, then possibly through the Chief HMI
to another Chief Constable, who may take Counsel's opinion or deal with
the matter as he sees fit.

I told him that I regarded his comments above as absolutely confidential
to me as Acting Chief Constable as his client and he agreed this was so.




Acting Chief Constable




                         CONFIDENTIAL
 CONFIDENTIAL
                +




CONFIDENTIAL
                                       soaM M M A L                                                             AH
 #                                                                                   Ref:
        From:                                                                        Station/Dept:
     To:            Chief Constable                                                  Date:
                                                                                                     12 April 1990



                SUBJECT:     H I L L S B O R O U G H D I S A S T E R - 15 A P R I L 1989


                    I have to report          that     on    Tuesday,       18    April
                                                                     1989, having been
                    cancelled from a                                     at
                                     I was deputed to work a duty of 9.00 am to 5-00 pm
                    driving the black Staff Granada motor vehicle.  My initial duty was
                    to attend at the Police Headquarters, Sheffield, and to be at the
                    disposal of Lord Justice Taylor and the officers from West Midlands
                    who were coming up to conduct enquiries into the Hillsborough
                    Disaster.

                    Together with the other Staff car, I attended at the Midland Train
                    Station to collect Lord Justice Taylor, and conveyed him to the
                    Police Headquarters for a meeting with the Chief Constable.  Later
                    that date, I again transported Lord Justice Taylor to Hillsborough
                    Football Ground in the black Staff Granada.   I waited outside the
                    stadium for his return, together with the other Staff cars and
                    after he had received a conducted tour of the Leppings Lane end at
                    Hillsborough Football Ground, he returned to the vehicle, briefly
                    speaking to the press that were gathered outside, prior to again
                    sitting in the rear of the car.

                    At this time he was joined by Mr Dear, the then Chief Constable of
                    West Midlands Police, both men being seated in the rear of the
                    Staff car.  Prior to the vehicle setting off back to Headquarters,
                    Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear started a conversation, which I
                    clearly heard, Lord Justice Taylor saying to Mr Dear, "I SUPPOSE
                    YOU REALISE THAT TO GIVE THIS INQUIRY ANY CREDIBILITY WE HAVE TO
                     APPORTION THE MAJORITY OF THE BLAME ON THE POLICE?"        Mr   Dear
                    acknowledged this by saying, "I SUPPOSE WE DO."    I then drove them
                    around to Leppings Lane where Lord Justice Taylor alighted from the
                    vehicle  for a short time to look at the turnstiles,           before
                    returning to the vehicle - after which both* gentlemen were returned
                    to Headquarters.   The general conversation throughout this journey
                    revolving around the logistics of setting up the Inquiry and where
                    they were going to site their offices to run the Inquiry from.

                    During the course of my duties that day, I also transported the ACC
                    of West Midlands, Mr Jones, to Hammerton Road Police S t a t i o n ,■where
                    the Incident Room was.

                    On concluding duty at 6.00 pm         that night, I returned home and
                    discussed the conversation I had overheard with my wife,
                                         and although angry at the time about the comment
                    m a t was s a i a , I decided there was little point in submitting a
                    report about this matter for what good is it - a mere _____ word
                    against an eminent Judge and a Chief Constable - and I believe that
                    little   good      would  have   come  out  from  me  disclosing   this
                    conversation prior to any Inquiry that was being made.           I was
                    however so annoyed that to left off steam I did mention it to my
                    close work colleagues for although I realised an official report
                    would have no ultimate benefit, what I needed was close friends to
                    realise what an injustice was likely to be done.
Gen/2

                                             CONFIDENTIAL
CONFIDENTIAL




 CONFIDENTIAL
                       CONFIDENTIAL

                            -   2   -




Subject - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15 APRIL 1989




However, having discussed this matter recently with Superintendent
Bettison, I feel it only right that the record be put straight.  I
still believe that no one will take my word against the other two
gentlemen but pass the information for your consideration.

I have been asked to treat this matter in the strictest confidence and
I will do so.




                     CONFIDENTIAL
                                           D IR E C T O R O F P U B L IC P R O SE C U T IO N S
                                                   4 -1 2 Q U E E N A N N E S G A T E
                                                       L O N D O N SW 1H 9A Z

                                                        T e le p h o n e 071-273 8098
                                                        F ax          071-222 0802

Allan D. Green QC




                      PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL


Richard Wells Esq QPM MA                                               9 July 1990
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill
Sheffield S3 8LY




                     RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



Thank you very much for coming to see me today about this
matter on which you have sought my advice.


I have considered the report by                  It is dated 12 April
1990 but relates to an incident which occurred on 18 April
1989. I assume that               Lrtio was driving the Staff car,had
no opportunity to maLe a n y — m A e of the fragment of conversation
at the time. When did he first make anv wri i-i-en note ? Plainly
it is vital to assess how accurately                 heard and
remembered the precise words used,since a small difference in
what was heard or recalled may be crucial to the interpretation
of what was said.


On the assumption that                  heard and recalled the words
spoken accurately and t r r a n . m e y expressed an improper intention
(and on the further assumption that two very senior public
figures would have expressed such an intention in front of a
third partyvwho was a South Yorkshire police driver) the
question arises whether there is any prima facie evidence of a
criminal offence. I do not believe that there is.I think that a
conspiracy to pervert the course of public justice must relate
to the course of actual or potential civil or criminal
proceedings,and not to the conduct of a non-statutory inquiry
set up by the Home Secretary.There is no evidence here of any
bribery of a public official (see Archbold,43rd edition,volume
2 at para.24-47) nor would there appear to have been misconduct
by an officer of justice,since Lord Justice Taylor was not
appointed by the Home Secretary to act as a judge in civil or
criminal proceedings (ibid.para.24-49).

                             CONFIDENTIAL
CONFIDENTIAL
It is therefore.a matter for you to decide what further action
you should take. Plainly it would be open to you to consult Sir
John Woodcock or Sir Clive Whitmore at the Home Office. If you
wished to show this letter to Sir John or Sir Clive,I would
have no objection whatever.




                          CONFIDENTIAL'
CONFIDENTIAL




CONFIDENTIAL'
TEL E PH O N E :                                     S O U T H YORKSHIRE PO L IC E
SH E FFIE LD (0742) 768522                            P O L IC E H E A D Q U A R T E R S
TELEX: 547996                                            SN IG H IL L
FAX; (0742) 523243                                         SH E FFIE LD S3 8LY



R B W ELLS Q P M M A

C H IE F CONSTABLE                                                23 July 1990



                                                PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



A Green Esq QC
Director of Public Prosecutions
4/12 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AZ




Thank you, again, for your letter of 9 July.  I understand clearly what
you say and can now confirm that there was no original note made of the
conversation in question.

Would you be kind enough to run your professional eye across the attached
letter provided by our solicitors?

The last paragraph suggests that, with a view to the matters being seen
to be thoroughly examined, you might seek Counsel's opinion on the angle
now introduced, which I perceive to be fresh.   This thought is offered,
I'm sure, only in the spirit of canvassing the widest of independent
view.

I am due shortly to go back to                 originating the report and
would   like  to do   so  with   the  maximum   possible   collateral for
open-handedness. I do hope that this final enquiry will not prove the
last straw on the burden of your office.      I anticipate publicity when
I have seen         ind we should be seen to have tried our best.




Richard Wells




Enc




                             CONFIDENTIAL
CONFIDENTIAL




   CONFIDENTIAL
                                                            CQ.NFID.FNT1AI
fHAMMOND SUDDARDS
                       SOLICITORS
ALAN I. BOTTOMLEY            PETER C . METCALF       '     DAVID W. K. ARMITAGE   CONSULTANTS:              EMPIRE HOUSE
D. TREVOR LEWIS              CHRISTOPHER W. JON ES         J. PATRICK MITCHELL    ROGER W. SUDDARDS c m     10   PICCADILLY
MICHAEL E. GREGSON           ANDREW R. JORDAN              CHRISTOPHER MARKS      SIR DESMOND HEAP          BRADFORD BD1 3LR
JOH N D. DE MAIN             SIMON R. B. STELL             MICHAEL S. HENLEY      IAN W. WHITSON
MICHAEL L SHEPHERD           SIMON R. INMAN                ROSAMOND J. MARSHALL SMITH                       TELEPHONE (0274) 734700

PETER N. WtLBRAHAM           RICHARD W. WADE-SMITH         PHILIP W. HARUNG                                 TELEX 517201
J . RICHARD ARCHER           JOHN G. BECKETT               WILLIAM N. DOWNS
                                                                                                            D.X. N O . 11720
BARBARA W. FRANCE            0 - N, IAN GREENFIELD         LUCCI DAMMONE
C.   NOEL HUTTON             STEPHEN GALE                  ANDREW H. McDOUGALL                              FAX (0274) 73 75 4 7
JOHN H. G. HELLER            MARK W. HILTON
IAN R. SHUTTLEWORTH          RICHARD BURNS



OUR REF.           PCM/P AB                   YOUR REF.                                       DATE        18th    July,            1990



Dear       Sirl,

Hillsborough

We refer to recent telephone discussions and,                                                 having       reviewed            the
authorities, we have the following comments:


           1.      T he c o m m o n law o f f e n c e of c o n s p i r a c y was a b o l i s h e d
                    by t h e C r i m i n a l L a w A c t 1977, s a v e s p e c i f i c a l l y in
                    relation to conspiracy to defraud and conspiracy
                    to e n g a g e in c o n d u c t w h i c h w o u l d t e n d t o c o r r u p t
                    public morals or outrage public decency.

           2.      Subject to the exceptions above the statutory
                   o f f e n c e of c o n s p i r a c y c a n o n l y b e c h a r g e d in
                   respect of a conspi r a c y which n e c e ssarily involves
                   the commission of an individual criminal offence.

           3.      In our view, the c o n d u c t under c o n s i d e r a t i o n w o u l d
                   n o t n e c e s s a r i l y h a v e i n v o l v e d t h e c o m m i s s i o n of
                   the o f f e n c e of p e r v e r t i n g the c o u r s e of justice.
                   As has been p o i n t e d out, the inqu i r y to be
                   c o n d u c t e d w a s n o t j u d i c i a l in nature.

           4.      U n t i l 1974, it w a s w i d e l y b e l i e v e d t h a t t h e r e w a s
                    a common law offence of "effecting a public
                    mischief".     This was often used to charge persons
                    making false statements to the Police about
                    imaginary crimes, but convictions were also


                                                                                                                 /...          contd.


The Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police,
Police Headquarters,
Snig Hill,



LEEDS OFFICES:
                                                         CONFIDENTIAL
                     BRITANNIA CHAM BERS 4 /5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AX TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 5 5 720 2 FAX 4 447 94/421199
                     JO S E P H S WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 1AB TELEPHONE (0532) 450845 TELEX 55 3 6 5 FAX 426868
CONFIDENTIAL    *


                #   '




 CONFIDENTIAL
                                        CONFIDENTIAL
          ONDSUDDARDS                                                                                 FW3ENO.   2




               o b t a i n e d for such d i v e r s e a c t s as d i s s e m i n a t i n g
               rumours calculated to cause widespread alarm and
               building defective air raid shelters.

        5.    W e h a v e n o d o u b t t h a t if t h e r e w a s s u c h a c o m m o n
              law offence as effecting a public mischief, then
              t h e c o n d u c t w i t h w h i c h w e a r e c o n c e r n e d (if it
              c o u l d be m a d e out) w o u l d i n v o l v e a c o m m i s s i o n of
              that crime.               W e r e a c h -this c o n c l u s i o n b e c a u s e t h e
              inquiry was commissioned by the Secretary of State,
              expressly for the purpose of producing
              r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s i n t e n d e d t o e n s u r e the. f u t u r e
             \preservation of human life.                         In o u r view,, t o
             /commence the inquiry needed to produce such
              recommendations, having deliberately pre-judged the
              conclusions, must amount to the effecting of a
              public mischief.

        6.    However, in.the case of D P P v W i t h e r s (1974)
              3AER984, the House of L o r d s r u l e d that c o n s p i r a c y
              to e f f e c t a p u blic mischief, in t he sense of an
              agreement to.do an act which, although not
              u n l a w f u l in itself, w a s e x t r e m e l y i n j u r i o u s t o t h e
              p u b l i c , is n o t a n o f f e n c e k n o w n t o t h e law.      That
              case concerned impersonation of officials by
              i nqu i r y a g e n t s a t t e m p t i n g to o b t a i n sight of
              government and financial records.                         The Judgments
              of th e vari o u s law Lords m a d e c l e a r that the
              o f f e n c e c o u l d s t i l l b e c h a r g e d if, a n d o n l y if,
              the conduct complained of was of a type wh i c h had
              already been recognised at common law.or
              s t a t u t o r i l y def i ne d as a crime.


We are, therefore, drawn to agree w ith                         the c o n c l u s i o n s of the DPP,
albeit reluctantly, because we do feel                          t h a t if s u c h c o n d u c t w e r e
made out, then it o u g h t to d i s c l o s e an               offence.

Finally, we s h ould say that we d o not h o l d ou r s e l v e s out as expe r t s
on criminal law.              It, t h e r e f o r e , o c c u r s t o u s t h a t if, f r o m t h e
p o i n t of v i e w of S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e , t h i s m a t t e r is t o be s e e n
a s h a v i n g b e e n t h o r o u g h l y e x a m i n e d , t h e D i r e c t o r m i g h t be a s k e d if
he w o u l d be p r e p a r e d to obtain an e x t e r n a l o p i n i o n f r o m Lead i n g
Counsel.


Yours     faithfully,




                                          CONFIDENTIAL
r\   ft'r ' r *yf'i * |
,J’ "“''iULi'ii ittL.
               Crown Prosecution Service
 ~ .                              Private Office
                           4-12 Queen Anne's Gate
   ^ d_                      London SW 1H 9AZ
Urt^f'DfcMTiM-               F a x :0 7 1 -2 2 2 0802
                                       IDLE                 )Q@[M


For the attention of:              :
Address:        _________ ___________________________




Fax No.:

From:                                  _C ^ t^ o y x ___
CPS Division:                   j ) £ £ ____________

     Date:________2>0 7) SHO                     Time:

 This FAX transmission consists of this page -f.                    others.
Message:




   Original to follow:                    YES                      NO


   Please acknowledge receipt:            YES                      NO

If you do not receive all pages or cannot read
all the text please contact the sender on:               071-273        S\<Xj
                                                                                CPS R«g014(BX2«0)
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room *** f J) £
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT




RE:    THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


Further to the Director’s letter of 30 July 1997,1 enclose two schedules showing the material
held by the CPS.

As the Director indicated, the material falls into two distinct parts, the material relevant to
the 1990 decision not to prosecute and that relevant to the recent 1997 decision not to
prosecute.

The schedules are comprehensive and list all the material held at the CPS or viewed by the
CPS. All the material we hold is currently at United House in York. Rather than reproduce
in our own schedules all the lists contained in the West Midlands Police Report, I have
attached a copy of the master index of witnesses and documents as an appendix to the
schedule of pre August 1990 material.

You will no doubt wish to discuss access to the material. There is one further item which
is not covered on the 1990 schedule, about which the Chief Crown Prosecutor will be writing
to you separately.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
