 h i£ £ s b o r o u g h
  in q u iry   te a m

.%Yirc
                 tc f^VrjSI
                 (S®1   r et
                                                                               /tv       lG    U" — * ^

J M ERVYN JONES M Sc                                               F U R N IV A L H O
A S S IS T A N T CHIEF CONSTABLE                                   Furnival Gate
                                                                   Sheffield S1 4 Q N
 H IU S B O R O U G H INQU IRY TEAM
                                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
                                                                   Fax:        0742 731483
WEST M ID LA N D S POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                             Medico Legal Centre
Colrnore Circus Queensw ay                                         Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6N Q                                                 Fax:       0742 726247
telephone: 0 2 1 2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                   Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N
Fowler Street                                                                           JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                  Our Ref:
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                   Date:
                                                                                        h November 1989




         Miss E Steel
         Hillsborough Steering Committee
         C/0 Castle Chambers
         Cook Street
         Li verpool
         L2 9SH




         Dear Miss Steel

         HILLSBOROUGH - CRUSH BARRIERS

         I have noted the contents of your letter dated 21 October 1989 and in
         particular your concern about the barrier and access to it. The
         situation at present is that the Director of Public Prosecutions does
         not see any further need to retain the barrier. However, this is
         subject to receiving assurances from the Health and Safety Executive, in
         writing, that they have no further use for the barrier. Secondly, that
         the Director of Public Prosecutions has the opportunity of having a
         representative present at any future tests. Thirdly, that an opportunity
         will exist to take photographs of such tests. Fourthly, all reports and
         data are made available to the Director of Public Prosecutions/Crown
         Prosecution Service as early as possible after the tests.

         However, as you know the interest in the barrier is not restricted to
         the Director of Public Prosecutions.  Lord Justice Taylor has an
         interest and once I have received the letter from the Health and Safety
         Executive declaring they no longer have interest then I will write to
         him to seek his approval. Furthermore, HM Coroner at Sheffield will also
         want to give similar approval once the Health and Safety Executive have
         written.

         All this might seem a little bit bureaucratic, but given that thebarrier
         could be an important part of any subsequent proceedings then I wish to
         be assured that all parties I relate to have had every opportunity to
         examine and carry out tests. Having said that, I do hope that it will
         not be long before I can release the barrier and certainly in plenty of
         time for you to carry out what work you wish in good time for the
         commencement of civil actions.




    PLEASE REPLY T O T H E OFFICE A T            Lloyd House, Birmingham
                                     2


I have received other letters also requesting access to the barrier for
the purposes of securing samples. Consequently, I have agreed with the
representative of the Director of Public Prosecutions' office that once
I have all the assurances that we no longer need the barrier then he,
Mr Kennedy, will undertake to contact you and the other representatives
of the parties involved in order to discuss the best way forward.
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club who are ultimately the 'owners' of the
barrier, no doubt will wish to have their say in respect of the way
forward

I trust this letter is of assistance to you. Please rest assured that I
will not delay the release of the barrier without good cause.  I have
taken the liberty of copying this letter to the legal representatives of
the other parties joined in the civil action.
