                                                                                           - 9 DEC 199
   VSBO«0^
                                                                                         ^sB0S%


                        Hillsborough Family Support Group


Mr Enzor
Crown Prosecution Service
CPS Central Casework
United House
Piccadilly
York YOl IPQ
Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89

8 December 1998
By fax and post

Dear Mr Enzor,


ARLINGTON v MURRAY: ADLINGTON v PIICK EN FIELP

Further to our recent correspondence, I am writing to you as a matter of courtesy to inform you
of developments at the Leeds District Magistrates’ Court yesterday.

Draft witness summonses were presented on behalf of the prosecution directed to Mr Daines,
Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, and former Inspector Henry White, to
produce statements and documents. We attach copies for your information. However, after
discussion, it was agreed that, instead of the issue of these summonses, a remand date would be
arranged for the week before Christmas, to which Hammond Suddards, solicitors to the South
Yorkshire Police, would be invited to consider the next step.

O f course, a decision by the CPS to take over and discontinue would put an end to this, but all
parties approached the timetable on the basis and there would be no discontinuance. Counsel for
the prosecution suggested that the date should be as late as practicable in Christmas week, in
order that Hammond Suddards could take a day or so to consider the position, but it was not
possible for the magistrate to sit on 22nd or 23rd. All day on 21st December has been set aside
before the stipendiary magistrate.

Four weeks for committal have been allocated. The prosecution asked for the committal to be
heard in February, but the defence said they could not be available until 19* April, a date to which
the magistrate reluctantly agreed. This day will be four days after the tenth anniversary of the
tragedy, but, like the relatives of the Lockerbie victims this month, the HFSG will regard the tenth
anniversary as a stimulus for greater efforts to engage the legal process, in spite of all the
frustrations o f the intervening years. The prosecution again asked the defence today, as we did
on 24th August, to indicate whether or not any application would be made that the proceedings
be stayed on the ground of abuse of process. Again, lawyers for both defendants declined to say.

               Phone 0151236 1919. Fax 0151236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
             1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
you will appreciate that the date o f 21st December has been fixed with that date in mind. The
prosecution is very anxious to start the disclosure process before Christmas, in order to avoid
further delay.

In July of this year, the CPS took the view, and gave the South Yorkshire Police “guidance”, that
the police might wish to await the outcome of the CPS review before taking any action. We
therefore request you to give guidance, if the case is not taken over, that the material should be
disclosed on a voluntary and orderly basis, and we would invite you to write to Hammond
Suddards before 21st December to this effect, so that time and public money is saved. We have
also written today to Hammond Suddards, and we are most anxious that 21st December is used
profitably, if the decision goes in our favour. For the sake of the families, for whom Christmas is
a difficult time, we wish to end the year on a high and positive note.



Yours Sincerely,




Ann Adlington
Solicitor


Hard copy and enclosures to follow in the post.
