•       '




    From:               Michael Kennedy
    To:                 CPSHQY.CCU(crostong)
    Date:               26 August 1998 3:13pm
    Subject:            Hillsborough: draft reply to HFSG letter -Reply -Reply -Reply


    G

    Many thanks for your very helpful e-mail.

    I have further amended your draft - copy attached - to include your suggestion about asking HFSG to contact
    both Hammond Suddards, on the disclosure advice point, and the PCA as you suggest.

    Since my e-mail this morning I have recieved a file of papers with a letter dated 25 August from Ann Aldington
    which have also been sent to you. I have also added a paragraph about my involvement which is limited to
    acting as Dru's deputy whilst she is on leave. I think it is important to make it absolutely clear that I will not be
    involved in the review decision. The review must be a matter for you, Dru and the Director. Any involvement by
    me is likely to be rightly criticised in any Judicial Review proceedings which I suspect will follow a CPS decison
    not take over and discontinue the HFSG Prosecution.

    Give me a call on 273 8099 after you have considered this and the fresh draft.

    M

    Files:              C:\MGK\HILLS\HBOR0.021
Keva Coombes Esq.
Legal Advisor
Hillsborough Family Support Group
1st Floor
Central Buildings
41 North John Street
LIVERPOOL L2 6RR

                             273 8450

                             273 8099

                            YBF/3341/89




                            <Date>


        Dear Sir

        RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

        Thank you for your letter of 17 August and enclosures. I understand Mr Croston in
        our York office has explained to Ms Adlington that he holds all the CPS case papers
        and is briefing me. This has resulted in a slight delay in responding.

        I note the concern you express about the papers remaining in the custody of the
        South Yorkshire Police. In the absence, however, of any indication of impropriety I
        do not feel it is appropriate for me to request the South Yorkshire Police to make
        alternative arrangements for th<      fekeeping of the original papers.

        It is our understanding of the correspondence you enclosed from the police that they
        are deferring the consideratioi^your request for voluntary disclosure until the CPS
        review decision has been made.

        We have no record of CPS guidance given in the terms you describe. It may be that
        there is some confusion between the policy on voluntary disclosure and that of the
        responsibility for storage of the material. However my understanding is that the
        material is the property of the South Yorkshire Police and the question of where the
        material is to be held is a matter for the Chief Constable to decide.

        It may be of assistance, and we would have no objection, if you were to discuss the
        disclosure point with Messrs Hammond Suddards, the solicitors representing the
        South Yorkshire Police.

        As the Police Complaints Authority(PCA) supervised the original West MMtSncJs
        Police investigation which generated the material held in South Yorkshire. Yoymay
        wish to contact the Chairman, Mr P W Moorhouse, to ascertain whetn§rj2W*5t the
        PCA feel they have a remit to assist.
I appreciate your wish to obtain disclosure of documents in the possession of the
police and the CPS as quickly as possible. It is my firm view that consideration of
voluntary disclosure should be deferred until after the CPS review decision has been
made. If our decision is to let the private prosecution continue then voluntary
disclosure will be given as expeditiously as possible (except for material subject to
public interest immunity or legal privilege).

I understand Mr Croston has informed all the parties involved in the prosecution that
the case review ought to be completed by the end of September. This is date may
be subject to revision by any new material that is brought to our attention. The
Director will then be consulted before any decision is made. I understand the next
hearing is on 30 October at Leeds Magistrates' Court and that provisional dates for
an oral committal have been set for mid-December.

Finally I want to make it clear that, although I have replied to your correspondence in
Ms Sharpling's absence on annual leave, I will not play any part in the review
process which is being handled by Mr Croston. This is because I was involved in the
case and decision not to prosecute which was made some years ago after the West
Midlands Police enquiry. I have received a file of material today from Ms Aldington
which has also been sent to Mr Croston. I have sent this extra copy on to Mr
Croston.




M G KENNEDY
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
