Chris Newell
Director Casework
                              |                                  J*                     wO^"


                             U/J                           v-^ o -^ -w                   <5*~4 ^
Cc     George Croston

                                                                                        LaL,
1. Thank you for letting me have copy of Sue Ross's letter of 25 March 1999. George and I
   have spent some time on this and this minute represents our joint view.
2. If the Divisional Court does indeed quash the decision not to intervene as Sue suggests, this
   can only be on the basis that a charge by charge approach should have been adopted. This
   means one of two things:
       •   The policy was not explicit enough in that it should have made reference to a charge
           by charge approach being the proper approach; or

       •   We should have applied a charge by charge approach to the decision notwithstanding
           that the policy was silent on it.

3. My immediate reaction to Sue’s letter was that, once we have the judgement, we should
   simply step in and take over and discontinue the attempt pervert on the grounds that there is
   clearly no case to answer. On one view, this would be the correct approach as we have
   already stated that we consider there to be clearly insufficient evidence on this charge.
4. An alternative view, however, is that we should give the defendants the opportunity of
   making further representations about this charge, bearing in mind our view that the other
   charges should be left alone.
5. It is unlikely that their view will be any different from that expressed in previous
   correspondence about the case as a whole, ie. they would wish us to step in and take over to
   discontinue. However, it occurs to me that they may possibly wish to adopt a different
   approach in the knowledge that we will not intervene on the manslaughter charges.
6. It might just be preferable from the defendants’ point of view for a consistent approach to
   be taken to all charges. There might be a benefit to them in having the one court consider
   all charges at one and the same time, bearing mind that the court will have to consider some
   of the charges in any event. For example, the court might decide that the appropriate course
   is to stay the proceedings in their entirety as being an abuse of the process of the court. The
   defence may think that they have a better chance of arguing this with all charges before the
   court, as they could possibly demonstrate bad faith on the part of the prosecutor, for
   example. In the final analysis, the defence may wish to consider whether there is a tactical
   advantage to them in leaving the case intact rather than having it slimmed down piecemeal.
7. In the circumstances, my view is that we should give the defence the opportunity of making
   further representations about the attempt pervert course of justice charge, against the
   background that we will not intervene on the other charges.
8. I will have a draft letter prepared in advance of next Wednesday, in readiness for the
   decision.
9. I have considered whether it would be appropriate to ask the Hillsborough Family Support
   Group for their views on whether we should take over par of the case to discontinue. I do
   not think that anything they might say could possibly influence our decision when we have
   publicly stated our view that there is clearly insufficient evidence on this charge. We cannot
   rule out, of course, an attempt by the HFSG to seek a judicial review of that decision!



Chris Enzor
26 March 1999.
