                             THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                     Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS

    DX 123242 St James’s Park   Direct Fax: (0171) 1           ~| Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)

                                     Direct Line: (0171):


George Croston                                         Please quote:             L98/8265K/SJR/D1
Central Casework
Crown Prosecution Service                              Your reference;           YBF/3341/89
DX: 300850 Ludgate EC4
                                                       Date:                      26 January 1999




ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

As instructed, I asked Philip Havers QC to advise on the terms of the reply to Walker Murray's
letter dated 18 December 1998.

He agrees with the approach I have adopted in my advice and draft letter. He considers that if
a judicial review is in prospect it is on balance probably more advisable to provide information
rather than not. However, he several suggestions about the draft, with which I agree. To make
it easier I have annotated a draft, which I enclose. A couple of points could usefully be
expanded upon.

1      In the first full paragraph on the second page, Counsel suggested that the final line may
        not belong in that position and may confuse matters, albeit it reflects a principle that
        appears in the policy document. He did not have strong feelings about removing it, so
        you may want to consider whether to include it (there or elsewhere) and whether it adds
        anything to the explanation of your policy.

2      In the last paragraph on that page, leaving out "Generally" is designed to avoid the
        defendants simply inviting you not to apply the policy in this case as an exception. His
        alternative, which I have annotated, is of course much better and embraces cases which
        are not covered by the policy or which require a different approach on the particular facts
        (as with the attempt pervert).

3      He considers that the letter will look less defensive coming from Chris Newell at this
        stage.

Counsel does not consider that the defendants have a realistic prospect of successfully arguing
that the policy is unlawful.

I hope this is helpful. Let me know if there is anything further that I can do.

                                                                                 c a sew o r k


Miss s. J. Ross                                                          MI 28JAN1999
for the Treasury Solicitor                                               |   |         "Jjjjjjjjl—

                                                                                     YORK
                                 HE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                        ^ l i i ljjtAnne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS

   DX 123242 St James’s Park      Direct Fax: (0171)           I   Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)

                  nil                  Direct Line: (0171)

Walker Morris                                          Please quote: L98/8265/SJR/D 1
Solicitors
DX: 12051 LEEDS 24                                     Your reference:RBM/MT/MURRAY

                                                       Date:                     21 January 1999




ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

You wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service on 18 December 1998 following the receipt of a
letter from the CPS, also dated 18 December 1998, informing you of the Service's decision not
to exercise its power under Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the
criminal proceedings against your clients with a view to discontinuing them.


You ask for further information, (1) as to the factual matters on which the CPS relied and
identifying which parts of the evidence is "new" since the Crown Prosecution Service last
considered the case; and (2) as to the way the Service applied the Code for Crown Prosecutors
in deciding whether to intervene.


These questions indicate that you misunderstand the factors the Crown Prosecution Service
considers when deciding whether to take over a private prosecution at the request of a defendant
with a view to discontinuance. It may help if I set out again in broad terms the approach the
Service adopts to these decisions.


As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors indeed sets out the general principles applied by
the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a prosecution it has taken over; or
whether to institute proceedings or to advise the police whether to do so. It is correct that the
Crown Prosecution Service decided in 1997 that the evidence available at that time was not
sufficient, in its view, to provide a realistic prospect of the conviction of either of your clients
for an offence.         However, it does not follow that, when considering the evidence and
representations submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf of your clients,
the CPS should seek merely to identify whether there is now any new evidence sufficient to
provide a realistic prospect of a conviction. The decision whether to intervene in a private
prosecution with a view to terminating it calls for altogether different considerations to be           *
applied. It ijiftuite possible for a private prosecution to continue notwithstanding that the CPS
is not satisfied, on the basis of its own assessment of the strength of the evidence, that the
evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the Code (that there should be a "realistic
p ||sp ect of a conviction").


In broad terms, the reason for this is that Section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985,
which established the Service's powers and duties, specifically preserved the right of private
individuals and prosecuting authorities or bodies other than the CPS to bring criminal
proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) to the limitation in Section 6(2) that
the CPS may nevertheless take over the proceedings with a view either to conducting or to
terminating those proceedings. jThe Service takes the view that it should not exercise that power
                                                                                                      U fcteu r
unless there is a particular need to do so on behalf of the p u b lic ^   <2-°—


Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when deciding
whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the evidential sufficiency test in the
Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer. The Service therefore recognises that
it is not appropriate to intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its Consultation Paper
No. 149 "Consents to Prosecution" (see paragraphs 6.3 and 6.4).


GefteratlyT^he Servicejwill not take over a private prosecution with a view to terminating it
unless one or more of the following applies:


(i)     there is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution started in these circumstances
        would be unfounded and ought not to be permitted to continue.


(ii)    the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour
        (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious or vexatious or the offence is one
        for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned, or where the defendant is
        terminally ill and the offence is serious).
    #
        (iii)   the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.


        In this case the decision not to intervene was considered at a very senior level within the Service,
        by the Director of Casework Evaluation. After careful consideration, he concluded in respect
        of the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty (which, for the
                    '


        avoidance of doubt, were each considered against each individual separately) that he could not
        sayjli.it I lere is clearly no case to answer. It was not right therefore for the Service to take over
        tb proceedings with a view to terminating them.


        Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate course to take in these
        circumstances, he concluded that it would not be right to intervene in respect of the one
        remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield of attempting to pervert the course of justice, albeit
        he had formed the view that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge alone. The charge
        of attempting to pervert the course of justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against
        one who was, at the relevant time, a serving, senior police officer. Nevertheless, in the context
                CiXOfl—
*       of the disaster as a whole that charge is not the gravamen of the criminality alleged against Mr
        Duckenfield and he concluded that his approach to that charge should be led by his conclusions
        on the chargegof manslaughter^ouoN^ UxX^vaA                          JG o- p e j r ^ v w v               c ta x K j


        He considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors that should
        lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance but came to the conclusion that
        [any] public interest factors tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour.
        Nor did he consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.


        I should point out that the Crown Prosecution Service is not obliged in law to provide detailed
                                 I      o J io v A -e -                           .                        .t
        reasons for its decision&laad-we do not in-any event-consider it-appropnatc m this case ter provide -
        an analysis of the evidence. However, in ^ the circumstances of this particular case and-agamat-
        *lia hnflfcrnymnrUftf its history r we -did consider it appropriate to explain the factors taken into
        account in more detail than was contained in the Service's letter dated 18 December 1998.




        Miss S. J. Ross
        for the Treasury Solicitor
                                        T r ea su r y S o l ic it o r ' s D e p a r t m e n t
                                                    O u e e n a n n e 's C h a m b e r s
                                                            26    B roaow at
                                                                 Lo n d o n
                                                             SWI H 9JS
                                                      <017 1 )2 10 3 2 4 3
                                    _              F a x ; (O I 7 I ) 2 1 0 3 4 I O

      ■ o    a                e ^ G o sA -e v v

                                                                     D ate: 2 4 , ^ 9 ^
   T° : N r .:^
   Fax      ^ >
                                                                     Pages:                (including this cover sheet),
   From :          SUE ROSS

   S" b,CCt:



  COMMENTS:




™ ^ “ ' r“ s” ission is intMided only for the use o f the recipient named above. It contains
y o f a ^ h e « t ^ f i M n,hW^ Ch iS‘egallyprivilSS 'd- If J™ *™ »0> the intended recipient,


S X 'w e                                       P‘^ e ”0,i^     m e d ia te ly by telephone
           can make amngem ents for the return o f the documents to us. Your co-operation is
appreciated.

H *a » Jo not rc rrirc th ii f a , cim p irtelv. nlm w f r i , n h n . > t i . . . . . . . .
                                 THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                          Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS
        DX 123242 St James’s Park    Direct Fax: (0171) f           I   Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)
                                          Direct Line: (0171);
     George Croston
     Central Casework                                       Please quote:              L98/8265K/SJRyDl
     Crown Prosecution Service
     DX: 300850 Ludgate EC4                                 Your reference:            YBF/3341/89

                                                            Date:                      26 January 1999




    ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY


                                          QCadViS<! 0n                        ° f the r' p,y ,0 Walker

 He agrees with the approach I have adopted in my advice and draft letter. He considers that if
           reV1f Wi f ln P*0* * * ix ls on balance probably more advisable to provide information
 rather than not. However, he several suggestions about the draft, with which I agree. To make
 expanded uporf                & drafl> which 1 enclose-            A couple o f points could usefully be


 1        In    ? rSt m            on the second Page, Counsel suggested that the final line may
          not belong in that position and may confuse matters, albeit it reflects a principle that
          appears m the policy document. He did not have strong feelings about removing it, so
          you may want to consider whether to include it (there or elsewhere) and whether it adds
          anything to the explanation o f your policy.

 2              lMt ?araf aph on that PaSe> leaving out "Generally" is designed to avoid the
          defendants simply inviting you not to apply the policy in this case as an exception. His
            emative, which I have annotated, is o f course much better and embraces cases which
              S
          (as with         y pervert).
                   the attempt P° lK* ° r Which require a different approach on the particular facts


3         stage°n$lderS      * e lettCr WiH l0°k 1CSS defensive COminS from Chris Newell at this


                                    ,hc defendan,s havc a reaiis' ,c prospect <* *—                iy

I hope this is helpful. Let me know if there is anything further that I can do




Miss S. J. Ross
for the Treasury Solicitor
                                 THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                         QU^ l k nn?>S Chambers’ 28 Broadway, London S W m 9JS
       DX 123242 St lailBSvS Park^'&irectFax: (017!);
                                                              Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)
                                          Direct Line: (0171)
   Walker M o rins/' ,
   SolMjkprj. «    mP'                                   Please quote: L98/8265/SJR/D1
   DX:            EEDS 24
                                                         Your reference:RBM/MT/MURRAY

                                                         Date:                   21 January 1999




  ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

  You wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service on 18 December 1998 following the receipt o f a
  letter from the CPS, also dated 18 December 1998, informing you o f the Service's decision not
 to exercise its power under Section 6(2) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 to take over the
 criminal proceedings against your clients with a view to discontinuing them.


 You ask for further information, (1) as to the factual matters on which the CPS relied and
 identifying which parts o f the evidence is "new" since the Crown           Prosecution Service last
 considered the case; and (2) as to the way the Service applied the Code for Crown Prosecutors
 in deciding whether to intervene.


These    questions indicate   that   you misunderstand the factors the   Crown    Prosecution Service
considers when deciding whether to take over a private prosecution at the request o f a defendant
w,th a view to discontinuance. I, may help if I set out again in broad terms the approach the
Service adopts to these decisions.


As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors indeed sets out the general principles applied by
the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a prosecution it has taken         o   v   e r ,   or
whether to institute proceedings or to advise the police whether to do so. It is correct that the
Crown Prosecution Service decided in 1997 that the evidence available « th .t lime w „ not
sufficient, in its view, to provide a realistic prospect o f the conviction o f either o f your clients
for an offence.     However, it does not follow that, when considering the evidence and
      representations submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf o f your clients,
          CPS should seep- m |j|j|y to identify whether there is now any new evidence sufficient to
    provide a realistic f r o s p e c f e a conviction. The decision whether to intervene in a private
    prosecution w ^ v i ^ ' to terminating it calls for aiteg * * * different considerations to be
    applied. It i|rffu^e jk^sible for a private prosecution to continue notwithstanding that the CPS

    1S n<l i k %               ^   n th® basis o f its 0Wn assessment o f the strength o f the evidence, that the
                        the evidential sufficiency test in the Code (that there should be a "realistic
    pJbspe0"of a conviction").


    In broad terms, the reason for this is that Section 6(1) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985,
    Which established the Service's powers and duties, specifically preserved the right o f private
    individuals and prosecuting authorities or bodies other than the CPS to bring criminal
 proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) to the limitation in Section 6(2) that
 the CPS may nevertheless take over the proceedings with a view either to conducting or to
 terminating those proceedings. (The Service takes the view that it should not exercise that power
 unless there is a particular need to do so on behalf o f the public?^ S Q_e_ *oo^


 Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when deciding
 whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the evidential sufficiency test in the
 Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer. The Service therefore recognises that
 it is not appropriate to intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
 general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its Consultation Paper
No. 149 "Consents to Prosecution" (see paragraphs 6.3 and 6.4).

^                 - tr              **§          La
                                          4 /v Q jt cfc
        ^                          eejwill
                              ServiceL     not take
                                          over
                                          ov« aa private prosecution with a view to terminating it
                                      wi11 not “to
unless
unless one
       one or m o re no ff the
           or more         the following applies:



                            *S c*ear^ no Case to answer. A private prosecution started in these? circumstances
          w   o   u   l d    be unfounded and ought not to be permitted to continue.


(«)       the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour

          (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious or vexatious or the offence is one
          for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned, or where the defendant is
          terminally ill and the offence is serious).
   (iii)    the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.


   In this case the deci*i^i not'ftintervene was considered at a very senior level within the Service,
   by the Director ^ a s ^ b r k Evaluation. After careful consideration, he concluded in respect
   o f the c h a r | p ^ m'lnslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty (which, for the

                       ’ W6re 63011 Considered aSainst each individual separately) that he could not
  s a y | r f | ^ s dearly no case to answer. It was not right therefore for the Service to take over
  ^    proceedings with a view to terminating them


  Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate course to take in these
  circumstances, he concluded that it would not be right to intervene in respect o f the one
  remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield of attempting to pervert the course o f justice, albeit
  he had formed the view that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge alone. The charge
  o f attempting to pervert the course o f justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against
 one w h o ^ at the relevant time, a serving, senior police officer. Nevertheless, in the context
 o f the          as a whole that charge is not the gravamen o f the criminality alleged against Mr
 Duckenfield and he concluded that his approach to that charge should be led by his conclusions
 onthecharge5D fm anslaughter>xxi^ uxA (vJL V'JLC^ejCL*" Jfcb j> £ jr^ v w v a . ^sjUhJUc.


 He considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors that should
 lead to the Service in te n d in g with a view to discontinuance but came to the conclusion that
 [any] public interest factors tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour.
 Nor did he consider that the prosecution is dearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.


 I should point out that ‘h = & o ™ P ro sg u tio n Service is not obliged in law to provide detailed
reasons for its d c c i s i o n ^ ^ o nm in any r     rm.si*« j, appropriate in thj., um . ui pl
an analysis o f the evidence. However, in iQ the circumstances o f this particular case—
      -flfsro u n i              we 4 * consider it appropriate to explain the factors taken into
account in more detail than was contained in the Service's letter dated 18 December 1998.




Miss S. J. Ross
for the 1reasuiy Solicitor
