RESTRICTED POLICY

1.    CCP
2.    Director

cc.   John Ringguth
       Lyn Salisbury



1.    ISSUE

1.1   Hillsborough

2.    ACTION REQUIRED


2.1   In order to prepare handling arrangements for the publication of Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith’s report, George Croston was asked to review the report and advise the
      Director on the following points:-

              •        what the Home Secretary can properly say about the Director’s
                       decision (that the material presented to her prior to the scrutiny would
                       not justify fresh proceedings):

              •        whether there is any part of the report which would cause us concern
                       if it was published;

              •        the extent to which the material which the judge has considered can or
                        should be put into the public domain;

              •        whether there is anything in the report that may give rise to
                       suggestions that there ought to be further police enquiries regarding the
                       amending of police officers’ (or other persons’) statements;

              •        whether the state of the terracing requires further enquiry;

              •        the extent to which the report discloses new information not previously
                        considered that may reflect on the potential criminal liability of the
                        football club.
2.2   The Home Secretary’s letter of the 9 February 1998 addressed to the Attorney
      General (and copied to the Director) asks for his views on certain points concerning
      issues involving the Director. I have been requested to advise on these points as
      follows:

             •       whether advice considered by the Director in 1990 and 1997 as to the
                     evidence needed to support criminal proceedings, could be placed in
                     the Library at the House and therefore be in the public domain;

             •       whether or not the Director agrees that having considered the
                     conclusions of the report, and on the basis of the material it contains,
                     there is no basis that would justify fresh criminal proceedings;

             •       whether anything in the process by which police officers submitted
                     statements to the Taylor Inquiry might amount to misconduct of a
                     criminal or disciplinary nature, and thus require the instigation of a
                     police investigation;

             •       whether the new information concerning the condition of the terraces
                     and the overestimation of the crowd capacity would have affected the
                     conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry and by inference the Director’s
                     original decision not to prosecute any person;

3.    TIMING

3.1   A public announcement will be made by the Home Secretary on the 18 February
      1998.

3.2   This advice is required as soon as possible.

4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   Following the submission of the Central Casework review note to her, the Director
      wrote to the Attorney General on the 9 May 1997 advising that there was no new
      evidence and no grounds for re-opening the police enquiry. That review, dated the
      8 May 1997, should be read in conjunction with this briefing note as it gives more
      comprehensive details of the allegations and evidence that were examined.

4.2   On the 13 May 1997 the Attorney General endorsed the Director’s view.

4.3   After consultation with the Director and the Law Officers, the Home Secretary
      announced his independent scrutiny on the 30 June 1997.
(



    4.4   CPS co-operated fully with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s enquiry. His enquiry has seen:

                 •      the schedule of documents considered by the CPS in this case;

                 •      the opinions of counsel;

                 •      George Croston’s recent review note, leading to the Director’s decision
                         on the 9 May 1997.

    4.4   Chapter 1 of the report covers the background to the disaster in detail.

    5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

    5.1   The scrutiny terms of reference appertaining to the CPS were "To ascertain whether
          any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
          1989 which was not available to the Director of Public Prosecutions ... for the
          purpose of discharging ...(her)... statutory responsibilities ... and to draw to (her)
          attention any evidence not previously considered by (her) which may be relevant to
           (her) ... duties".

    5.2   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was also to consider the existence of evidence in relation
          to police disciplinary matters.

    5.3   For the purposes of the scrutiny he received evidence both orally and in written form
          from relatives of the victims, members of the public, police officers and others (for
           a full list see Appendix 1 to the report). He examined the papers from Lord Taylor’s
           Inquiry and most of those from the Inquests. He looked at the body files and
           submissions from the counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG)
          and members. He considered all the above evidence whether previously available or
          not. ‘Previously available’ was defined as being within the public domain or known
          to the legal advisers of the parties or families, He read the joint opinion of counsel
           ( of the 6 August 1990) who advised the DPP that the police investigation had not
          changed the findings of the Taylor Inquiry. The report does not mention that the CPS
          review note of 1997 was taken into consideration or indeed read.


    5.4   The report’s covering letter, which was addressed to the Home Secretary, says that
          the report was written with publication in mind following the Minister’s stated
          intention to publish the evidence considered during the scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart-
          Smith gives categories of that evidence which he does not think should be disclosed.
          It includes:

                  •     Reports from Drs Bums and West (relates solely to the death of one
                        particular person).
                  •     Report of N.Bume (copyright problem involving privileged material
                        although his oral evidence is in the public domain).
                  •     Details of consultations as listed at paragraph 6 of Appendix 1,
                        including the Coroner.
                  •     Transcripts of private discussions with relatives off the deceased.
The report consisted of seven chapters and ten appendices. The key points from each
chapter will be considered in order.

Chapter 1: BACKGROUND: Paragraphs 25 and 26 of the report state that counsel
for the HFSG only invited a recommendation (as to criminal prosecution) in the case
of Duckenfield and Murray, who were the two main senior officers on the day. The
Judge opined that the fresh evidence would have to be of sufficient significance that
in considering it there would be a real possibility that the DPP might change her mind
and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or any other offence, against one or both
of the officers. At paragraph 56 it was said that any prosecution of an individual
police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would not be
enough to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

Chapter 2: VIDEO EVIDENCE: The Judge found that there was considerable
confusion and misunderstanding about the video evidence of the disaster. All four
police video tapes (including the one that was supposedly missing) were made
available in their entirety to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner. There was no
evidence for the suggestion that the theft of two video tapes from the club’s Control
Room was part of a police ‘cover-up’. Submissions to him by counsel for the HFSG
were:

        •     Police evidence that their failure to see overcrowding in the pens was
               due to a defective camera was deliberately false.
        •     Evidence from video tapes was deliberately suppressed and concealed
               by the police because it would have revealed the above falsity.
        •     The Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the ‘missing
               footage’.
        •     PCs Bichard and Ryan, and PS Goddard deliberately gave false
               evidence about camera 5 not working properly.
        •     The evidence of Mr Houldsworth, the club CCTV technician, that the
               pens were overcrowded, was deliberately withheld from the jury.



He says that if the first two submissions are made out they might affect the verdict
of accidental death and the decision of the DPP not to prosecute for manslaughter. The
third submission is a grave allegation against the Coroner which could also affect the
verdict. On the fourth submission consideration would have to be given to prosecuting
the officers concerned. The fifth shows a further criticism of the police failure to
appreciate a dangerous situation. His brief findings on each point are shown below:

5.7.1         Submission 1 is quite untenable.

5.7.2         As submission 1 is misconceived, number 2 must fail also. There
              never was any disappearance or concealment of video footage from
              camera 5. The allegation is completely unfounded.

5.7.3          Submission 3 is unfounded as there was no missing footage.
       5.7.4          The evidence on submission 4 is wholly insufficient to warrant
                      consideration of criminal proceedings against any police officers.

       5.7.5          Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is rejected. His explanation as to why it
                      was only in 1996 that he realised his evidence was important is not
                      convincing. What he now says is inconsistent with what he said
                      before.The importance of his evidence has been exaggerated out of all
                      proportion.

5.8    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s final comments on the video evidence is that there is
       nothing in the submissions that calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the
       prosecuting or disciplinary authorities.

5.9    Chapter 3: MEDICAL EVIDENCE: The Judge said that the Coroner’s reasoning has
       been widely misunderstood and misinterpreted. In considering the question of how
       someone died it is not usually relevant to consider matters subsequent to the infliction
       of injuries which obviously result in death. There was no new intervening cause
       which might break the chain of causation between the crushing injuries and death.
       The Coroner did not say that all those who died did so before 3.15. The cut-off time
       was necessarily imposed to keep the Inquiry within reasonable bounds. It is difficult
       to see the relevance of further evidence that a person was alive at 3.15pm but died
       subsequently.

5.10   The scrutiny considered the evidence of Dr Walker among others. It was suggested
       by counsel that the medical conclusions and assumptions made by the Coroner as to
       the cut-off time were false, and that on an application for judicial review it would be
       open to the Divisional Court to hold that the (inquest) verdicts had been procured by
       fraud, suppression of evidence or insufficiency of inquiry. Further that the non­
       presentation of Dr Walker’s evidence (like that of Mr Houldsworth) could amount to
       fraudulent concealment.

5.11   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found all the submissions on the medical evidence to be
       unfounded. The relevant part of his reasoning was that the evidence of Dr Walker and
       others added nothing to that given at the Inquest. The suggestion that the evidence
       now put before him was deliberately suppressed and concealed and those concerned
       acted in bad faith, was in his opinion wholly irresponsible.

5.12   Chapter 4: ALLEGED IMPROPER INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES: These
       allegations were not made to the CPS in the HFSG letter of 4 March 1997 or at any
       other time, except by way of a general remark that "one of the most striking aspects
       of this history is the way in which the evidence presented to the Inquest was evidence
       that tended to exculpate the South Yorkshire Authorities and the police from blame.
       Very serious questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the
       West Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner". The allegations were either of
       pressure being brought by police officers to bear on witnesses in order to prevent
       certain evidence being put before the jury, or of the way in which South Yorkshire
       Police obtained evidence about the disaster from their own officers (specifically the
       amendments made to their witness statements).
5.13   The Divisional Court did not find it necessary to investigate the allegation concerning
       the police putting improper pressure on civilian witnesses. The scrutiny did look into
       this matter in great detail. The first conclusion was that the suggestion that police
       officers brought pressure to bear on witnesses as part of a biased and incomplete
       investigation was clearly untenable. Secondly, that for the most part the suggestions
       made by the solicitors (acting for the police) for amendments were not open to
       criticism. In a few cases it would have been preferable if a deletion had not been
       made. At worst it was an error of judgement, it was not unprofessional conduct. Any
       amendments made by the police themselves were unexceptionable. The Judge is quite
       satisfied that the exclusion of comments (in the statements) could not possibly have
       affected the DPP. The allegation of irregularity and malpractice is not substantiated.

5.14   Chapter 5: OTHER MATTERS OF CONCERN: Families of some of the victims
       raised concerns about alleged inconsistency in police evidence, failure to disclose
       documents, and police bias. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was not able to resolve all the
       concerns about conflicts in evidence. However he would be surprised if the criticisms
       about families being unable to obtain copies of relevant documents were true. He saw
       no reason to differ from Lord Taylor’s conclusion as to the impartiality of the West
       Midlands investigation.

5.15   Chapter 6: MISCELLANEOUS: The state of the ground: New evidence was heard
       from Mr N.Bume, a structural engineer who advised on the safety and structural
       aspects of the Hillsborough ground in 1990. It had not been available at the time of
       the Taylor Inquiry and he was not called to give evidence at the Inquest. In October
       1990 Mr Bume gave evidence before a High Court judge in the contribution
       proceedings (when the apportionment of liability was decided as between the police,
       the Club and others). However these proceedings were settled before his evidence was
       complete or could be tested in cross-examination. His report criticised, among other
       things, the inadequate number of turnstiles, the lack of a control system for
       monitoring numbers in each pen, the overestimation of overall capacity on the
       Leppings Lane Terraces, inadequate emergency signing, and the inadequate standard
       of crush barriers. There were said to be many breaches of the advice and
       recommendations contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. The scrutiny
       found that all but two of the criticisms were fully considered by the Taylor Inquiry.
       These were the height of the crush barriers which were too low, and the overall
       capacity of the terrace which was overestimated. Hie conclusion was that these
       matters did not give grounds for re-opening the Judicial Inquiry or any other
       proceedings. The Judge considered that had Lord Taylor known about them he might
       have criticised the Club, their consultant engineers, and those responsible for the
       licensing of the ground in more stringent terms than he did. He did not consider that
       the central conclusion of the Inquiry would have been changed, in that the primary
       cause of the disaster was a failure of police control. However, if the responsibility
       of the other parties was somewhat greater than had earlier been appreciated, that
       might have a bearing on any reconsideration of criminal proceedings against officers.
    4
%




        5.16   Chapter 7: SUMMARY: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith does not consider that there is any
               material that should be put before the DPP or Police Complaints Authority which
               might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken. There is no
               occasion for any further investigation into the circumstances in which alterations were
               made to some of the self written statements of South Yorkshire officers.

        5.17   The conclusions from the scrutiny report mirror the relevant comments from my
               review.Indeed the Judge’s observations on the allegations and submissions put to him
               on behalf of the HFSG are often more stinging than mine.

        6.     RECOMMENDATIONS

        6.1    The recommendations on the points requiring action in paragraph 2.1 above are:

               6.1.1 The Director’s decision: The Home Secretary stated to Parliament on the 30
                     June 1997 that the Director of Public Prosecutions takes the view that the
                     material so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings.
                     My review of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report is that he comes to
                     the conclusion that, having heard fresh evidence, there is nothing that should
                     be put before the Director to cause a reconsideration of previous decisions.

                      Therefore I recommend that the Director can quite properly say that the report
                      does not change her stated view.

               6.1.2 Publication of the report: I have read the report a number of times and am
                     unable to find any point of evidence or conclusion which is adverse, unfairly
                     or otherwise, to the CPS. While there is a quote from counsels’ joint opinion
                     of 1990, and therefore strictly speaking privileged, the way in which the quote
                     and comment are used is supportive of our decision making process in the
                     case.

                       I recommend that no objection be taken.

               6.1.3 Material for the public domain: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s covering letter to
                     the Home Secretary said that the Minister’s stated intention was to publish the
                     evidence which was considered during the scrutiny. That letter makes certain
                     recommendations to the Minister about specific categories of evidence and
                     which do not involve the CPS. By inference it could be said that other
                     material, for example, the 1990 joint opinion of two leading counsel, should
                     be put into the public domain by being deposited in the House Libraries. This
                     opinion was read by the Judge who commented favourably on it. He did not
                     say that he considered in any way whatsoever the 1997 report to the Director
                     from myself. Neither of the two reports could be classed as evidence, fresh
                     or otherwise. They are legally privileged or subject to Public Interest
                     Immunity and not normally subject to disclosure unless previously in the
                     public domain or where that privilege or immunity is waived. Neither have
                     been disclosed publicly. The basic rule is that reasons for prosecuting
                     decisions are given in only the most general terms. The view is normally
                     taken that the public discussion of a decision not to prosecute ©wild amount
      a trial of a suspect, in this case certain police officers and others, without the
      safeguards which criminal proceedings are designed to provide. The Judge’s
      comments on our decision in 1990 should be sufficient for the interests of
      justice to be served. Similarly, the above reasons should also apply to the
      1997 review.

       I recommend that it is not in the interests of justice for the disclosure of the
       two advices.

6.1.4 Further police inquiries re amended statements: The report conclusions are
      that there was no improper pressure put on witnesses and that a small part of
      the amendment procedure involved at worst an error of judgement on the part
      of solicitors. As we have not seen the evidence available to the scrutiny we
      have no reason to consider going behind the conclusions made.

       I recommend that there should be no further action on this point.

6.1.5 Further inquiries re the terracing: Paragraph 5.1.4 above covers Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith’s opinion that the new and valid evidence concerning the crush
      barriers and terrace capacity would not have affected the central conclusion
      of the Inquiry. He might have made stronger comments about the Club and
      others. This new evidence was extremely relevant to civil liability claims and
      was before the High Court for those proceedings. It must be right that when
      the scrutiny report is published a more fair apportionment of blame can be
      acknowledged. My assessment of the comment that the appreciation of a
      greater responsibility of other parties might have a bearing on any
      reconsideration of criminal proceedings against officers is that if there had
      been a decision to prosecute it would have been affected by the new and
      mitigating evidence.

       I recommend that no further action is required as to any more inquiries.

6.1.6 Potential criminal liability of the Club: I can find nothing in the report which
      can be seen as a suggestion that the new evidence goes towards criminal rather
      than merely civil liability. The Judge considers that there are no grounds for
      reopening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.

       I recommend that no action should be taken by us on the new evidence now
       seen.

The recommendations on the points requiring action in paragraph 2.2 above are in
accordance with what I have already said:

6.2.1 Disclosure of our advices into the public domain should be resisted, not least
      on the ground of ‘candour’.

6.2.2 There is no basis for the instigation of criminal proceedings against police or
      others or for any further investigation into allegations of purported criminal
      liability.
7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   There have been        detailed and comprehensive investigations of the grave
      circumstances that lead up to the disastrous consequences in the Hillsborough
      Stadium. It should now be considered that UK judicial procedures have been fully
      explored and satisfactorily exhausted for the purposes of the CPS. I have no doubt,
      based on my dealings with the HFSG, that the matter will not end here.

7.2   There are a number of matters contained in the Home Secretary’s letter of the 9
      February 1998 which do not fall within the CPS remit and I have therefore expressed
      no view. They concern any applications to the High Court for a new inquest and the
      role of a Coroner following an inquiry into a major disaster.

7.3   Our concerns about placing the 1997 review note and the 1990 joint opinion in the
      library of the House have been expressed orally to Stephen Wooler, who will brief
      the Attorney General accordingly. It is understood that the Attorney General and the
      Home Secretary will be discussing Hillsborough in the margins of another meeting
      today. Thereafter, Stephen Wooler will draft a reply from the Attorney General to
      send to the Home Secretary, which we will consider before despatch.



George Croston                                                          11 February 1998
                   F r o m T h e R ig h t H o n o u r a b l e T h e L o r d I r v in e   of   L a ir g




                                                                                          H ouse of L o r d s,
                                                                                                  L o n d o n s w i a opw
     s? c




                                                                                                         h tr               ,
RESTRICTED


The Right Honourable Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT                                                                    /J§ February 1998




                                              HILLSBOROUGH


      Thank you for my copy of your letter to John Morris of 9 February. I have not, of course,
seen Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report: the following remarks are based on the comprehensive
summary in your letter.

        The questions in respect of the publication of the DPP’s advice in 1990 and 1997, and the
lack of justification for fresh criminal investigations, are of course for John, but if he is content, I
would be too.

        More generally, I agree with your conclusions on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s work.
Though it will undoubtedly be disappointing for the family support group, I support the proposition
that the Government response should make clear that there are no grounds for a further public
inquiry, nor for further investigations into the police conduct in respect of the amendment of
statements. I also agree with your comments about the later evidence on the state of the ground,
though that is not primarily a matter for me.

        The final point concerns the relationship between judicial enquiries into major disasters and
coroners’ inquests into the resultant deaths. The recommendations of the Home Office working
 group are in my view entirely sound. Where it is possible to certify that a properly-constituted
judicial inquiry would examine all the necessary issues, it merely prolongs and exacerbates the
distress of bereaved relatives to have to contemplate the prospect of a coroner’s inquest as well. I
therefore agree with the proposal to accept the working group’s recommendations in principle,
recognising that the necessary primary legislation may have to wait for a suitable opportunity.




                                                            1

                                                                                                                                lJ
7
           It follows that I am content with your proposals for handling the issues before Parliament
    next week.

          I          am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Attorney General, the President of the
    Council, the Director of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.


                                                 Yours




                                                    2
 Amanda Campbell




 cc.    Clare Stocks
        Dru Sharpling




 HILLSBOROUGH

 1.     H ie Home Office have asked us for a line this afternoon for the Home Secretary’s
        statement on Wednesday on whether we would take over any private prosecution
        mounted by the families.

 2.     The suggested question and answer for the Home Secretary is as follows:

        Q:     Would the DPP take over any private prosecution in Hillsborough?

        A:     That is a matter for the Director and the Crown Prosecution Service. It would
               be inappropriate for me to speculate.

        If pressed:

        If there is a private prosecution CPS would consider whether to intervene. Options
        available to CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it or to take it over
        and discontinue it. If the CPS decided not to intervene then the prosecution would
        remain with the private prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.

 3.     Dru Sharpling is content with this formulation. Could I have clearance to provide
        them with this form of words.




J f S Ringguth
  ACCP
  Central Casework
  16 February 1998
  Ext 1236
18/02 ’98 12:35 0171 273 4284                  Home Office OPPU          >92738450                ECM Pg.
                                             C'C-



                                                    JL        Ww
                                                               'J                              DRAFT 3
                                                                                     18 February 1998 10:13




               4                   HOME SECRETARY’S STATEMENT ON

                                          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                                                                     /




                                       WEDNESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1998




           W ith permission Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
           Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


           2       Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so many people. The families
           and friends of the 96 Liverpool fans who died on 15 April 1989 have suffered
           immeasurably. The whole nation was profoundly disturbed by what occurred that day.
      , , o^AJtHotigh    is now almost nine years since that fateful day, many of the families and others
       '   I ki tnat1new evidence was available which would cast new light on these events. As Home
           Secretary, I was determined to do all I could to establish if that was indeed the case.


           3       O n coming into office in May I gave this question intense consideration, and on
           30 June 1997,1 announced to the House that the Attorney General and I had decided to
           appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal to conduct
           an independent scrutiny of this matter. His terms of reference were:


                   To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
                   Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


                   (a)    to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                   (b)    to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the purpose
                           of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
r
         18/02 ’98 12:36 0171 273 4284                    Home Office OPPU -->92738450                       ECM Pg. 02/05


    .S
                              (c)     to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                                      disciplinary matters;


                                      and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
                                      is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
                                      the Home Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b)
                                      and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by
                                      them which may be relevant to their respective duties;           and to advise
                                      whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
                                      interest.


                   4          Lord Justice Stuart*Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
                   today.


                   5          His scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and detailed examinations of the
             . ,   evidence in this case. The public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered
                                         of (he disaster and msule wide-ranging recommendations about crowd
                   control aiid safety at sports events- These have had a profound effect on both crowd safety
                   at football grounds and on the policing of football matches.


                   6          The deaths which occurred were also the subject of inquests which were conducted
                   by the Coroner for the Western District of South Yorkshire in two parts in April and May
                   1990 and between November 1990 and March 1991. They involved over 80 days of public
                   hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised
                   by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
                   criminal or disciplinary proceedings.' That investigation involved the taking of more than
                   5000 statements. At a later stage in November 1993, there was a judicial review of the
                   coroner’s proceedings, which upheld the inquest verdict of accidental death and the
                   conduct of those proceedings. We have now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior
                   Lord Justice of Appeal.




                   Statemantihi'lls                                  2
r
        18/02 ' /8 12:36 0171 273 4284                Home Office OPPU -">92738450                     ECM Pg. 03/05

    ►


                  7         The main causes of the disaster have long been clear. They were identified by
                  Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to a
                  single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that “the main reason for the
                  disaster was the failure of police control*. The South Yorkshire police have in turn
                  accepted the main share of responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield Wednesday Football
                  Club and the Local Authority were also criticised by Lord Taylor.


                  8         With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that over the course of time some
                  new information may become available. But that does not necessarily mean that the
                  outcome of any previous inquiries would have been different had this information been
                  available. What is crucial is not just whether the information is new, but also whether it is
                  of such significance • to use the phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new
                  inquiry.


                  9         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered in great detail all the evidence which has been
                  put to him. This included all the relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
                ’• inquest. He has looked equally rigorously at all the information presented to him, by
                  individuals and official bodies including those representing the families of those who died,
                  and others who have acted in support of them.            He has produced a thorough and
                  comprehensive report. His clear conclusion, however, is that there is no basis on which
                  there should be a further public inquiry. He also finds no basis for a renewed application
                  to quash the verdict of the inquest, or any material which should be put before the
                  Director of Public Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to
                  re-consider the decisions they have already taken. He concludes that none of the evidence
                  which he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence which was
                  available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.


                  10        I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
                  report very carefully. We have no reason to believe that his conclusions are wrong. This
                  will, I know, be deeply disappointing for the families of those who died at Hillsborough
                  and many who have campaigned on their behalf.




                  Statament:hilt*                                3
12:3? 0171 273 4284                        Office OPPU ->92738450                      ECU P9 . 04/05




 11        I fully understand that those who lost loved ones ac Hillsborough may feel betrayed
 by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state of the
 ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which resulted from the Taylor
 Inquiry should mean that such a disaster will never be repeated.


 12        But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough families.
 As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,


            “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held
            to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent
            of losing their job”.


 13         There are serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system.         The Home
 Affairs Committee produced a report earlier this year which makes recommendations for
 change.        I will be responding fully to that report soon.       But what happened after
 Hillsborough is a prime example of why we have to improve the current arrangements.


 14         Lord Justice Sruart-Smith also comments on the coroner’s proceedings after a major
 disaster, which has been subject to a public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of a
 Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests, published in March 1997, that the
 role of the coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.


 15         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally difficult task
 which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I
 think, unnecessary burden on him when the Taylor Report had covered substantially the
 same ground. Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its present
 form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind. If no inquest had been
 necessary, the Taylor inquiry, which all have accepted as an excellent report, would then
 have remained unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.




 Statenwnt: hills                                 4
 18/02 ’98 12:37 0171 273 4284                 Home Office OPPU ““>92738450                    ECM Pg. 05/05
■%
 ‘   f
 %



          16       I therefore agree in principle with Lord Justice Scuan-Smith’s recommendations
          that there should rarely be the need for an inquest following a judicial inquiry into a major
         * disaster.


          17       When I established the scrutiny I said that I would do my best to ensure that the
          evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published.            Most of the main
          material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report. Much of
          the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain, consisting of
          transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor Inquiry. I am arranging
          for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in the Library of
          the House.


          18       All Honourable Members will have the most profound sympathy with the families
          and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend
          what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


                    “ I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
                    especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could be
                    done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look
                    dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of
                    the evidence which had previously been considered”.


          19       I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions must consider
          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same light. I recognise that it will be difficult and
          painful for the families of those who died to accept the conclusions of this report. But
          having established this rigorous judicial scrutiny I must accept its conclusions.




          StatanMRtrhttta                                 5
Amanda Campbell




cc.       Clare Stocks
          Dru Sharpling




HILLSBOROUGH

1.         The Home Office have asked us for a line this afternoon) on whether we would take
           over any private prosecution mounted by the familiesJfot the Home Secretary’s
      (^"'statement on Wednesday                                 "

2.        The suggested question and answer for the Home Secretary is as follows:

          Q:    Would the DPP take over any private prosecution in Hillsborough?

          A:    That is a matter for the Director and the Crown Prosecution Service. It would
                 be inappropriate for me to speculate.

          If pressed:

          If there is a private prosecution CPS would consider whether to intervene. Options
          available to CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it or to take it over
          and discontinue it. If the CPS decided not to intervene then the prosecution would
          remain with the private prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.

3.        Dru Sharpling is content with this formulation. Could I have clearance to provide
          them with this form of words.




                                                                                          Lf
J S Ringguth

r C? ? i rCasework
Central          v                                                                        tL i.
16 February 1998
Ext 1236                                                                          \
                                                                                               I


jur-.
i¥ll 1300111
Mr Graham
Mr Harvey
Mr Lewis
Mr Spear
Mrs Salisbury




ORAL PQs

1.      Please find attached draft answers and supplementary questions in respect of:

        •      Gareth Thomas MP (this is the first question on the list and is therefore the
                ‘general’ question);

        •      John Burnett MP;

        •       Dr Evan Harris MP; and

        •       Mr Ian Bruce MP.

2.     I need to send these to the Grade 3s so that they can approve them during the course
        of Monday morning. The Director has also asked to see the drafts. With apologies
        for their lateness, please could you let me know whether you are content with the
        drafts.

3.     I amhappy to receive comments either by telephone or bye-mail.




Stuart Moore
Strategic and
 Change Management Division
Ext 8037

13 February 1998
     PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR ORAL ANSWER

            ON THURSDAY 19 FEBRUARY 1998




QUESTION:     MR GARETH THOMAS: To ask M r Attorney
              General, when he expects to receive the Glidewell
              Report on the future of the Crown Prosecution
              Service.
              (28775)




MEMBER’S CONSTITUENCY: CLWYD WEST                          (LAB)




ANSWER:       THE ATTORNEY GENERAL: I expect to receive
              the report shortly and hope to publish it towards the
              end of March 1998.
                                 SUPPLEM ENTARY


WHY IS THE REVIEW TAKING SO LONG?

The Review Team are conducting a thorough and proper inquiiy. I am satisfied that the
inquiry is proceeding as expeditiously as it can, given the complexity of its task.

IS THE GOVERNMENT STILL COMMITTED TO THE PRINCIPLE THAT THE
CPS SHOULD ORGANISE ITSELF INTO 42 AREAS?

We remain committed to our manifesto commitment to change the organisational structure
of the CPS to provide a one-to-one relationship between each police force and its CPS Area.

WHY THEN THE SUGGESTION IN THE ‘TIMES’ THAT YOU EXPECT SIR IAIN
GLIDEWELL TO PROPOSE A SYSTEM OF 30 REGIONAL CROWN
PROSECUTORS?

I do not propose to comment on press speculation. Sir Iain Glidewell’s terms of reference
are to make proposals and recommendations against the background of our earlier decision
to re-organise the CPS so that there is a Chief Crown Prosecutor in each police force area.
The question is how to achieve this, not whether to achieve it.

WHY HAVE THE NEW CCPS NOT BEEN APPOINTED?

It was recognised at the outset that the CPS would need to liaise with the Review Team over
the move to 42 Areas and the appointment of the new CCPs. As a result of this process it
became clear that it would not be possible to effect the restructuring or make the
appointments as early as had been hoped. The appointments will not now be made until 1
December 1998 at the earliest.

WHY NOT?

The Review Team considers it essential that the new CCPs should be selected in the light of
the Team’s recommendations, in particular its proposed recommendations about the character
and responsibilities of the new posts.

HOW WILL THE STRUCTURE OF THE NEW CPS AREAS BELOW CHIEF
CROWN PROSECUTOR LEVEL AFFECT STAFF?

It is too early to say how the new structure will impact on staff in the present CPS Areas,
or how local offices in the new Areas might be structured.

WHAT IS THE POSITION OF THE DPP HERSELF?

I was consulted about and agreed with the decision of my predecessor to renew the DPP’s
contract. That decision is in no way related to my subsequent decision to invite Sir Iain
Glidewell to undertake a review of the CPS. I expect the DPP to complete the term of her
existing contract and will then review the matter as my predecessor did.
Butler Inquiry

WHAT DECISION HAS THE CPS REACHED IN THE CASE OF RICHARD
O’BRIEN?

The CPS has now completed its re-view of the decision not to prosecute any police officer
following the death of Richard Joseph O’Brien in April 1994. The advice of Senior Treasury
Counsel was obtained and, after very careful consideration, the CPS has advised the
Metropolitan police to initiate proceedings for manslaughter against three police officers.

DOES THIS SHOW THAT THE CPS MADE MISTAKES?

The CPS accepts that errors were made in the original decision-making process and has
written to lawyers acting for the family. The matter is now sub judice and it would be
inappropriate for me to add anything further at this stage.

WHAT ABOUT THE CASE OF DEREK TREADAWAY?

The advice of Senior Treasury Counsel is that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute and
that the original decision not to prosecute was correct.

WHAT ABOUT LAPITE?

The case of Oluwashijibomi Lapite is still under consideration.

WHAT ABOUT THE BUTLER INQUIRY REPORT?

The CPS has received the report from His Honour Gerald Butler QC into the decision­
making process within CPS Central Casework and is seeking independent advice from senior
counsel as to whether the report can be published while proceedings in the case of Richard
O’Brien are under way.


Hillsborough Inquiry

WHAT WAS THE CPS ROLE IN THE HILLSBOROUGH CASE?

In 1990 the CPS considered whether there was sufficient evidence to prosecute any one
arising out of the disaster. It concluded there was not. In 1997, the CPS considered material
supplied by or on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG). Allegations
were made that evidence had been suppressed from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest. The
CPS considered whether there were grounds for asking the police to institute further criminal
investigations. It concluded that there were insufficient grounds, ["material" - ie. papers and
video tapes].

WHY WILL YOU NOT TAKE ACTION IN RELATION TO THE ALLEGATIONS
THAT POLICE OFFICERS ALTERED THEIR STATEMENTS?

This matter was considered in full by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. He considered that these
amendments in no way affected the outcome of either the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest.

WILL YOU ASK THE POLICE TO INVESTIGATE THE STATE OF THE GROUND
IN THE LIGHT OF THE COMMENTS OF LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH?

No. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith made it clear that some evidence not previously considered
about the size of crush barriers and the capacity of parts of Leppings Lane terraces do not
give grounds for re-opening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.

WHY WILL YOU NOT PUBLISH YOUR ADVICES?

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked to consider whether there is any new material which
might have a bearing on the CPS decisions. He was not asked to comment on the decisions
themselves. It has long been accepted that detailed reasons for prosecuting or not
prosecuting someone should not be made public.

[If pressed, reasons are: Decisions about prosecution frequently involve the interests and
reputations of witnesses, the victim and the accused or suspect. Publicly calling into question
decisions about prosecution could amount to a trial of the suspect without the safeguards
which criminal proceedings are designed to provide].

HAS THE DPP HERSELF BEEN INVOLVED IN CONSIDERING THE CASE?

The DPP has been consulted about the decisions and has been kept informed of key
developments.
J
r
                                                                         18 FEBRUARY 1998                         Hillsborough                        1086
1084                                              K > 5
                                                    I
                                                                                          The main causes o f the disaster have long been clear.
e has                                  H illsborough                                   They were identified by Lord Taylor in his interim report
1   put
                                                                                       in August 1989. Lord Justice Taylor did not attribute all
              3.31 pm                                                                  the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph
                H ie Secretary o f State for the Hom e D epartm ent                    278 o f his report he made it clear that
i any
vings         Qjr. Jack Straw): With permission, Madam Speaker,                        “the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”.
r the         I should like to make a statement about the Hillsborough
              stadium disaster.                                                        Both Lord Taylor, and now Lord Justice               Stuart-Smith,
  put
uit—                                                                                   have been damning in their condemnation              o f the senior
                Few events in recent years have touched the lives o f so               officer in charge that afternoon, the                 then Chief
lions         many people. The fam ilies and friends o f the 96 Liverpool
 first                                                                                 Superintendent Duckenfield. Lord Justice              Stuart-Smith
              fans who died at Hillsborough have suffered
                                                                                       refers in his report to
              immeasurably. The whole nation has been profoundly
              disturbed by what occurred that day. Although almost                     “Mr. Duckenfield’s disgraceful he”
              nine years have now passed, many o f the fam ilies and                   about one of die gates at Hillsborough—
              others felt very strongly indeed that new evidence was
              available that would cast new light on the events. As                    “Gate C being forced open by fans”.
              Home Secretary, I was determined to do all that I could                     The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the
              to f stahlish whether that was indeed the case.                          m a in share o f responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield
                On com ing into office in May last year, I gave that                   W ednesday football club and the local authority were also
              question intense and urgent consideration, and on 30 June,               criticised by Lord Taylor.
              I announced to the House that the Attorney-General and
                                                                                         With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that,
              I bad decided to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
                                                                                       over timp som e new information may become available,
              a senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal, to conduct
              an independent scrutiny o f the matter. His terms of                     but that does not necessarily mean that the outcome of
                                                                                       any previous inquiries would have been different What is
              reference were
                                                                                       crucial is not just whether the information is new, but
                 “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster    whether it is o f such significance—to use the phrase in
              at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not
                                                                                       the terms o f reference— as to justify a new inquiry.
              available;
              (a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or                    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail
                                                                                       all the evidence put before him. That included all the
              (b) to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
              for the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
                                                                                       relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
              responsibilities; or                                                     inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at all the
                                                                                       information presented to him, by individuals and official
              (c) to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to        bodies, including those representing the families o f those
              police disciplinary matters;
                                                                                       who died and others who have acted in support o f them.
              and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously     He has produced a thorough and comprehensive report
              available is o f such significance as to justify establishment by the    and goes into immense detail to analyse and reach
              Secretary o f State for the Home Department of a further public
              inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any   conclusions on each o f the submissions made to him.
              evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant            Let me briefly summarise what Lord Justice
              to their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other
                                                                                       Stuart-Smith says on the key allegations relating to video
              action which should be taken in the public interest.”
                                                                                       evidence and the cut-off time o f 3.15 pm for the inquest,
                Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report,                and allegations o f interference with witnesses. I refer first
              which I am publishing today. It is available in the Vote                 to the video evidence. Two sets o f allegations were made
              Office. H is scrutiny is the latest in a series o f lengthy and          to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about video evidence. They
              detailed examinations o f the evidence in this case. The                 were, first, that video tapes were stolen from the club’s
              public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor                       control room to conceal material evidence from the earlier
              considered fully the causes o f the disaster and made                    inquiries. There is no dispute that the theft o f two tapes
              wide-ranging recommendations about crowd control and                     took place. The tapes were pictures from the club’s closed
              safety at sports events. Those have had a profound and                   circuit television cameras, not from police cameras.
              positive effect on both crowd safety at football grounds                 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that, in any event, the
              and on the policing o f football matches.                                tapes would have shown nothing significant. Moreover,
                   The deaths that occurred were also the subject o f                   he is satisfied that all the police tapes were made available
                inquests conducted by the coroner for the Western district              in their entirety to Lord Taylor’s inquiry and to the
                o f South Yorkshire in two parts in 1990 and 1991. Those                coroner.
              ■ inquests involved more than 80 days o f public hearings.
                                                                                           The second allegation relating to video tapes, with
                A further investigation was conducted by the West
                                                                                        which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals at considerable
                Midlands police, supervised by the Police Complaints
                                                                                        length, was made principally by Mr. Roger Houldsworth,
                Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds
                                                                                        a video technician at Sheffield Wednesday football club.
                for criminal or disciplinary proceedings against the police.
                                                                                        It was that the police had blamed their failure to see
                That investigation involved taking more than 5,000
                                                                                        overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on camera 5 being
                 statements. A t a later stage, in November 1993, a judicial
                 review o f the coroner’s proceedings upheld the inquest                defective, when it was not; that evidence o f the video
                 verdict o f accidental death and the conduct o f those                 tapes taken by camera 5 was deliberately suppressed and
                 proceedings. W e have now had this further detailed                    concealed; and that tw o police officers gave deliberately
                 scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice of Appeal.                            false evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.

                    553 CD122-PAG2/1


          i
1087                      Hillsborough             18 FEBRUARY 1998                      Hillsborough                         10:

[Mr. Jack Straw]                                              authorities that could cause them to reconsider ti
                                                              decisions that they have already taken. He also conclud
   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the police did         that none o f the evidence that he was asked to consid
not try to blame their failure to spot overcrowding on        added anything significant to the evidence that w
the terraces on faulty CCTV equipment. He says that           available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.
the police controllers had a good view over the terraces        I, the Attorney-General and the Director o f Pub!
from the control box, and did not pretend otherwise.          Prosecutions have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
H e also concluded that                                       report very carefully. W e have no reason to doubt h
“the importance of Mr. Houldsworth’s evidence has been        conclusions. That w ill, I know, be deeply disappointii
exaggerated out of all proportion”,                           for the families o f those who died at Hillsborough and i
and that Mr. Houldsworth’s existence and evidence were        many who have campaigned on their behalf.
known to the Taylor inquiry and to the coroner.                  I fully understand that those who lost loved ones
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that the allegation       Hillsborough feel betrayed by those responsible f
that the police hid video tape evidence o f the terraces      policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the sta
is “unfounded”.                                               o f die ground on that day. I hope and believe that ti
   There are allegations about the conduct o f the            changes that resulted from the Taylor inquiry w ill me;
inquest, and in particular about the cut-off tim e of         that such a disaster w ill never happen again.
3.15 pm. One o f die issues that has unquestionably             However, there is another sense in which the syste
caused m ost distress to those bereaved at Hillsborough       has failed the Hillsborough families. As Lord Justi<
was the decision o f the coroner to rule that all those       Stuart-Smidi says in chapter 7 o f his report:
who had died had received the injuries that caused their
                                                                 “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual h
deaths by 3.15 pm. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that        personally been held to account either in a criminal cou
the coroner did not say that all those who died did so        disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of losing their job'
before 3.15 pm, or that all those w ho became
unconscious subsequently died. It was only in relation         That highlights som e o f die serious shortcomings in tl
to how or by what means the deceased cam e to their           police disciplinary system . Earlier this year, the Sele
deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Lord Justice        Committee on Hom e Affairs produced a report that mat
Stuart-Smith says that die cut-off time did not lim it the    major recommendations for change. I shall respond fill
inquiry undertaken by the inquest, and that he does not       to that report soon, but what happened after Hillsborouj
consider the inquest to have been flawed. The Taylor          is a prime example o f why we must improve the curre
inquiry considered in detail the response o f the             arrangements.
emergency services after 3.15 pm as w ell as before,            Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on wheth'
and concluded that no valid criticism could be made           coroners’ proceedings are appropriate at all in respect <
o f them.                                                     a major disaster that has already been the subject o f
  The main allegations concerning interference with           public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation <
witnesses were that specific witnesses had had pressure       a Hom e O ffice working group on disasters ar
put on them by the West Midlands police, and that the         inquests— published in March 1997—that the role o f tl
South Yorkshire police had collected evidence from            coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.
their own officers in an unacceptable manner.                    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report emphasises d
   On the first allegation, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith         exceptional difficulty o f the coroner’s task in conductir
concludes that there was no improper attempt to alter         the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I thin
the evidence o f those witnesses. On the second, he           unnecessary burden on the families involved, given th
records that a number o f the initial statements made         the Taylor report had covered substantially the sarr
by South Yorkshire police officers were subsequently          ground. Certainly, I am sure that Hillsborough proved th.
amended on the advice o f solicitors to the force before      the inquest system in its present form is an unsuitab
being submitted to the Taylor inquiry. He says that in        means o f dealing with disasters o f that kind. I think
a very few cases, which are referred to in appendix 7         would be far better— above all, for the bereave
o f the report, what was excluded was either factual or       fam ilies— if there were one fully comprehensive inquii
comment in which factual matters were implicit. He            into the causes o f death and the wider circumstances.
says that
                                                                 When I instigated the scrutiny, I said I would do m
"il would have been preferable"                               best to ensure that the evidence considered b
for those matters not to have been excluded, but he is        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. M ost o f th
satisfied that Lord Taylor’s inquiry was not in any way       main material that he has considered is contained i
inhibited or impeded by what happened.                        appendices to his report. Much o f the other evidence th;
                                                              he has considered is already in the public domaii
  The report also deals comprehensively in appendix
                                                              consisting o f transcripts o f public hearings or materi;
10 with the 10 questions posed by the Granada Television
programme in December 1996.                                   considered by the Taylor inquiry. As I told the shado'
                                                              Home Secretary, I am arranging for die other materi;
   Taking those and all other considerations into account,    considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed i
the overall conclusion that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith         the Library o f the House, save where there are overridin
reaches is that there is no basis for a further public        reasons for doing otherwise. Let me make it clear that th
inquiry. He also finds no basis for a renewed application     material that w ill be published w ill include all the origins
to quash the verdict o f the inquest, and he concludes that   statements made by South Yorkshire police officer;
there is no material that should be put before the Director   together with the amended versions submitted to th
o f Public Prosecutions or the police disciplinary            Taylor inquiry.

   5M CD I22-PA G2/2
   >88   1089                       Hillsborough                    18 FEBRUARY 1998                       Hillsborough                      1090

  the      All hon. Members w ill have profound sympathy                         how it happened in the worst tragedy in British sporting
  les    with the fam ilies and friends o f those who died at                    history are now closed as far as the Government are
  ier    Hillsborough. W e can scarcely begin to comprehend what                 concerned?
  vas    they have suffered. In his report, Lord Justice
         Stuart-Smith says:                                                          M r. Straw : I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman
                                                                                 for his opening comments. O f course, the whole House
  >lic      “I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment
                                                                                 agrees with the eloquent and compassionate words that he
  h’s    to them”—
                                                                                 used to express some understanding o f the nightmare that
  his    the fam ilies and friends o f those who died—                           the fam ilies have faced since that afternoon. He asked four
  ing
          “especially since they have had their hopes raised that something      questions, the first o f which was whether I am personally
  for     more could be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my          satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully examined the
         judgement. I have had to look dispassionately and objectively at        new evidence, or the claimed new evidence that has
   at    what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of the evidence which   emerged. Y es, I am satisfied, and so is my right hon. and
         had previously been considered”.
  for                                                                            learned Friend the Attorney-General.
  ate    M y right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General,                    It does not follow that when one establishes an inquiry
  the    die Director o f Public Prosecutions and I have had to                  o f this kind, one is bound to accept its conclusions, but as
  ian    consider Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same                 the right hon. Gentleman w ill have seen from the
         light, and w e accept its conclusions.                                  summary in chapter 7, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has
  em       The entire country is united in sympathy with those                   conducted a most careful examination o f the evidence and
  ice    who lost loved ones a t‘Hillsborough. W e cannot take                   has reached clear conclusions. It would have been
         the pain from them, but I hope that the fam ilies w ill                 extraordinary if my right hon. and learned Friend the
         recognise that the report represents—as I promised— an                  Attorney-General and I had not followed those
  has
  urt,   independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny o f all the                 conclusions in those circumstances.
  o”.    evidence that was given to the committee.                                  The right hon. Gentleman asked whether I am satisfied
                                                                                 that the fam ilies’ complaints about the 3.15 pm cut-off
 the
                                                                                 point have been dealt with satisfactorily in the report.
 ect        S ir B rian M aw hinney (North-W est Cambridgeshire):
                                                                                 I am satisfied about that so far as the report is concerned.
 ide     1 thank the Home Secretary for his courtesy in letting me
                                                                                 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith states on page 41, paragraph
 illy    have early sight o f his statement, and even earlier sight o f
                                                                                 12 that in his view the coroner had been “widely
 lgh     the report. It is a long report, and, as the right hon.
                                                                                 misrepresented” about what the 3.15 pm cut-off point was
 ent     Gentleman w ill understand, I have not had the opportunity
                                                                                 meant to mean. He states:
         to read it all, but I have read carefully the chapter that
         summarises the findings in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s                     “It should be noted that the Coroner did not say that all those
 her                                                                             who died did so before 3.15, or that the medical evidence was to
         own words. I also thank the right hon. Gentleman for his
  of                                                                             this effect.”
         w illingness to publish all the material, both unamended
 f a                                                                             The point about the 3.15 pm cut-off was much narrower.
         and amended. I am sure that that was the right thing to do.
  of                                                                             I do not think that that w ill be accepted by the families.
 ind       W e, like Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, express great                    The combination, the conjunction, o f the coroner’s inquest
 the     sympathy for the relatives o f those who died, and the                  before and after the major public inquiry raises concerns
         spectators who were injured. W e, too, find it difficult to             about the purpose o f such inquests when there is such a
         imagine anything more horrific than the experience o f                  major inquiry, about which I commented in my statement.
  the
         those who endured it, and o f those who lost their
 ing                                                                                The right hon. Gentleman asked whether the families
         fam ilies— including children— in that appalling incident.
 nk,                                                                             w ill be disappointed. Inevitably, there was always a risk
 hat        I have four questions on the report. First, is the Home              that in accepting, as I did, that there was, prima facie,
 me      Secretary satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully                sufficient new evidence needing this kind o f scrutiny, the
 hat     examined all the so-called new evidence that has emerged,               fam ilies’ hopes would be raised and that that could lead
 ble     not least from the fam ilies, since the Taylor inquiry? Is he           to one o f the four possibilities that are mentioned in the
 : it    personally satisfied that none o f it was newly significant?            terms o f reference. That was inevitable. I do not in
 /ed     Secondly, is he satisfied that the fam ilies’ complaints                the least think that it was wrong to set up the inquiry,
 iry     about the so-called 3.15 pm cut-off point have been                     and I know that the right hon. Gentleman supported me
         comprehensively addressed by the judge? N o doubt the                   in doing so.
         right hon. Gentleman realises that, although his decision                  The fam ilies are disappointed. With Madam Speaker’s
 my
         to establish this independent scrutiny was broadly                      permission, I saw them at 2.15 pm this afternoon and,
  by
         welcom ed, it always carried the risk that it would heighten            again with her permission, I gave them copies o f the
 the
         expectations, particularly those o f the families who were              report. They are upset, disappointed and angry about its
   in
         involved. That brings me to my third question. D oes he                 conclusions. They are also angry that I have accepted
 hat
         accept that they w ill be disappointed by the outcome o f               those conclusions. I understand that, but what I ask them
 un,
         the inquiry and that som e o f them may feel let down?                  to do— and, obviously, what they were not able to do in
 rial
 ow         M y fourth and final question to the Home Secretary is               the three quarters o f an hour that I had with them— is to
rial     this. By agreeing that there is no basis for a further                  read the report carefully and, I hope, in time, to come
  in     judicial inquiry; for a reopening o f Lord Taylor’s inquiry;            to understand that the establishment o f this further
ing      for a renewed application to the divisional court; for                  scrutiny and the way in which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
the      the Attorney-General to exercise his powers undo: the                   conducted it show great respect for their bereavement and
nal      Coroner’s Act 1988; or for any new material to be put                   continuing concerns.
irs,     before the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Police                  Finally, the right hon. Gentleman asked me whether
the      Complaints Authority, is he suggesting to the H ouse and                I believe that, as it were, this matter is now closed.
         the country that matters relating to what happened and                  W e are announcing today that there are no grounds for

            555C D I22-PA G 2/3
1091                       Hillsborough                    18 FEBRUARY 1998                     H illsborough                   1092


[Mr. Straw]                                                             follow ed by a comprehensive inquiry, which, in practice,
                                                                        would include the purposes o f subsequent main inquests
reopening a further full public inquiry o f the sort that was           under a senior judicial figure, and a final, formal inquest,
conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, the coroner’s inquest,                which would simply receive the main inquiry s report.
disciplinary matters against the police or certain other                In our judgment, that would be a far more satisfactory
matters. Those are our decisions and they will have to                  way o f dealing with these matters, and far less frustrating
stand.                                                                  to the relatives and friends o f the bereaved.
    The feelings o f the fam ilies w ill live with them for ever,
so the matter is not closed in that sense. A ll o f us who                 M r. A. J . B eith (Berwick-upon-Tweed): Although the
have lost children in any circumstances have some                       report has not provided the Home Secretary with support
understanding o f the way in which people never get over                for a further general inquiry, does he recognise that this
the deaths o f children, even if they die from natural                  outcom e w ill make it even harder to lift the cloud o f grief
causes; it is still more terrible if they die from violent              and frustration that hangs over the families and friends of
causes such as this. However, there are other lessons that              those who lost their lives? Bearing in mind Lord Justice
w e have to learn. A s I have said, those relate to the                 Stuart-Smith’s reference to the “disgraceful lie” o f a
purpose o f coroners’ inquiries, to the fact that w e should            senior police officer, the evidence o f material omitted
IKK put fam ilies through the m ill twice, as happened in               from police evidence and Lord Justice Taylor’s assertion
tiiis case, and to the need to change the police                        that the principal cause was a police failure, is it not
disciplinary system.                                                    understandable that the families w ill be bitterly
                                                                        disappointed that the door seems finally to be closed on
   M r. E ddie O ’H ara (Knowsley, South): One has to live              any disciplinary action against particular individuals who
on M erseyside to understand die palpable sense o f grief,              should bear some responsibility? W ill the right hon.
resentment mid anger that still exists in our part o f the              Gentleman look again at that aspect o f the issue and give
world at what w e regard as the continuing injustice as a               priority to a reform o f police disciplinary procedure?
result o f the Hillsborough affair.
                                                                           M r. Straw : The right hon. Gentleman asks whether
   M y right hon. Friend has rightly pointed out that Lord
                                                                        it w ill not now be even harder to lift the clouds o f grief
Justice Stuart-Smith had to consider two questions: was
                                                                        over the bereaved fam ilies. 1 cannot speak for them, but
there new evidence; and was it sufficiently strong to be a
                                                                        it would have been far worse had I not set up this further
basis for reopening the inquiry? I draw my right hon.
                                                                        scrutiny. They cam e forward with serious new allegations
Friend’s attention to paragraph 14 and related paragraph
                                                                        and it was important that they were examined by someone
 13 on page 41 o f the report, which deal with the 3.15 pm
                                                                        o f the experience and distinction o f Lord Justice
cut-off, which is one o f the most important sources o f
                                                                        Stuart-Smith. However, the right hon. Gentleman is
anger. Referring to new evidence about whether people
                                                                        right— there can be no dispute about it—that the families
w ere alive after 3.15 pm, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says:
                                                                        are bound to be bitterly disappointed by the fact that no
“it is difficult to see the relevance of further evidence that person   one has taken the blame for what happened. Lord Justice
A was alive at 3.15 pm but died subsequently”—
                                                                        Stuart-Smith makes that clear and shares the bitter
referring to whether people might have survived if they                 disappointment o f the fam ilies, as do I and, I believe, die
had been given better medical treatment. He justifies that              House. As I said in my earlier remarks, that underlines
conclusion by referring to the divisional court, which                  the need for there to be significant changes to the police
rejected such grounds, concluding that such questions                   disciplinary system.
“were not relevant to the inquiry into how—i.e. by what means—
the deceased had come to their deaths.”                                    M r. A ndrew M iller (Ellesmere Port and Neston):
If a person had a cardiac arrest in hospital and was not                M y right hon. Friend has mentioned in the context o f the
satisfactorily treated, would that be regarded as simply                report his consideration o f the future conduct o f inquests.
death by cardiac arrest, or would the consideration o f                 W ill he extend his review to consider carefully the way
neglect com e into it?                                                  in which relatives are treated during inquests? They are
                                                                        treated in a most dispassionate way, which results in much
   M r. Straw : The point that my hon. Friend raises is                 o f the grief that is expressed vocally by many o f the
often raised in relation to the conduct o f inquests. It com es         people, including my constituents, who suffered in this
up when, for example, there have been allegations o f                   terrible tragedy.
deaths in custody and in many cases when there has been
a violent or unexpected death. The relatives believe that                  M r. Straw : Y es, I w ill. We have the helpful report o f
part o f the purpose o f the inquest is to allocate blame for           the disasters and inquests working group, established
what has happened, whereas the purpose o f the inquest                  under the previous Administration, which made
is much narrower: to try to identify the cause o f death. It            recommendations in March last year. Part o f the reason
is in that context that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith makes his             for the frustration— often anger—at inquests, o f relatives
remarks. It is important to recognise that all that he says             and others who are bereaved, goes back to a
in paragraph 14 on page 41 follows the decision o f the                 misapprehension about their purpose. To some extent, that
divisional court, which followed a thorough judicial                    w ill be dealt with by the kind o f changes that I have
review hearing, not to grant a reopening o f the inquest.               already outlined for inquiries into major disasters.
   Again, my hon. Friend flags up a need for changes in
the way in which investigations are held into major                       M rs. L ouise Ellm an (Liverpool, Riverside): My right
disasters such as Hillsborough. I repeat that we believe                hon. Friend acted prompdy and properly in
that, in future, there should be what are called                        com m issioning the scrutiny, for which I thank him.
m ini-inquests into the immediate causes o f death,                     I agree that the bereaved parents will remain upset,

   55* CDI22-PAC2/4
    1092      1093                      Hillsborough                18 FEBRUARY 1998                     Hillsborough                    1094

practice,     disappointed and angry and, in that knowledge, w ill he           aside, as the fam ilies would have wished him to do. It is
 inquests     give the matter further consideration? Does he accept that        a matter o f huge frustration that no one has been brought
 inquest,     it is not possible for all of. us at this early stage to assess   to justice. That represents severe defects in terms o f police
s report,     the report’s full implications and to read it in detail to        discipline, and I have spoken about the need for that to
isfactory     form our judgment? Therefore, w ill he support calls for          be changed. It is not possible to put the clock back nine
ustrating     an opportunity for the House to consider the report               years to do so.
              further, so that w e may give a reasoned assessment o f the
              report and attempt to deal with the unresolved problems              M r. R obert N . W areing (Liverpool, West Derby):
ough the      and traumas faced by the parents? I support them in not           D oes my right hon. Friend accept that there w ill be deep
i support     wishing to leave matters simply as they stand.                    unease on M erseyside and elsewhere, and that people w ill
 that this                                                                      feel that there is no justice in this world? Does he further
1o f grief       M r. Straw : I am grateful to my hon. Friend for her           accept that because few o f us have had the opportunity to
len d s o f   opening remarks, and I fully understand her concern—              read the report— although he was kind enough to analyse
1 Justice     which is widely shared—that there should be a debate on           it with the parents— far more scrutiny is required by the
e” o f a      the matter. I am probably one of the few who has had an           House o f Commons; possibly by the Select Committee on
  omitted     opportunity to read the report thoroughly, and I shall pass       Home A ffairs, which should be asked to report?
assertion     on m y hon. Friend’s remarks to my right hon. Friend the             Furthermore, I add my voice to that o f my hon. Friend
is it not     President o f the Council. I hope that my right hon. Friend       the Member for Liverpool, Riverside (Mrs. Ellman) and
  bitterly    w ill take them into account.                                     ask that there should be a proper debate following a
losed on                                                                        reasonable period to allow us to read the report. For
lals who         M aria E agle (Liverpool, Garston): I thank my right           example, it would seem that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
|h t hon.     hon. Friend for his statement and for his consideration in        ruled as not significant a couple of videos stolen from
and give      seeking your permission, Madam Speaker, to speak to the           Sheffield W ednesday. How on earth could he say that they
ure?          fam ilies first before making i t He has accepted the deep        were not significant if he had never seen them? Many
              disquiet that they feel as a result o f the report by Lord        questions have been raised by the report, and the parents
  whether     Justice Stuart-Smith, and I know that it is deep.                 w ill not feel that justice has been done until they are
; o f grief   I particularly welcom e my right hon. Friend’s                    answered.
hem, but      undertaking to publish all the available evidence. What
is further    would his attitude be if, at some stage, the families were           M r. Straw : Lord Justice Stuart-Smith explains why he
legations     to consider private prosecutions or taking further action?        came to that conclusion and how he could judge that the
someone                                                                         videos were not significant when he had not seen them.
   Justice       M r. Straw : Subject to certain constraints, individuals       One o f the videos was from a misplaced camera angle.
eman is       in this country may take private prosecutions. That is            It was known that it had been pointing at a wall.
  fam ilies   entirely a matter for them and for the judicial processes.        Therefore, the tape was o f no value, even though it was
t that no     It would be improper for me to comment.                           stolen. A s for the other video, two points are made. One
d Justice                                                                       is that it was a club video. Police videos in part covered
le bitter       M r. D erek T w igg (Halton): I speak with some                 the same area. In addition, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 ieve, the    knowledge, as I was on the terraces at Hillsborough that          makes the point that the police admitted that they could
nderiines     day and not in som e directors’ area. I had to wait for two       see with their own eyes what was going on on the terraces
le police     hours to see whether my friends were alive, and I know            and did not need this crucial video evidence. That is one
              that a number o f people from my constituency and that o f        example o f why it is very important that everybody should
              my hon. Friend the Member for Weaver Vale (Mr. Hall)              read the report’s details. When they do, they may be
 Neston):     were killed on that day.                                          reassured that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has gone into the
:xt o f the                                                                     matter in great detail and with great care.
                 May I express my bitter disappointment—not at the
inquests,     Home Secretary, whom I thank for organising                          That brings me to m y hon. Friend’s first point. I have
 the w ay     the scrutiny— but at the conclusions o f the report?              already accepted that it is a matter o f fact—there is no
rhey are      The fam ilies w ill be bitterly disappointed by the fact that     question about this— that there is great disappointment
 in much      no one has been brought to justice, and such an injustice         among the bereaved fam ilies and friends o f those who
y o f the     does not give confidence in our judicial system. I ask my         died on that terrible day. I do not think that it is correct
d in this     right hon. Friend for his comments on that. If we cannot          to say— to pick up my hon. Friend’s words— that there is
              have a debate on the Floor o f the House on the report,           no justice in this world. On reflection, he will perhaps
              would you, Madam Speaker, be prepared to allow an                 accept that Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry was conducted
report of     Adjournment debate on the subject in the future?                  impeccably, with great thoroughness. There has been no
tablished                                                                       criticism o f either the way in which he conducted that
1 made                                                                          inquiry or his conclusions. That may be only partial
                 M r. Straw : O f course, I understand my hon. Friend’s
 e reason                                                                       justice in the context o f this terrible tragedy— it is partial
              personal feelings in the light o f the fact that he was
 relatives                                                                      justice. I understand that the conduct o f the inquests was
              present on that terrible day. I understand, too, that those
k to a                                                                          controversial,’ but that has a great deal to do with the
              feelings w ill live with him for the rest o f his life. The
 tent, that                                                                     system of inquests, and that was not found to be unjust.
              fam ilies are bitterly disappointed and, as I said, I hope
it I have     that their disappointment will be directed at my right hon.         It is inevitable that an inquiry’s conclusions may be
s.            and learned Friend the Attorney-General and me as w ell           uncomfortable to one side or another. I hope that those
              as at Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, because it is our view that      who read the report w ill understand that it represents a
My right      he has done a thorough, comprehensive and detailed job            thorough inquiry in the best traditions o f British justice.
erly in       with the utmost integrity. He has gone into all the
ink him.      allegations carefully and, as he said, it was his job to look      M r. V ernon C oaker (Gedling): As one o f the
 n upset,     at the evidence presented to him and to put compassion            Members o f Parliament who represents the Nottingham

                 557 C D I22-PA G 2/5
1095                      Hillsborough                     18 FEBRUARY 1998                     Hillsborough

[Mr. Vernon Cooker]                                                      why he was chosen to hold the inquiry. When my hon.
                                                                        Friend has had a chance to digest Lord Justice
area, may I take this opportunity, on behalf o f those                  Stuart-Smith’s report, he w ill appreciate that it has gone
Members, to express our sympathy with the fam ilies and                 into the allegations with great care.
people o f M erseyside? Does the Home Secretaiy agree
that the people o f Nottingham, along with those on                        M r. T ony C larke (Northampton, South): Does my
M erseyside, w ill want a full and frank debate on the                  right hon. Friend accept that it is that clear evidence that
report, which amounts to more than 200 pages and has                    w ill make it im possible for the families to accept
only just been published today? W ill he do all that he can             disappointment, inasmuch as they know that the police
to ensure a full debate, so that people w ill have                      failed and that nothing is being done about that? Will he
the opportunity to express their view s and opinions to me              say a few words about the evidence that Lord Justice
and other Members o f Parliament, and w e can express                   Stuart-Smith put forward in respect o f the stolen tapes?
                                                                        Surely, if the stolen tapes are m issing, we must ask two
those view s in the Chamber?
                                                                        questions. First, who was responsible for that theft and,
                                                                        secondly, for what reason were they stolen if not for
  M r. Straw : I accept m y hon. Friend’s point I should                concealment? It is for that reason that I add my support
have made the point in response to my hon. Friend the                   to the call o f my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool,
Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) that                     Riverside (M rs. Ellman) for a full debate in the House to
there is obviously considerable feeling about the need for              exam ine the individual pieces o f evidence and missing
a debate. I shall pass that on to my right hon. Friend the              evidence before com ing to a conclusion.
President o f the Council.
                                                                          M r. Straw : I appreciate that I am one o f the few people
                                                                        who have had the benefit o f reading the report. If my hon.
   M r. D ennis S kinner (Bolsover): Is the Home Secretary              Friend reads it, as I know he w ill, he will see that the
aware that I find it difficult to believe that 95 people were           question o f the tw o m issing tapes is dealt with in some
killed but nobody is to blame? Is he further aware that                 particular detail. I have explained why Lord Justice
inquests on the deaths o f many people, such as after                   Stuart-Smith reached the conclusion that he did about
m ining disasters and for this matter, are not fit and proper           whether the fact that they were stolen was significant.
places to start the procedure? He would do w ell, during                This goes back to the point that I made at the beginning o f
this Parliament, to introduce measures to ensure that                   my statement. W hen w e consider whether a major public
inquests are fit to deal with not just the death o f three              inquiry into events that took place nine years ago should
people in a house fire but with mass disasters. I have                  be reopened, with all the inevitable problems caused by
never believed that inquests are competent to do the job.               the effluxion o f tim e, the issue has to be not only whether
                                                                        there is new evidence— which there might be—but
  W ill the Hom e Secretary do me a favour? If, perchance,              whether it is o f such significance as materially to alter the
there is another unfortunate incident o f this kind, w ill he           conclusions o f the first inquiry. That is what Lord Justice
not invite these tinpot judges and justices—distinguished               Stuart-Smith has examined. He has come to the
though they may be— to deal with the problem? I have                    conclusion that I have described about the two missing
never believed that they understand working-class culture.              tapes.
Over the past few years, all these people—Lord Justice                     It is a matter o f supposition why the tapes were stolen.
Scott, Lord Justice Taylor, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—                  People steal things for the purposes o f concealment or for
have been investigating matters. What do they really                    more prosaic reasons. They may have wanted the tapes
know about what makes working-class people tick?                        for their own use. N o one has ever been apprehended for
                                                                        the theft o f the tapes, but in the circumstances described
                                                                        and set out in the report, it is palpable that they were not
  M r. Straw : M y hon. Friend makes the point that no                  material to the question whether the police were to blame
one is to blame. It is not the case that the earlier inquiries          for failing to recognise that a serious disaster was taking
found no one to blame. Indeed, on page 49 o f his interim               place at the Leppings lane end. That was the issue. If Lord
report— Cm 765— Lord Justice Taylor was explicit and                    Justice Taylor had said that the police were not to blame
damning. He said:                                                       and that the tapes were likely to disclose why, the tapes
                                                                        would have greater significance. However, Lord Justice
“(he main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”.
                                                                        Taylor said that the police were to blame. He also pointed
There has been no cover-up o f that. There was a failure o f            out— this was confirmed by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith—
police control, and Lord Justice Taylor pulled no punches               that one o f the reasons why the police were to blame was
whatever in reaching that conclusion. I hope that that                  that they did not have to rely on video evidence;
gives the lie to my hon. Friend’s suggestion that judges                they could see with their own eyes what was going on
are incapable o f holding investigations into matters o f this'         and they failed to make proper decisions following that.
kind. I note that whenever there is a call for an inquiry,
there is a great demand for members o f the Court o f                      M r. R oss C ranston (Dudley, North): May I take my
Appeal to hold them.                                                    right hon. Friend back to the issue o f police discipline and
                                                                        the feeling among the relatives that no one has been
  It is inevitable that not everyone w ill be satisfied by the          brought to justice? M ay I ask him specifically whether
result o f an inquiry because such judgments defy human                 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith addresses the issue o f early
behaviour. However, Lord Justice Taylor’s report showed                 retirement by police officers to avoid disciplinary
great understanding o f soccer and soccer culture. He was               procedures? M ay I press him for a speedy response to the
an ardent soccer supporter himself. I had the occasional                Select Committee on Home Affairs report on police
discussion with him about it. That is one o f the reasons               discipline?

   558 CD122-PAG2/6
1097                     Hillsborough               18 FEBRUARY 1998                                                         1098


   M r. Straw : I have already referred to Lord Justice                              P oint of O rder
Stuart-Smith’s remarks about the fact that no one has been
brought to justice and that no one has suffered any             4.21 pm
disciplinary proceedings or even lost their job as a result
                                                                   M r. A ndrew R obathan (Blaby): On a point o f order,
either o f those tenible events, or o f Lord Justice Taylor’s
                                                                Madam Speaker. I have given you prior notice o f this
clear conclusion that a failure of police control was the
                                                                point o f order, which concerns the accuracy o f statements
principal cause o f the disaster. By implication, it is clear
                                                                recorded in the Official Report. W e all judge the Official
that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is not happy with what
                                                                Report to be o f immense use when we write our speeches
happened, and neither are we. I have looked in great detail
                                                                or assemble arguments, and it is important that
at the helpful report from the Select Committee, of which
                                                                statements recorded in it are accurate, so I ask your
my hon. Friend is a member. As I said earlier, we intend
                                                                guidance. On 21 January, the hon. Member for Broxtowe
to make an early announcement about that matter, with a
                                                                (Dr. Palmer) introduced a ten-minute B ill about air
view to improving the system o f police discipline.
                                                                weapons. I have spoken to the hon. Gentleman and we
                                                                have discussed the matter, although sadly he cannot be
                                                                here this afternoon. I should say that I wish him no ill
                                                                and I am sure that it was confusion o f facts, rather than
                                                                any other cause, which led to this point of order.
                                                                The Official Report states:
                                                                  “In the past few years, one police officer was tilled and another
                                                                7,000 injured by airguri attacks.”—[Official Report, 21 January
                                                                1998; Vol. 304, c. 1014.]
                                                                However, in response to a written question from me, the
                                                                Hom e Secretary said that, although he had no figure for
                                                                the past tw o years, he could find no fatal injuries and a
                                                                total o f 22 injuries recorded during eight o f the past
                                                                10 years. I can find no other evidence o f anybody being
                                                                killed. Every policeman injured is a serious matter, but the
                                                                discrepancy between 22 and 7,000 is large and I wondered
                                                                whether you could give your judgment on that, Madam
                                                                Speaker.

                                                                   M adam Speaker: The answer is a polite no. It is not
                                                                a point o f order: the hon. Gentleman is challenging the
                                                                figures used by another hon. Member and that is not a
                                                                matter for the Speaker, but a matter for debate and
                                                                argument. It is not for the Speaker o f the House to
                                                                determine the figures or to becom e involved in arguments
                                                                about the substance o f debates. The hon. Gentleman may
                                                                try to use other methods to bring the matter to the
                                                                attention o f the hon. Member for Broxtowe (Dr. Palmer).




   559 C D I22-PA G2/7
JUN '97   16=10      HOME OFFICE PRESS OFFICE                   I                        P. 1/7
                        CaSaM a4~~C. h -                  V f f lo M   j   '•




                                            Mi     M il

                                           JlVl*
                                           •Mf     0                       _    .ty/o'     r •
      HILLSBOROUGH : ORAL STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY

                                 MONDAY 30 JUNE 1997



With permission, Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the

Hillsborough Stadium disaster.



2.    Ninety six people lost their lives as a result of the Hillsborough disaster,

which happened on 15 April 1989. That was more than eight years ago but no

one who saw the news reports on that dreadful Saturday will have forgotten

those terrible events. For those who lost loved members of their family, the

pain is ever-present.         Following Hillsborough, members of this House were

united in their determination to do all in their power to prevent anything like

that ever happening again.

(i)   P_Ujb lic .lQf luiry.




3.    Madam Speaker, after the Hillsborough disaster, a number of inquiries

and investigations took place, looking at aspects of the tragedy. Perhaps the

most thorough and wide-ranging was the Public Inquiry led by Lord Taylor.

The terms of reference of that Inquiry encompassed not only inquiring into the

disaster itself but also making recommendations about crowd control and

safety at sports events.
30 JUN '97    16:10     HOME OFFICE PRESS OFFICE
                                                                                    P. 2/




  4.     Lord Taylor's inquiry took oral evidence from over 170 witnesses at

  public hearings during May and June 1989 and considered many hours of

  video evidence from different sources. In his interim report in August 1989,

  Lord Taylor found that the disaster had a number of causes.              He did not

  attribute all the blame to a single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he

  made clear that in his view:



          "The main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control”



  5.     In   his     interim    report Lord Taylor made      43   immediate   interim

  recommendations.              His final report in January   1990 made a further 76

  recommendations. The developments which have taken place since then in

  safety at football grounds and in the policing of football matches have been

  based largely upon those recommendations. Football in this country has been

  transformed since the Taylor Report To a large extent that is due to Lord

  Taylor’s wide-ranging and soundly based conclusions.



  (ii)    Coroner’s Inquest



  6.      The deaths which occurred on 15 April 1989 were             also the subject of

  inquests conducted by the Coroner of the western district, of South Yorkshire.




                                               2
30 JUIN ' 9 <   ib:U      HUP1L U h U L L PKLbb t > H L L
                                                                                                 t- 1 . 3   /   <




  7.     The jury at the Coroner’s inquest, after examining the evidence, found in

  March 1991 that the cause of death of those who died at Hillsborough was

  accidental death.



  (Hi)     West Midlands Police Investigation



   8.    A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands Police,

   supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there

  were any grounds for criminal proceedings, and to consider whether any

   police officer should be subject to disciplinary proceedings.



   9.      That investigation involved the taking of over 5000 statements and the

   scrutiny of all the material which had previously been examined by the Taylor

   inquiry. After that investigation the evidence was sent to the Director of Public

   Prosecutions, who concluded that no person should be subject to criminal

   proceedings.



   10.     The     Police      Complaints        Authority    did    decide   that     the     chief

   superintendent and superintendent in charge on the day should face

   disciplinary charges for neglect of duty. In the event, the chief superintendent

   retired due to ill health in advance of a ruling by a. disciplinary tribunal under

   the police discipline rules.           A disciplinary hearing cannot proceed when d

   police officer retires before the hearing takes place. The Police Complaints

   Authority      later     decided       that     disciplinary     proceedings      against    the



                                                      3
• 30 JLW '97   16''n       OFFICE PRESS OFFICE
                                                                                P. 4/




  superintendent should be withdrawn because the retirement of the chief

  superintendent meant that what, in effect, was a joint allegation of neglect of

  duty could not fairly be heard in the absence of the more senior officer.



  (iv)    Continued,callafQrJurtherJ,nye_stLqatiQ.ns



  11.     Madam Speaker, Hon Members will be familiar with the unhappiness of

  the families of those who died, about the outcome of the inquest.     They later

  applied for judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings. In November 1993 the

  Divisional Court ruled that none of the matters raised in the judicial review

  proceedings justified intervention by that court in the verdict of the inquest

  Jury-



  12.     The events surrounding the disaster have therefore been subject to

  investigation on several occasions.          But concerns have remained about

  whether the full facts have yet emerged,             I have met relatives of the

  Hillsborough victims whose suffering is exacerbated by their belief that there

  are unresolved issues which should be investigated further.



  13.     Representations were made to my predecessor and have been made to

  me, to the Attorney General and to the Director of Public Prosecutions. A

  Granada television programme in December last year dramatised the disaster

  and raised a number of issues which, in the view of the programme makers,

   represented new evidence. This programme prompted an adjournment debate



                                           4
30 JUN '97   IS '. 12   HOME OFFICE PRESS OFFICE
                                                                              p.b>v




led by my Hon Friend, the Member for Liverpool Walton, to which my

predecessor, the Rt Hon and Learned Member for Folkestone and Hythe,

 responded. I know how seriously he took this matter. Since then further

 material has been submitted on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support

Group. Those representations have related in particular to video evidence of

the disaster and medical evidence about the time of death of the victims.



 14.   Madam Speaker, my Department, the office of the Attorney General and

 the Crown Prosecution Service have considered very carefully ail the evidence

 which has been put forward in recent months.



 15.    The Director of Public Prosecutions has taken the view that the material

 so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal, investigations. The

 then Attorney General also took the view, again on the material presented to

 him, that any application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have

 any realistic prospect of succeeding.



 16.   Nonetheless, I am acutely conscious that the families of those who died

 at Hillsborough and many others including Hoh Members of this House are

 very concerned that unresolved issues remain. I am determined to, go as far

 as I can to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked and that we do

 not reach a final conclusion without a full and independent examination of the

 evidence.




                                            5
. 30 JUN '97   16:i2   HOME OFFICE PRESS OFFICE

                                                                                    P. 6/




  17.    I can therefore tell the House today that the Attorney General, the

  Director of Public Prosecutions and I have agreed that it is in the public

  interest that there should be an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether

  there now exists any new evidence relating to the disaster which was not

  previously available. We are appointing Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior

  Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal, for that purpose.           His full terms of

  reference are;



         To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating, to the disaster at the

         Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:



         (a)           To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or



         (b)           To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney

                       General      for the purpose of discharging their respective

                       statutory responsibilities; or



         (c)           To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation

                       to police disciplinary matters;



         And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously

         available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the

         Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;

         and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not



                                            6
30 JUN ’97   16:12   HONE OFFICE PRESS OFFICE
                                                                               P. 7/




      previously considered by them which may be relevant to their

       respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which

      should be taken in the public interest.



1am today placing a copy of these terms of reference in the Library.



18.   We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and

other evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider any further

material which interested parties wish to submit to him.



19.    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s task will be twofold.    First to advise me

whether any evidence not previously available is of such significance as to

justify a further full public inquiry. His advice to me will be made available to

the House and will be made public. Secondly, he will identify for the Attorney

General and the Director of Public Prosecutions and for the Chief Constable of

South Yorkshire Police any evidence which might be relevant to their

decisions which has not previously been considered.



20.    I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively

whether or not material evidence about the causes of the Hillsborough

disaster has been overlooked. If it has I can assure the House that I will take

whatever action is needed. We owe it to everyone touched by this tragedy, but

above ail to the families of those who died, to get to the bottom of this matter

once and for all.



                                        7
