1
                                                     To? 7 * 2 -£ • @ C*4fc-
                                                                                                                    CPS
                                                                                                                   Central Casework

    Facsimile                                                                                                         United House
                                                                                                                           Piccadilly
                                                                                                                     York ¥01 1PQ

                                                                                                           Direct Line:
                                                                                                          Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                                            Facsimile: 01904-456577
                                                                                                              DXNo. 65204 York 6
Attention of:                 H Q c fn it

Address:                  &COOAtb\
                H ^ H lC K D

Fax No:         £>u2> 2&M- 700 I
From:                    C R > sro ^ »

CPS Division:         T [? tH           F
Date:     lb              Time:           \7UrS~
This fax transmission consists of this page plus L(-others

Please ackngwicdgereceipt:


If transmission is not properly received please call 01904-                                  h i ? ? £"




                          Crown Prosecution Service • Woriung in the interests o f justice
0?.M3rE,
                                                                                          @
Hammond Suddards
Solicitors
2 Park Lane
Leeds
DX: 26441
                                                                          YBF/GC/3341/89

                                                                          PCM. CHI. 57-9


                                                                           15 July 1998


Dear Sirs

HILLSBOROUGH PROSECUTIONS

Thank you for your letter of 6 July 1998 requesting guidance for the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire in the matter of disclosure of documents to the Hillsborough Family Support
group. This branch has also received a request from solicitors for the HFSG for copies and
details of all the relevant documents in our possession including advice of counsel.

As this is a case where the police investigation commenced before 1 April 1997 then the
disclosure of unused and other material will be governed by the common law rules. It may
assist you in making your decision if I discuss the principles that we will apply in considering
the request made to us.

The right to bring a private prosecution does not confer on an intending private prosecutor
a right to obtain documents from the CPS: R v DPP, ex parte Hallas (1988) 87 Cr App 340.
Nor would a defendant in such an action have a right to obtain documents from the CPS.
It must also be that the above will apply to documents in the possession of the police as well
as any member of the general public. Following a committal, the Crown Court may grant
the private prosecutor a witness summons to secure the production of relevant material from
the police or the CPS in order that the private prosecutor should be able to comply with his
obligation of disclosure to the defence: R v Gregory Pawsey (1989) Crim LR 152.

The decision whether to give voluntary disclosure of statements or information held by the
CPS (eg, the names and addresses of witnesses) is governed by certain principles. In normal
circumstances when a request is received the matter can be approached on the following
lines:

       •       The police should contact the witness and explain that a bona fide request has
               been made for a copy of the statement.
J
    t




           •       The witness should be asked whether there is any objection to his/her name
                   being given to a third party so that the third party can communicate direct.
                   It should be pointed out that if the witness has no objection, perhaps they
                   could indicate then and there whether any objection would be made to the
                   statement being disclosed by the CPS.

           •       In cases where the witness has no such objection, disclosure can be made.

           •       In circumstances where the witness has no objection to the address being
                   provided but wishes for the third party to communicate direct with them on
                   the question of release of the statement, then the address can be communicated
                   to the third party.

           •       If consent is refused to disclosure of the address, the police should endeavour
                   to obtain in writing the reasons for the refusal. The witness should be warned
                   that the CPS will have to give careful consideration to the matter to decide
                   whether the interests of justice are such that disclosure should nevertheless be
                   made.

    The above steps are only guidelines but the main principle is that wherever possible the
    witness is consulted before decisions to disclose addresses and/or statements are made. The
    general rule is that the CPS should give disclosure whenever it is in the interests of justice
    to do so. Any voluntary disclosure should be even-handed between the parties. Therefore
    if voluntary disclosure is given to the private prosecutor at his or her request then the same
    documents or information should be copied to the defendants, or vice versa.

    Where the CPS do not take over a private prosecution we would notify the private prosecutor
    and the defendants of the existence of the material in our possession and supply it on request
    if right to do so based on the above principles. Where material was subject to either public
    interest immunity ( eg, reports and advice passed between the police and the CPS) or to legal
    professional privilege (advice from counsel to the CPS) then it should not be disclosed
    without the authority of the Chief Constable or the DPP as appropriate.

    You may consider that the above principles are as appropriate for the police as they are for
    the CPS. If voluntary disclosure is to be given then initially it might be best practice to send
    to the parties a full schedule of all the non-sensitive documents in your possession. These
    schedules should already be available to you as part of the police preparation for the Taylor
    and Stuart-Smith Enquiries. Consideration can be given to the relevance of material before
    actual disclosure is made as this should considerably reduce your preparation work. I
    understand that much of the material has already been supplied to or seen by the HFSG, that
    in itself should reduce the amount of any disclosure if eventually given. Before the CPS
    consider the issue of disclosure of relevant material in our possession we will first decide on
    the exercise of the power under section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 as to
    taking over a private prosecution. This decision is presently under review.
You pose five questions for me, and my advice to the police is as follows:

       •      You may wish to delay any voluntary disclosure at this stage until the result
              of the CPS review is known.

       •      While there have been successful challenges by defendants toCPS/police
              charges for the copying of unused material in prosecution cases, I know of no
              similar caselaw for private prosecutions where voluntary disclosure is given
              by a third party (ie, the police). If you make a charge which is contested by
              any of the parties then they could be asked for the legal basis of their request
              for the free provision of documents. It would however be a different matter
              in the provision of material subject to a court order after committal
              proceedings.

       •       The original statements in your possession are part of the record contained in
               a police file involving a criminal investigation. As such I consider that best
               practice would be to retain them within the file but allow access to the private
               prosecutor/defendant making the request for the purposes of inspection or
               photo-copying if requested. If following any voluntary disclosure there was
               a request for original witness statements to be used for the committal
               proceedings, then, subject to witness agreement being obtained as stated
               earlier, it would be more appropriate for the private prosecutor/defendant to
               obtain a new original from a witness that they are to call.

       •      If the police retain original statements then the only concern would be the
               eventual disposal of copy documents. Prior to the introduction of the
               Criminal Procedure and Investigations Act 1996 there was little the
               prosecution could do about the disposal of trial papers and unused material
              provided to defendants. For investigations that commenced after 1 April 1997
               Section 17 of the Act makes a provision for the protection of unused material
              then disclosed. The aim of this section is to preserve the confidentiality of the
              material and to ensure it is only used for the given purpose. While the
              common law does not grant the same protection as under the Act I do not
              consider that an undertaking will have any great force in the present situation.
              I accept that the interests of justice can be adequately served by voluntary
              disclosure of relevant material only, subject to witness agreement.

       •      There may be occasions when it will be appropriate for the Chief Constable
              to copy to one or other parties or to the court correspondence that he has had
              with the other party, so that all parties are aware of the position. If in doubt
              he should confirm the proposed action with the originator of the letter. As
              previously advised what is disclosed to one party should be disclosed to all.

I understand that the summonses issued to Mr Duckenfield and to Mr Murray are being
withdrawn at South Sefton Magistrates’ Court for want of jurisdiction in the issue of process.
I anticipate that fresh informations will be laid in South Yorkshire in the near future,
although for now we have a short breathing space in which to properly consider the available
options.
I hope that this advice will be of some help to the Chief Constable in the decisions to be
made.

In the meantime if I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




George R.Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
