                                                                                H
                                Not for P u M lc .z iic n until
                                iltei ficiiiuiiiiics Meeting
                SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY miTNCTT.

REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE                              FIRE SERVICE COMMITTEE
                                                           1ST NOVEMBER, 1979


                 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975


As the Committee will recall the County Council's powers and duties under the Act
are p a rt of the te rm s of reference of this Comm ittee. On 8th January, 1976 the
Committee decided that the functions should be exercised through Officer Working
P a rtie s covering each of the four Borough Council a re a s , the Working P a rtie s to
consist of represen tativ es of the Police, the F ire Service and the Building Surveyors
of the Borough Councils, with co-ordination being undertaken by the Department of
Adm inistration.

The only grounds currently designated under the Act by the S ecretary of State as
requiring a Safety C ertificate are those of the F ir s t Division of the Football League
and certain "International" grounds (including the Hillsborough Stadium of the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club). Grounds of those clubs in the Second Division
of the Football League have been designated by the Secretary of State as requiring
a Safety Certificate with effect from 1st January, 1980. However, the County Council
has em ergency powers under Section 10 of the Act whereby it can apply to the courts
for an o rd e r to prohibit o r r e s tr ic t the adm ission of spectators to any sports grounds
until steps have been taken to reduce any risk s to them to a reasonable level.

 It was with this background that the Rotherham A rea Officer Working P arty visited the
 Millmoor ground of the Rotherham United Football Club following the collapse on
 6th October of p art of the concrete pitch p e rim e te r wall at the bottom of the Tivoli Covered
T erracin g at the match with Sheffield United (20, 355 attendance). Investigations
 showed that the final whistle had blown when fighting broke out between a sm all number
of fans near the central exit at the top of the Tivoli Covered T erracin g . This had
resulted in people who were in the course of leaving trying to turn back ag ain st the
p re ss u re of the people lower down who were also trying to leave and who were unaware
of what was happening at the top. The consequence had been a sudden downward move­
ment on the terracin g with an unprecedented p re ss u re on the concrete pitch p erim eter
wall (some four foot high), at the bottom. This had collapsed under the strain along
an approximately 15 foot length. A total of 32 persons were injured as a re su lt of the wall
collapsing, 2 relatively seriously.
The Working P arty inspected the Tivoli end of the Ground in company with the Club's
Vice-C hairm an, M r. L. P urshouse, on 9th October, and considered suggestions
made to contain the situation and enable the Tivoli end of the ground to be utilised
for the match against Sheffield Wednesday on 13th October

With the approval of the Chairman of the F ire Service Committee, the Club were
informed that no objection would be raised to the continued use of the Tivoli end of
 the Millmoor Ground provided that:-
(i)     the pitch p erim eter wall was satisfactorily reinstated where breached
         and reinforced along the whole of its length by metal b a r rie r s on the
         spectator side;

(ii)    the number of spectators at this end was re stric te d to a maximum of
         4,240 and

(iii)   the agreed penning arrangem ents were implemented.

A furth er inspection by the Working P a rty took place on Friday evening,
12th October, which showed that the wall had been satisfactorily reinstated where
breached and that the rem ainder of it was in a sound structural state. The metal
b a r rie r s in front of the wall had been installed along the m ajority of its length.
An exception was a sm all a re a towards the Millmoor Lane end of the covered
terracing , but the Club had installed additional vertical b a r rie r s which had the
effect of producing additional penning of spectato rs.

Bearing in mind the reduction in capacity of the covered terracin g from some
6,000 to 4,240, the additional lateral and vertical b a r rie r s , the sound state of the
concrete pitch p erim eter wall and the additional penning arrangem ents, it was
considered that the Club (who had offered the utm ost co-operation) had done all
that could reasonably be expected of them in the short tim e available to them.

Some 13,701 spectators attended the match with Sheffield Wednesday the following
day, Saturday, 13th October, of whom some tw o-thirds were Sheffield Wednesday
su p p o rte rs. It became obvious even before the match started that a small
m inority of the Sheffield Wednesday supporters in the Millmoor Lane end of the
covered terracin g were intent on making p ersisten t and determ ined efforts to cause
damage to the wall, evidently on the basis of they could better anything that the
Sheffield United supporters had done the previous week. It must of course be
pointed out that whilst the fighting which led to that incident was deliberate, the
subsequent damage to the wall was alm ost certainly accidental.

Despite police presence, a wooden advertisem ent hoarding on the pitch side of the
concrete pitch p erim eter wall was f ir s t dislodged, followed shortly by the dislodging
of concrete panels in the wall along a 12 foot length. In the consequent downward
surge in "celebration" and the scoring of the f irs t Sheffield Wednesday goal, it is known
that three supporters received minor in ju rie s .

All this happened in the period before and up to the firs t twenty minutes of the match.
Once this period had passed, there was no more than the usual sm all number of
incidents, which unfortunately have become the norm at football m atches nowadays.
T here was no trouble in any oth er p a rt of the ground o r between rival sup porters.
The segregation arrangem ents devised by the police worked very well and their
actions inside the ground undoubtedly contained what could have developed into a
very serious incident. The match itself was played in a competitive but friendly
sp irit, and there ware not any incidents on the field of such a nature as to cause
an adverse crowd reaction. As stated, there was no more than the usual small number
of incidents throughout the ground during the afternoon, some of which resu lted in a
sm all number of supporters receiving treatm ent for minor in juries.
11.     A Lesson to be Learned perhaps is the need for the Football League to ensure that
        when arranging their fixture list in future that a club does not have local derby 's
        on consecutive weekends, p articularly where the visiting team s a re from the sa m e
        city or imm ediate surrounding a re a .

12.     The Rotherham A rea Working P arty again visited the ground on 17th October, and
        reached the following agreem ent with the Club’s V ice-Chairm an, M r.L .P u rs h o u s e :-

         (i)     that in the immediate future the Club would rein state the concrete wall
                 where breached and continue its reinforcem ent by metal b a r rie r s on the
                 spectator side along the whole of the length of the Tivoli end of the ground,
                 and also bolt the advertisem ent hoardings to the wall to prevent them
                 being easily dislodged, and

         (ii)    that the Working P arty would, at the Club's request, c a rry out a survey
                 of the Millmoor Ground using the c r ite ria laid down in the Guide to Safety
                 of Sports Grounds prepared by the Home Office, subject to the necessary
                 details and plans being supplied by the Club; as the Ground is not
                 designated, it will then be for the Club to decide if and when to implement
                 the recom m endations.

13.1    So far as police presence at the two matches is concerned, the following police
        officers were deployed in the ground, immediately outside and on special public o rd e r
        patrols at the match with Sheffield United on 6th October:-

                  1   Chief Superintendent
                  1   Superintendent
                  1   Chief Inspector
                  8   Inspectors
                 23   Sergeants
                134   Constables

        In addition, there were 9 dogs and handlers, 4 horses and r id e rs , 3 Detective Sergeants
        and 8 Detective Constables, making a total police commitment of 192.

13.2    F o r the match with Sheffield Wednesday on 13th October, a total of 296 police officers
        were used, including 9 dogs and handlers, 8 detectives, 6 motor cyclists and 4 h o rses
        and r id e rs from South Y orkshire, together with 4 h o rses and r id e rs from G reater
        M anchester.

14.1     As previously stated, of the South Y orkshire Football Clubs only the Hillsborough
         Ground of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is designated by the Secretary of
         State as requiring a Safety C ertificate. It is, of cou rse, the intention of P arliam en t
         that all Football grounds should ultim ately be designated but, experience with the
       ' designations to date suggests that this may well be some time in the future. However,
         all football grounds a re subject to the emergency arrangem ents outlined in Section 10
         of the Act and previously mentioned in paragraph 2 of this R eport. Whilst grounds
         which a re not designated a re in the lower divisions and may reasonably be expected
         not to norm ally have large crowds, there a re occasions when this does happen. For


                                                3.
       example, if a club is doing particularly well in the League o r the Cup o r, especially
       in South Y orkshire, if there a re more than the average number of local derby s.

14.2   The A rea Officer Working P a rtie s a re to be reconvened and reinforced by the
       addition of senior Police and F ire Service H eadquarters O fficers, with a view to
       examining the South Y orkshire football grounds in co-operation with the Clubs to
       agree crowd capacities on a sectional basis and stru ctu ral effectiveness. When this
       task has been completed, it is proposed in conjunction with the Chief Constable an d
       the Chief F ire Officer to prepare a re p o rt for consideration by this Committee on
       recom mendations fo r any fu rth er action, both locally and nationally if n ecessary .

15.    The Committee is requested to confirm the action taken to date.




                                                           F . A. MALLETT
                                                            Chief Executive




County Hall
Barnsley

25th October, 1979
