         C.     Breathing Apparatus Compressors

         A report by the Chief Fire Officer referred to the approved capital estimate
         of £74,000 for the purchase of operational equipment which included four
         Breathing Apparatus Compressors.

         Tenders had been received but the lowest tender did not meet certain aspects
         of specification. The second lowest tender, was considered satisfactory.

£,.£ •   RESOLVED - That the tender from Safety Air Services at £3G,336,000 j for the
         supply of four Compair Reavell Compressors, be accepted.

         139.   Premises - Conisbrough Fire Station

         RESOLVED - That the Lands and Buildings Sub-Commit tee be informed the
         former Conisbrough Fire Station is now surplus to Fire Service requirements.

         140.   South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority

         A report by the County Solicitor gave details of the main decisions taken by
         the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

         141.   South Yorkshire Fire Service Historical Society

         The Committee considered a letter dated 26th November, 1985, from the
         Secretary of the South Yorkshire Fire Service Historical Society,
         requesting a donation towards the setting up of a Fire Service Museum at
         the Old Victorian Fire/Police Station at West Bar, Sheffield.

         RESOLVED - That the Committee approve a grant of £5,000.

         142.    Statement of Capital Payments and Commitments

         A.     Statement

         RESOLVED - That the Statement of Capital Payments and Commitments be
         received.

         B.      Provision of Wolflite Safety Handlamps

         A joint report of the County Solicitor, Chief Fire Officer and County
         Treasurer referred to the replacement of the existing Oldham Lamp with the
         Wolflite Safety Handlamp.

         The Wolflite lamp had been introduced to certain stations and had proved
         very efficient and far cheaper to maintain. The remaining stations still
         used the Oldham Lamp, which no longer met requirements as far as increased
         safety was concerned.

         RESOLVED - That the Policy Finance and General Purposes Sub-Committee be
         requested to approve a capital estimate of £16,000 for the purchase of 252
         Wolflite Lamps and associated equipment.

         143.   Fire Prevention - Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975

         A.     Report of the Committee of Enquiry - Final Report

         Further to minute 58 of the 5th September, 1985, the Chief Fire Officer
         outlined the recommendations contained in the final report of Mr. Justice



                                               E.3
Popplewell which looked into the operation of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975, and certain aspects of the Fire Precautions Act, 1971.

B.     Certification of Sports Grounds

A joint report of the County Solicitor and Chief Fire Officer outlined the
position regarding the certification of Sports Grounds in the County.

Following their designation by the Secretary of State, the Committee had
granted General Safety Certificates to Sheffield Wednesday, Rotherham
United and Barnsley football clubs.

The Sheffield United Football Club had been designated following their
promotion to the Second Division of the Football League. The Belle Vue
Ground of Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. had been designated following
the Bradford City tragedy. Both clubs had applied to the County Council
for General Safety Certificates.

The Committee considered a Draft General Safety Certificate for the
Bramall Lane Ground of Sheffield United and a Draft Interim General Safety
Certificate for Belle Vue Ground, Doncaster.

RESOLVED -

1.   That the General Safety Certificate now submitted in respect of the
Bramall Lane Ground, Sheffield and the Interim General Safety Certificate
in respect of the Belle Vue Ground, Doncaster, be approved, subject to the
suggested amendments to paragraph 9 relating to Safety Stewards.

2.   That the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Committee be authorised to
agree any amendments necessary should any of the requirements of the
Certificates not be able to be complied with in full by the actual date of
issue (such amendments not to reduce the overall level of safety to be
required at either Ground).

3.   Thatno charge be made to the Sheffield United Football   Club Ltd. and
the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. for the certificates.

144.   Breathing Apparatus Compressor - Thorne Fire Station

Further to minute (l) of the Buildings Sub-Committee on 21st January, 1986,
a joint report of the County Solicitor, Chief Fire Officer and County Treasurer
referred to the need to replace the breathing apparatus compressor at T home
Fire Station.

RESOLVED - That approval be given to the purchase of a compressor at a cost
of £3,350.

145.   Fire Service Chapel - Moreton-in-Marsh

A joint report of the County Solicitor, Chief Fire Officer and County
Treasurer referred to the proposed establishment of a Chapel at the Fire
Service College.

It was felt that this would give an opportunity to commemorate those members
of the Fire Service who had lost their lives whilst carrying out their duties.
A window in the chapel was proposed to consist of engraved panes depicting the
badge of each United Kingdom Fire Brigade. The cost of each pane was
estimated at £220,. the cost to be borne by individual brigades. It
was suggested that South Yorkshire County Council make a contribution of

                                    E.4
