       The Police Officers involved in the organisation of the Open
Day unanimously felt that their efforts were amply rewarded by the
wonderful response shown by the public in supporting the event. I
have no reservations in expressing my thanks for the support which we
received and I look forward to the success of similar Open Days which
are planned for Hackenthorpe and Hammerton Road Police Station, later
this year.

       As you will be aware, for some months now musical and advertising
tapes are being played on a number of South Yorkshire Passenger
Transport Executive buses. As a lead up to Doncaster Open Day through
the auspices of the South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive Public
Relations Officer, we were able to take advantage of that tape facility
to advertise the event.


Duke of Edinburgh's Award

       On 25 March 1980 two South Yorkshire Police Cadets,
             and                 attended Buckingham Palace and received
the Duke of Edinburgh's Gold Award from His Royal Highness Prince Philip.
They are both to be congratulated on their achievement.


F.A. Cup Semi-Final

       It pleases me to report on the success of the police operation
on the occasion of the F.A. Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough on Saturday
12 April 1 9 8 0 . The event passed without any greater trouble than we would
normally experience with a league match despite the fact that this match
was attended by a crowd in excess of 50,000. A number of letters have
been received from the media, local residents and persons attending from
outside the city congratulating us on our success.


2      SPORTING ACTIVITIES

       (a)   Athletics

       On 2 April 1980 the European Police Cross Country Championships
were held in Austria. Two South Yorkshire Police Officers, Sergeant
             and Constable \            |, were part of a British Police
Team which achieved third place in the team event.

       (b)   Badminton

       In the P.A.A. National Badminton Championships held in Gwent on
9th and 10th April 1980, South Yorkshire Police Officers competed in all
four events, mens singles, ladies singles, mixed doubles and veterans
doubles. All progressed to the Quarter Final stages, with the exception
of the veterans doubles where Sergeants 2925 Marsh and 1^18 Robb won the
title for the second year running.
