RESOLVED - That, as they are no longer fit for future use, the beds, pillows
and mattresses supplied be destroyed; that a quantity of the blankets, sheets,
pillow-cases and towels be retained by the Force and that, in view of the
storage problems, the remainder be offered to the Fire and Ambulance Services
with any balance remaining to be given to the Red Cross (whose Regional
Director had promised their return should.their use be required in a further
emergency situation).

5.    Hooliganism at, and associated with, Football Matches.

With the Chairman’s permission, the Sub-Committee fully discussed recent
instances of hooliganism at, and associated with football matches, particu­
larly reported incidents centred at and around the match between Sheffield      j
United and Leeds United at the Bramall Lane Ground on 23rd March, 1985.
                                                                                |
As well as the safety of the general public, the Sub-Committee were concerned
at the policing requirements involved (both inside the Grounds and in City
centres) and the injuries being sustained by police officers because of the
actions of an admittedly few so-called football supporters of certain Clubs.
                                                               |   J



RECOMMENDED - That the following points be recorded and discussed at the   *

meeting of the Police Committee to be held on 1st April, 1985:-

(a)   the total policing costs of the Sheffield United v. Leeds United Match
played at Bramall Lane on 23rd March, 1985, including the proportion to be
charged to the Club;

(b)   likely "trouble" matches to be made all-ticket or played on a Saturday
morning or late Sunday afternoon;

(c)   Supporters Clubs to issue Pass cards which would require to be produced
prior to admission at any football ground in the country and to be withdrawn
from any individual convicted of violence to persons or property;

(d)   ground admission tickets to be issued at every turnstile and to
restrict admission to a certain specified section of a ground;

(e)   in order to release police to undertake duties outside of grounds and
in City centres, the Clubs to provide additional stewards inside of grounds;

(f)   the feasibility of more penning and fencing facilities being provided
at football grounds to achieve even greater segregation and more protection
for genuine football fans and the police (if possible, County Council
Architectural and Structural Engineering staff to assist in possible
investigations at grounds - commencing at the Bramall Lane Ground? - or the
Government to bear the cost of such investigations);

(g)   the County Council's legal powers under the   Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
1975, to require Football Clubs to take action.

6.    Government restrictions on spending in excess of £15,000.

With the Chairman's permission, the Sub-Committee discussed the latest reported
Government restrictions on spending in excess of £15,000 in the Metropolitan
Counties, with particular reference to the item on the 1985/86 Vehicle
Replacement Programme to be discussed at the Vehicles Sub-Committee on 29th
March, 1985.
