3.         That the 1975/76 expenditure be accommodated within the budget
of the P. T. E. Committee and that specific provision be made within
the budget of that Committee for future expenditure.


4.        That a supplementary estim ate, in the sum of £27,700 be approved
to cover the estim ated expenditure for 1975/76.


56.      Superannuation Fund - Investments

RESOLVED - That consideration of the report of the County T reasurer
on negotiations for the prem ature redemption of the internal investments
of the form er County Boroughs' Superannuation funds which were
tran sferred to the County Council on 1st April, 1974 be referred to
Policy AdvisorySub-Committees 'A' and 'B '.

57.      ) Selective Tendering - Standing L ist of Approved Contractors

RECOMMENDED - That the additional names of Contractors
recommended for inclusion on the standing list of approved contractors
for the Environment Committee (Minute 15(8) of this Sub-Committee
meeting held 19th May, 1975) as submitted, be approved.

58 .______ Licence to reproduce ordnance survey maps

RESOLVED - That a supplementary estim ate, in the sum of £5,400, be
approved for the County Council's annual licence fee for 1975 for the
reproduction of ordnance survey maps.

59.       Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1973

The Chief Executive submitted a report on the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act, 1973 which became operative on 1st September, 1975 for which a
commencement o rder has been made by the Secretary of State. The Act
imposes duties on the County Council as licensing authority and as
enforcing authority which are referred to in the report. The County
Council's duties under the Act will involve staff implications and the
explanatory memorandum attached to the Act indicates that there will be
required an increase of 16 staff for the whole of local government in
England, Scotland and Wales.
In accordance with the term s of reference of the Fire Service
Committee it was reported that the required duties could be administered
by that Committee.

 RESOLVED - That the County Council's duties under the Safety of
 Sports Grounds Act, 1973 be administered by the F ire Service
 Committee and reports on the staffing implications be submitted to
that Committee and the Personnel Sub-Committee.

60 .______ British Standards Institution - Subscriptions

The Chief Executive referred to Minute 29 of the meeting of this
Sub-Committee held on 16th June, 1975 and reported receipt of a
further letter from the A. M. A. intimating that consideration was being
given by the Associations for a further approach to B. S. I. to reconsider
the reduction in the £50 rate to £37.50 for local authorities amyia!
subscription to the Institution.

RESOLVED - That consideration of this m atter be deferred to the next
meeting of the Sub-Committee pending further information from
the A. M. A.

61.       Proposed Sheffield City Polytechnic

The Chief Executive submitted an invitation from Sheffield City Council
for the nomination of one member of the County Council to serve on the
Governing body of the proposed Sheffield City Polytechnic as from
1st April, 1976.

RESOLVED - That the question of nomination be referred to
Policy Advisory Sub-Committee 'A' for consideration.

62.       Exhibition of pictures and artefacts in County Buildings

The Chief Executive submitted a report on the exhibition of pictures and
artefacts in the County Buildings, including an offer by a local a rtist
to loan a painting, free of charge, each month for exhibition purposes.

In consultation with the Chief Officer for Recreation and Culture it
had been suggested that the display of works by local a rtists should
await the outcome of negotiations in connection with the Cooper Art
Gallery.
