                                            PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL COPYRIGHT
                                            RESERVED NOT TO BE PUBLISHED IN WHOLE
                                            OR IN PART WITHOUT COMMITTEE APPROVAL
                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE                                FIRE SERVICE COMMITT
AND THE COUNTY TREASURER                                     30TH NOVEMBER, 1978


                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

       Background

1.     A s the Committee w ill recall, the County Council's pow ers and duties under the
       A cta r e p artof this C om m ittee's term s of referen ce. On 8th January, 1976, theC om m ittee
        decided that th eir functions should be ex e r c ise d through Officer Working P a rties
        for the four Borough Council a reas, con sistin g of representatives of the P olice,
        the F ire S ervice and the Building Inspectors of the Borough Councils, with
        co-ordination being undertaken by the Department of Adm inistration.

2.     W hilst it is P arliam en t's intention that all sports grounds should com e under
       the Act eventually, the only grounds designated by the Secretary of State upto
       recently had been F irst D ivision grounds and certain international grounds.
       Following representations by the County Council, the Hillsborough Stadium of the
       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club has now been designated by the Secretary of
       State on the b asis of its quasi-international u se .

        General Safety Certificate

3 .1   The Officer Working Party has been considering in detail the term s and conditions
       which they feel should be attached to a General Safety C ertificate.

3 .2   The following recommendation is submitted for the C om m ittee's consideration:

               That the draft General Safety Certificate now attached be
               approved as the b a sis for the standard certificate to be
               used throughout the County.



        Fee

4 .1   T his lea d s on to the question of the fee to be charged to applicants for General
       Safety C ertificates. The Regulations stipulate that a lo ca l authority may determ ine
       the fe e s to be charged in resp ect of applications for the issu e or amendments of
       safety c e r tific a tes, but that such fees shall not exceed an amount com m ensurate
       with the work actually and reasonably done. Home Office Circular No. 130/76
       referring to this, e x p r e s s e s the view that lo ca l authorities should, in the n oim al
       course,not find it n ecessa r y to charge fe e s representing m ore than 17 m an/days'
       work p er cer tific a te.

4 .2   The fe e s charged by the local authorities who have issu ed C ertificates to date
        range from no charge at all by the Nottinghamshire County Council to an
        average of £4, 000 by the G reater London Council.

4 .3    There would appear to be five options open to the Committee, as follows:

        (i)     to charge no fee at all
        (ii)    to charge a purely nominal fee
        (iii)    to charge a fee which is a purely arbitrary figure ( i.e . not related to
                 any sp ecific number of m an/days' work)
        (iv)    to charge a fee related to the Home Office estim ate of 17 m an/days'w ork
        (v)     to charge a fee based on the actual number of m an/days' work.

        In the event of the Committee deciding on option (v), the charge for 17 m an/days'
        work (without including any elem ent of cle r ic a l support or supervisory staff) has
        been currently costed at £850.            This figure would need to be up-dated, of course,
        to take salary in cr ea ses, e t c . , into account as n e c e s s a r y . In the event of the
        Committee deciding on option (v), the fee could not, of cou rse, be determined
        until all of the work has been com pleted.

4 .4    Whilst the City of Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict Council has yet to make a
        d ecision as to the b asis of charge for w ork undertaken by its Building Surveyors,
        it is lik ely that any decision taken w ill be influenced by whether the County Council
        m akes, say, a purely nominal charge o r a full economic charge.

4 .5    The C om m ittee's instructions as to the fee to be charged are requested.

        P ow ers of Entry and Inspection

5 .1    The Act provides that the County Council, the appropriate D istrict Council and
        the Chief Constable are em powered to authorise entry of th eir officers to sports
        stadia for the purpose of making in sp ection s.

 5 .2   The following recommendation is subm itted for the C om m ittee's consideration:

                 That the Chief Executive for the tim e being be authorised to
                 issu e form al authorisations to the requisite o fficers under the
                 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, to enable them to e x e r c ise
                 the powers of entry and inspection specified in the Act.

                                                              F . A. MALLETT
                                                              Chief Executive

                                                              D. B. CHYNOWETH
                                                              County T rea su rer



 County Hall
 B a rn sley

 24th November, 1978
                                                                            CERTIFICATE No.


                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                             GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

A ddress of p rem ises for
which this Certificate is
issu ed .

Occupier of the p r e m ise s .


Holder of this C ertificate.


U se of the p re m ise s in                                                             Football m atches
resp ect of which this Certificate
is issued.

1.        This C ertificate is issued by South Y orkshire County Council in resp ect
          of the p r e m ise s described above, being a Sports Stadium designated
          by Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds A ct, 1975 as
          a stadium requiring a Safety C ertificate.

2.        The term s and conditions set out in P art 2 of the Schedule attached hereto
          are hereby imposed.

3.        The te r m s and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South
          Y orkshire County Council consider n ecessa ry or expedient to secure
           reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in
          resp ect of which this C ertificate is issued.

4.        The words used in this C ertificate and the Schedule attached hereto have
          the meaning assigned to them by P art 1 of the Schedule and Section 17 of
          the Act.

5.        The Schedule and P lans attached h ereto                        all form part of this C ertificate.

6.        This C ertificate com m en ces on the                                day of                   for an
          indefinite period.




          Date       ................ . . .............................   Signed

                                                                                   Chief Executive on behalf of and
                                                                                   duly authorised by the South
                                                                                   Y orkshire County Council.
1                                                                                                      1




                                    S C H E D U L E
                                        PART 1
                                    Interpretation
                                                                                                       I
         The Act                        means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.

         Authorised P erson             means a person authorised in accordance with
                                        Section 11 of the Act.

         The Building Authority         means

         The C hief Constable           means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                                        South Y orkshire P olice or, as the ca se may require,
                                        the P o lice Officer having charge of the Stadium on
                                        the occasion of a Specified Activity.

         The C hief F ire Officer       means the Chief Fire O fficer for the tim e being of the
                                        South Y orkshire County FiieSsrvicecrH s designated deputy.

         The C ertificate                means the w ritten General Safety Certificate of
                                         which th is Schedule forms part.

         The County Council              means the South Y orkshire County Council.

         The Guide                       means the "Guide to Safety at Spcr ts Grounds" as
                                         from tim e to time amended, issued by the Home O ffice,
                                         or such other code of p ractice as may be so issu ed .

         The Holder                      means the applicant for and person to whom the General
                                         Safety C ertificate has been issued and who is a
                                         ’qualified person' for the purposes of the Act.

         Invalid Carriage                means a veh icle, whether m echanically propelled or not,
                                         constructed or adapted for use for the carriage of one
                                         person , being a person suffering from some physical
                                         defect or disability.
                                                                  -

         The P lans                      m eans the document or documents attached to and
    r
                                         form ing part of the General Safety C ertificate and signed
                                         by the person signing the C ertificate and/or any other
    i-
                                         document or documents which may be added to or
                                         substituted for such document or documents and signed
                                         on behalf of the County Council.

         Specified A ctivity             m eans the playing of a Football match.

         Spectator                       means any person occupying accommodation provided
                                         for sp ectators at the stadium.
    I1
         The Stadium                     means

         Structural P arts               includes stru ctu res, com ponents, installations, fabric
                                         and associated parts of the Stadium.
                                                                                                           I
                                                                                                           I
         V eh icles                      includes invalid c a r r ia g e s.
                                     PART 2

                        General T erm s and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for file time being approved in writing by the County Council
shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for a Specified A ctivity, and he shall
ensure that the term s and conditions of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium u n less a
Specified A ctivity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the sev era l areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the number specified
in Part 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the term s and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relating
thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified A ctivity for one or more
of the following

(a)    the playing of m u sic or singing;

(b)    the provision of news or com m ent a sso cia ted with football;

(c)    the sa le of tickets for forthcoming a c tiv itie s, program m es, n ew -sh eets
       and souvenirs;

(d)    the sa le and consumption of refreshm ents;

(e)    any other u se ancillary to a Specified A ctivity which has the prior approval
       in writing of the Council.

(1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is required under the term s
      and conditions hereof, an application for that approval shall be made by tlie
      H o ld er to the County Council at le a s t 21 days before the occurrence in resp ect of
      which it is required.

(2)   If w hilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the
       Stadium or any of its installations in a manner mentioned in Section 8 of the
       A ct the Holder shall at le a s t 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal
       is begun, give notice of the proposal to the County Council.

(1)   The Holder shall a g ree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days (or such
      shorter tim e to which the Chief Constable m ay consent) prior to ev ery
      Specified A ctivity the methods of ad m ission to be employed in connection with
      the Specified A ctivity and the methods to be used for the segregation of home
      and visiting supporters.

(2)   The Holder shall refu se ad m ission to, or evacuate spectators from, the
      Stadium or any part thereof at any tim e before or during a Specified Activity
      upon receiving instructions so to do from the Chief Constable.
The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at ev ery Specified
A ctivity of an adequate number of police o fficers to secu re the orderly and lawful
behaviour of the spectators and the number of police officers required at each
Specified A ctivity sh a ll be agreed between the Chief Constable and the Holder at le a st
21 days (or such sh orter tim e to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
Specified A ctivity takes p lace.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the County
Council a suitably equipped F ir s t Aid Boom and shall arrange in relation to a
Specified A ctivity for the attendance of such numbers of qualified F ir s t Aid
a s sista n ts as the Chief Constable may require and in any event not le s s than one such
a s sista n t for each 2 ,0 0 0 sp ecta to rs. The F ir s t Aid Koom shall be adequately signed
and shall be capable of being lit by the em ergen cy power supply referred to in
paragraph 12, of this P a rt of this Schedule. The Holder shall ensure that at all
tim e s a doctor em ployed or retained by the Holder is available to attend at the F irst
Aid Room if required and that h is whereabouts are known to those in the P olice Cm tral
Control Boom at the Stadium.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified A ctivity of a Chief
Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 4 of
this Schedule, and shall ensure that the Safety Steward shall be (a) fit and capable
to carry out th eir duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by d r e ss
(d) provided with w ritten instructions as to th eir gen eral duties in ord er to carry
out the following

(1)     Manning of exfe as indicated on the plans

(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering using o r leaving the Stadium

(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any em ergen cy including raising an
        alarm and extinguishing any fir e .

Training e x e r c is e s relating to the action to be taken in the event of an em ergen cy   f
sh a ll be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at the Stadium at le a s t once
e v e r y three m onths.

The Holder shall en sure that, excep t where otherw ise marked on the P lans, all doors
and g a tes which form an e g r e s s route between any spectator accom m odation and the
public highway, or other open sp ace outside the stadium , shall be so secu red as to
open im m ediately and e a s ily from the inside and shall be manned at a ll tim es by at
le a s t the number of stew ards required by P art 4 of this Schedule. A ll such doors or
ga tes shall be opened by the stew ards responsible and secu red in the fully open
position at a tim e before the end of a Specified A ctivity agreed between the Holder and
the Chief Constable and at any other tim e on evacuation of the Stadium or a part
thereof on being ordered so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding of
 the alarm .

 (1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the sa tisfaction of the Chief F ire
        Officer exit signs over all exits ' from the Stadium and all exits from
        spectator accommodation fie r e in and shall en sure that such ex it sign s m ay be
        illuminated by both the m ain and em ergen cy lighting s y s te m s . Such supple­
        mentary illuminated sign s in such locations a s the Chief F ire Officer may
        require sh a ll a ls o be provided by the Holder.
      (2)   The Holder shall ensure that the co rr id o rs, gangways and s ta ir c a se s
             indicated on the plans may be illuminated when required during a Specified:
            A ctivity by both the m ain and em ergen cy lighting s y s t e m s .

      (3)   The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
             illuminated w henever adequate natural light is deficient during a Specified
            A ctivity o r as directed by the Chief Constable.

      (4)   A ll m eans of in gress to and e g r e s s from the Stadium and to and from any
             spectator accommodation therein shall be maintained free from obstruction
             and with n on -slip and even su rfaces and in particular s ta ir coverings shall be
             secu red and maintained so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

12.   (1)    The Holder shall provide and m aintain to the satisfaction of the Chief Fire
             Officer a separate em ergen cy power supply far providing e lectricity
             sufficient to light all em ergen cy lighting throughout the Stadium, all exit
             sign s and powering all the communication sy ste m s within the Stadium, such
             em ergen cy power supply to be operable independently of the main power
             supply and to com e into automatic operation within ten seconds of the failure
             of the latter and to be capable of maintaining the n e cessa ry power output for
             a minimum of three hours from the failure of the main power supply.

      (2)   A t le a s t once annually a report as to the condition o f the Em ergency Power1
             Supply certified by a Chartered E le ctric a l Engineer shall be supplied to the
             Chief Fire O fficer.

      (3)   Not le s s than three hours prior to the occurrence of a Specified A ctivity tire
            em ergency power supply shall be tested for a period of 30 m inutes. Any
            d efect revealed in this te s t shall be rectified before the com m encem ent of the
             Specified A ctivity.

      (4)   A competent electricia n employed or retained by the Holder shall be present
             during a Specified A ctivity.

13.   (1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction o f the
             Chief F ire Officer a fire warning s y ste m .

      (2)   The fir e alarm sy stem sh all be tested periodically to the satisfaction of tie
             Chief F ire O fficer.

14.   The Holder shall provide and m aintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the Chief
      Constable:-

      (1)   A P o lice Central Control Boom which shall be provided with such ancillary
             equipment as the Chief Constable m ay require.

      (2)    Accommodation for the ex clu sive u s e of the police as a detention room and
             for adm inistrative purposes.
(3)    A public address sy stem which may be audible in all parts of the Stadium.
       The police shall, should they so wish, have the unrestricted right to u se the
       public address system for police purposes and such purposes will have
       priority over the Specified A ctivity.

(1)    The Holder shall at a ll tim es maintain all structural parts of the stadium in
       sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide and in
       all c a s e s to the satisfaction of the Council.

(2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair and renewal
       to the Stadium as m ay be required from tim e to tim e by the County Council.

The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all operational parts of the Stadium (including
the e le c tr ic a l and communications installations) and all em ergen cy equipment in good
and efficien t working order to the satisfaction of the County Council and shall undertake such
maintenance repair or renewal as m ay from tim e to tim e be n e c e ssa r y to maintain
reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and unobstructed and in
the positions allotted on the P lans.

(1)     The parking of veh icles within the boundary o f the Stadium shall be restricted
        to those a rea s indicated on the Plans u n less otherw ise approved far em ergency
        purposes by a P olice Officer in uniform .

(2)     The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the satisfaction of
        the County Council the a c c e s s routes for em ergency v eh ic les shown on the plans.

The Holder shall en sure that m em b ers of the P r e s s , T .V . and radio s e r v ic e s having
a c c e s s to the public and playing a rea s of the Stadium are identifiable as such.

T elev isio n cam eras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such positions as
m ay be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.                              I

(1)     Liquid refreshm ents m ay be sold or distributed at the Stadium only in
         containers constructed from soft plastic or other soft m aterial, or as allowed
         by the L icensing J u stices.

 (2)    No accumulation o f rubbish, b rick s, stones or other m aterials which in the
         opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of u se as m is s ile s shall be
         permitted to rem ain in any part of the Stadium to which spectators have a c c e s s .

 No accumulation of flam m able rubbish, dirt, surplus m aterial or goods shall be
 perm itted to rem ain in any part of the Stadium excep t in a place and quantity approved
 in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

 No flammable g a s e s or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of the Stadium
 without the prior written approval of the Chief F ire Officer.
24.   The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
      Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the p resen ce of a representative of the
      Council within    months of the date cfthe C ertificate and at le a st once in each period
      of 12 months thereafter and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection
      there is provided to the County Councilby the said Chartered Engineer a certificate as to the
      current compliance or non-com pliance with good engineering and building practices
      and with the relevant B ritish Standard Specifications and Codes of P ractice and with
      the appropriate provisions and recom m endations cf the Guide of all structural parts
      of the Stadium excluding the crush b arriers and handrails.

25.   (1)       The Holder shall arrange for all crush b arriers and handrails within the
                Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
                Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the
                p resen ce of a representative of the County Council within      months of the date of th is
                C ertificate and for the resu lts thereot to be notified in writing to the County
                Council.
      (2)(i)    The Holder shall ensure that not m ore than       months after the date of this
                Certificate and thereafter not le ss than once in each period of 12 months a
                representative sam ple of crush b a rriers and handrails amounting to not Less
                than 20% of the total number of such b arriers and ra ils is tested in
                accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
                (Structural or Civil) in the presen ce of a reoresen tative of the County Council and the
                resu lts thereof notified in writing to the County Council;

            (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush b arriers and handrails so tested and a
                 b arrier so tested shall not be tested again within a period of 4-| years thereafter
                  but shall be tested again within a period of 5^ y ea rs th ereafter.

26.   The Holder shall within            months of the date of this certificate and th ereafter not le s s
      than once in each period of 12 months supply to the County Council the certificate of an
      independent e le c tr ic a l engineer as to the current compliance or non-com pliance of the
      e le c tr ic a l installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I . E. E. Begulations or
      other section s or Begulations for the tim e being in force relating to the E lectrical
      Equipment of Buildings.

27.   The Holder shall arrange for a ll fir e extin gu ish ers, fire hydrants and other water
      supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as appropriate at le a st once
      annually by a com petent person to the satisfa ction of the Chief Fire Officer.

28.   The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made available
      for inspection at all reasonable tim e to Authorised P erson s:

      (1)        A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium during a
                 Specified A ctivity and to each area of spectator accommodation therein
                 mentioned in Part 3 of this Schedule.
(2)      A record of any accident or incident occurring w hilst the Stadium is in u se
         for a Specified A ctivity which cau ses injury to a spectator, such record to
         Include the nam e, a d d ress, age and se x of the spectator injured, the nature
         of the injury and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
         inquiry, and the location of the incident. The Holder shall provide a written
         report to the County Council within 48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)      A record of the training and instruction given and the e x e r c is e s held in
         accordance with the requirem ents of Paragraph 9 of this part of this Schedule
         such record to include the date and tim e and duration of the instruction or
         e x e r c is e , the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
         instruction or e x e r c is e , and the nam e(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)      A record of all inspections, t e s t s , m aintenance, repairs and renew als carried
         out at the Stadium .

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall have the right at
time to require the Holder at his own expense to arrange for the conduct of any
in sp e ctio n or test which the County Council may c o n s id e r to be n e c e s s a r y in the i n t e r e s t s
of s e cu rin g reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for a Specified Activity.
                                PART 3

                             Ground Capacity


The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
sp ecified below.
                                  PART 4

                             Safety Stewards

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall be as
follows

(1)    Manning of exits                                                 Stewards
(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
       the Stadium                                                      Stewards
(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any em ergen cy
       including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire            Stewards


The Stewards shall be distributed as follow s:-

Section of Stadium                             Number required for each function
                                                   1     2                3
