       ■                                                         —   *
A !'




  fr Note of a meeting of the 'D' 1 (Sheffield ‘Cent-ral>-lH.vai’
                                                                ^ onftl Liaison Committe
     and the Community Action PaneT^e1rTh-at---t4te--OiaigT nnal P^>|^rp Headquarters,
     West Bar Green, Sheffield on 2nd August, 1985

       PRESENT:  Councillor J. Bower (in the Chair)
       Councillors D. Alderson, P. Collins, M. E. Smith.
       Sheffield City Council:    Councillor J. A. Butler
       C. Goode (Department of Planning).
       Police:  Chief Superintendant T. F. Broomhead, Superintendent       D. Duckenfield,
       Superintendent T. Swann, Chief Inspector D. Sumner, Inspector M. Young,
       Detective Sergeant
       Community Representatives:       The Very Reverend F. Curtis (Provostof Sheffield),
                     l(Pakistan Mosl em Welfare A s s o c i a t i o n ) ,
       (Sheffield Chamber of T r a d e ) .

       Apologies for absence were received from Superintendent R. Marshall,
       S. Thompson (Manager, Woolworth's, representing Sheffield Chamber of Trade)
                           and County Councillors R. Burford, B. P. Flanagan and
       G. H. M o o r e s .

       1.     Points Discussed

    (a)       Hooliganism at and associated with football matches.    Divisional
    Commander referred to publication of Popplewell Report - recommendations
    expected shortly by football league clubs from Football Association.      SY
    Police active during close reason - safety of grounds looked at very
  i carefully.    Sheffield United FC in 'D'  Division. Their emergency
    evacuation procedure had been revised. Club to take on     9 extra stewards, the
    John Street stand to be stewarded at all times.     Police to patrol in gate
■ areas to ensure rapid and safe opening of gates in emergency - the club to
    appoint Chief Stewards to assist in this area.    Dual controls for emergency
ft evacuation to be installed in Police box on television gantry - similar
    syst em to be offered to Fire Service.    Sheffield United to be certificated
       under Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

     Police had worked with club to overcome hooliganism - troublemakers
*■:. congregate on John Street terrace to be near away supporters at Bramall Lane
I*, end of ground.    Club agreed to make a 30 yard strip of terrace ’s t er il e ’ -
 *’ to be closed during league matches - w i t h a cut in capacity to that part of
     ground *' Proviso that if semi-final or other big game and Sheffield United
     not involved ’sterile' ground will be re-opened.    The 'sterile' area to
     extend up into stand *■ with lowering of capacity in stand.

t'' All Divisional Commanders met Directors and Secretaries of all S.Y. Pootball
  ' Clubs at Police HQ yesterday and had full and frank discussion re
    hooliganism.        Also referred to legislation regarding alcohol and football
    m a t c h e s • The latter would not cure all problems in football but may help.
    Police trying to create a better standard of behaviour among football fans -
tj nee^lieipilroni public, judiciary and magistrates.

      Police [Control room had been modified - n o w gives good view of threequarters
      of ground **" not large enough to accommodate closed circuit TV equipment.
•’ Police tasked club to extend room by 6 feet.       Club applied to Football League
■I*1 Improvement Trust for £25,000 for CC TV - application being considered.
^     Chief Constable of Greater Manchester chairing Working Party - recommendations
   i fawaited.’ Police believe bfetter deal will be secured if all clubs go to one
     |supplier;for CCTV e q u i p m e n t .

                 't   .   ■
    Cllr. Smith referred to a lay visit made over Easter on a day when Sheffield
    Wednesday were playing.  Two youths had been arrested, they had turned up
    at Hillsobourgh completely drunk.  Banning alcohol sales at football grounds
    was understandable but people could obtain it elsewhere.  He asked the
    Divisional Commander for his views.

    Divisional Commander replied he only had received copy of Act the previous
    day but he recalled the salient points.  The legislation had basically turne
    Police practice into law.

    Cllr. Collins referred to recent press speculation that licensed premises in
    vicinity of football grounds might be asked to remain closed.  Who wo ul d pay
    compensation for loss of trade if compulsorily closed?

    Divisional Commander replied that nothing in Act.  Police seek co-operation
    of licencee, if he does not co-operate they approach the brewery.  If neither
    licenceeinor brewery will co-operate Police apply to magistrates for closure
    notices.  Usually the licencees and breweries accept the Police advice.

     After further discussion on alcohol sales w i t hi n grounds the meeting discussed
     kick-off:times.

     Cllr. Butler wondered whether mo rning kick-offs would be helpful.  He
     also asked whether Divisional Commander had any comments on difficulties in
     getting certain clubs to pay for policing.

     Divisional Commander reported that if problems foreseen Police would advise
     club regarding early kick-offs.     Morni ng kick-offs might bring their own
     problems - large numbers leaving grounds at 12.45 p.m.      Saturday lunchtime
     may then go to city centre pubs. He understood Barnsley F C w e r e trying an
     11.00 a.m. Sunday kick-off w h e n theyplay Leeds United.   Policing is a very
     expensive exercise.    Scales of charges are agreed wi th clubs and police
     officers are deployed depending on estimated size of crowd.      Clubs only pay
     for m e n inside ground - police heavily involved in escorting fans, patrolling
     city centre, vicinity of ground etc.      Clubs pay extremely small proportion
     of total cost of policing.

      Mrs. Kennaway pointed out that Chamber of Trade could see some advantages to
      m o rning kick-offs but they wou ld prefer fans to be leaving grounds when the
    i city traders had closed their premises i.e. retaining afternoon kick-offs.

     (b)     Requests for funding - Inspector Young recalled that Victoria
     Methodist Youth Club had applied for funds for equipment.   Community Action
     Panel had originally deferred request because no active Police involvement
     at Club.   DLC at last meeti ng had likewise deferred. There was now Police
     involvement and the Chairman of the DLC had approved their request for
     £302.57. .

     A further application had been received, from Woodthorpe Youth Centre, for
     assistance wi th the purchase of weightlifting equipment.  Community
     Constables Adams and Marshall had a large imput at the Centre which caters for
     the unemployed.   The Chairman had approved their request for £293.10.

     The Chairman informed the meet in g that in addition to these two cases the
     following amounts had been,spent from the ’D* Division Ad Hoc Fund:
:                        ,       -




                                     ,


             " ■'.V i.
                ■'           ■ • 'V
         -                   ■ r . . ::
