                            POLICE COMMITTEE

                             1st August 1983

PRESENT:  Councillor G. H. Moores (in the Chair),
Councillors:  B. P. Flanagan (Vice-Chairman), J. Bower, Mrs. J. M. Brackley,
R. Burford, P. Collins, W. Cutts, D. W. George, W. Layne, M. McCoy,
R. J. McElvenney, W. K. Martin, R. H. Patton, J. Peet, P. T. Senior,
M. E. Smith, R. Walton.

Magistrate Members:  Mrs. B. R. Bullivant, Mrs. D. Cuttriss,
E. A.   Hancock, H. D. Hepworth, Lt. Col. J. W. Muntus, Dr. S. Race,
J. W.   Thompson, G. G. Wood, J. Wood.

Apologies for absence were received from Councillors S. A. Dawson and
T. A. Williams and Magistrate Member Mr. A. M. Davies.

68.   Minutes.

RESOLVED -

1.     That, subject to an apology for absence from Magistrate Member
Mr. E. A. Hancock being recorded, the minutes of this Committee held on
8th July, 1983, be signed by the Chairman as a correct record.

2. That the Resolution to Minute  61B(vii)     on pages F.7 and F.8 be
amended by the addition of the words      that there be Member involvement
in all meetings on sitings and that the detailed design be submitted for
approval."

6 9 .____Charges for the Services of the Police at Football Mat ches.

With the Chairman's permission, the County Treasurer circulated a report
on the action taken since the last meeting of the Committee.

The five Football League Clubs in South Yorkshire had been informed by
letter dated 13th July, 1983, that their offer to pay by monthly
instalments over a ten month period commencing in September was unacceptable,
the amounts having accumulated since August, 1982.  The Clubs had been
requested to pay a substantial portion immediately and suggestions had
been sought for settling the balances in the near future.

On 21st July, 1983, a letter had been sent to the Chief Executive by the
Chairman of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club requesting a meeting
between representatives of the Clubs and the Committee responsible for
fixing Police charges.  The reply sent on 26th July, informed the Clubs
that the Chairman of the Police Committee saw little useful purpose in
having this further meeting, particularly in view of the detailed
discussions on the subject which had taken place at meetings of the
Working Group on the Effects of Professional Football on the Community.

The County Treasurer had not had any reply to his letters to the Clubs,
nor had any payments been received to date.

RESOLVED - That the action taken since the last meeting be approved, and
that the matter be placed in the hands of the Chief Executive for
appropriate action.
