2.      That the report now submitted, as well as the report now requested,
be referred to Policy Advisory Sub-Committees "A” and "B".
3.      That the County Prosecuting Solicitor be requested to report to the
next meeting of the Committee on the effect of the increased number of Court
Sittings and eases being undertaken for the County Council.
61._____ Reports of Sub-Committee, etc.
A.      Working Group on the Effects of Professional Football on the
        Community - 2nd.June, 1983    -              -
The Committee considered the note of the meeting of the Working Group on the
Effects of Professional Football on the Community being held on 2nd June, 1983.

At the Chairman's request, the County Treasurer outlined the current
position with regard to the payment by the five Football League Clubs
in South Yorkshire of the charges for police services during the 1982/83
football season.

RESOLVED - That the note of the meeting of the Working Group on the
Effects of Professional Football on the Community held on 2nd June, 1983,
be approved and the following recommendations confirmed:-

(i)     Opening of Football Club Facilities to the Community

RESOLVED - That Officers of the County Council and of the Clubs discuss
possible suitable schemes involving the use of Football Club facilities by
the Community, particularly the young unemployed, and that the Chief
Executive report the results of the discussions to the Urban Action
Working Party.

(ii)   Charges for Police Services

RESOLVED -

1.      That implementation of the revised scale of charges for the
services of Police at football matches from 1st April, 1983 be noted.

2.      That the five Football League Clubs in South Yorkshire be requested
to settle all accounts, as now outlined, submitted for policing charges
during the recently completed 1982/83 football league season.

3.     That, at the start of the 1983/84season, the Working   Group consider
any evidence put forward by the Football Clubs of anomolies in comparative
police charges.

ALSO RESOLVED - That the County Treasurer be requested to report to the next
meeting of the Committee on the position with regard to the payment by the
five Football League Clubs in South Yorkshire of the charges for police
services in respect of the 1982/83 football season.

B.     Buildings Sub-Committee - 23rd June and 7th   July, 1983

The Committee considered the Report of the meeting of the Buildings Sub-
Committee held on 23rd June, 1983. With the Chairman's permission, the
Report of the Special Meeting of the Sub-Comnittee held on 7th July was
also circulated.

The Committee supported the views of the Sub-Committee over the apparent
delay at a late stage in the approved programme regarding possession of
part of the site for the proposed Woodseats Divisional and Sub-Divisional •
Headquarters at Heeley Carriage Sidings upon which it was proposed to erect
temporary buildings.

                                     F.5
