                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL


REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE                        FIRE SERVICE COMMITTEE
                                                     6 NOVEMBER 1973




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1973


The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1973 became  operative on 1 September 1975. The
Act imposes a duty on the County Council as licensing authority and as enforcing
authority.

Application will be made to the County Council and they have to determine whether
the applicant is likely to contravene the terms and conditions of the Safety
Certificate. The County Council has then to send a copy to the District Council
and the Chief Constable. When the County Council is satisfied they issue a general
safety certificate and where necessary a special safety certificate. The County
Council will be able to charge a fee for the issue of the certificate.

The more usual conditions imposed by the County Council will relate to such matters
as the number of spectators to be admitted, entrances and exits and crush barriers.
Terms and Conditions covered by the certificate involve provisions to the Fire
Preventions Act 1971 and in a fire certificate issued under this Act.

In an emergency situation, where there is a risk to spectators, the County Council
 is to have power to apply to the Magistrates Court for an Order prohibiting or
 restricting the admission of spectators until steps have been taken to reduce the
 risk to a reasonable level. Power is given to persons authorised by the County Council
 at reasonable times, to enter a sports ground and inspect it and any records relating
 to attendance and maintenance of safety.

The Finance and General Purposes Committee on 1 September 1975 resolved that the
County Councils duty under the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1973 be administered by the
Fire Service Committee, and the staffing implications be reported to the Personnel: Sub-
Committee.
Members are informed that it is intended to take a multi-disciplinary approach over
the Act and tthe Fire Service, Police, Building Surveyors as well as the District
Council will all be involved with this new legislation, which is to be co-ordinated
by the Fire Service Committee.

There will therefore be no increase in staff required, an element of the workload being
absorbed by present levels of staff in the several departments who will be involved
as outlined above.




                                         F. A. MALLETT
                                         Chief Executive


Department of Administration
County Hall
Barnsley

7 October 1975
JRB/HJG
