MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES
Police Horses and Dogs

INCOME
Any actual increases or   decreases in view of their effect on expenditure.

4.     That the officers be requested to report to the Sub-Committee on the
costs incurred on the hiring of horses and riders from other Forces.

5.     That the County Treasurer be requested to bear in mind the necessity
of including in the claim to the Home Office all of the costs identifiable
with the policing of the dispute in the mining industry.

(vi)    Outstanding Accounts.

RESOLVED -

1.     That the 38 accounts totalling £61,207.29    gross now detailed be
passed for payment.

2.      That the County Treasurer be requested to   report to a futuremeeting
on:

(a)     the installation charges for Pay Phones at RAF Bawtry and

(b)     the cost of audio cassettes.

3.     That the Vice-Chairman of the Environment Committee(Councillor R.
Walton) be requested to enquire as to the availability or otherwise of
waste skips from the Environment Department.

(NOTE:  Councillor Walton reported that his enquiries showed that waste
skips were available free of charge, but there was no record of any enquiries
from the Police. The Chief Constable undertook to look into the matter.)

(vii)   Regional Crime Squad - Financial Effects of Decision to Withdraw.

RESOLVED - That the recruitment to the South Yorkshire Police be frozen
immediately to enable the personnel currently seconded to the Regional Crime
Squad to be absorbed into the Force establishment at the earliest possible
date after 30th September, 1984, regardless of post or rank, and that if
necessary they be carried supernumerary to establishment for a temporary
period.

(viii) Charges for the Services of Police at Football Matches.

RESOLVED -

1.     That Resolution 2 to Minute 36 of the Police Committee of 4th June,
1984, be rescinded.

2.     That the County Treasurer be requested to ensure that future accounts
for the services of police at football matches are rendered to the Football
Club(s) concerned within 7 days of matches taking place with a requirement
for payment within 21 days; should the Football Club(s) concerned fail to
comply on any occasion with this requirement, the Chief Executive be
instructed to commence legal proceedings immediately.
