                            Rot for . P u b i i c c t r n u r t u

                            after C o m ;r.'.U ii i.'.so'



               County Hall, Barnsley : 24th November, 1977
                                                              -..j


                                                          COUNCI L                      1
NOTE OF AN INFORMAL MEETING BETWEEN FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM
WORKING PARTY AND SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.

PRESENT: Councillor R. Thwaites (in the Chair)
             Councillors J. Brough and W. Circuit
             Officers J. C. H arris, R. P e te rs, D. Vaughan.
Apologies for absence were received from Councillor A. Waugh and
A ssistant Chief Constable I. Mead.
             Representing the Club
             M r. E. Barron (Director)
An apology for absence was received from M r. K. T. Addy, the other
D irector who had intended to be present.

1 ._____Introduction

The Chairman welcomed M r. B arron on behalf of the Working P arty and
thanked the Club for responding so readily to the invitation to m eet the Working
P arty. It was understood that this p articular meeting was to be on an informal
basis and could not commit the Club a t this stage to any particular course of
action.

2.     Working P a r ty ’s Report

The Working P a rty 's Report, as approved by the County Council on 28th
September, 1977, was discussed. It was evident that there were large a re a s
of agreem ent, but the Club felt that they would have to reserv e their position
on the questions of the designation of the Stadium under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act, 1975, and who should be responsible for compensation (covered by
insurance) for personal injury and damage to property.

The Chairman stre sse d that the call for legislation to give County Authorities the
general power to ban proposed sporting events was intended to be a reserv e
power to be used as a la s t r e s o r t to cover exceptional circum stances where
arrangem ents were clearly inadequate, and hopefully, would never be required to
be exercised. The la s t thing the County Council wished to see was the closure of
the Stadium.

3 .____ League Cup Match - 29th Novem ber, 1977

Whilst it was appreciated that the     League Cup Match on 29th November, 1977
with Everton was not an all-tic k et   match and was unlikely to a ttra c t a maximum
capacity crowd, possible courses       of action were discussed which could be
treated as experim ents for future     capacity m atches.

                                            1.
4.     Re c omm endati ons

That, in consultation with the Police and the Club, the following possibilities
where capacity crowds are expected be investigated:-

(a)   the opening of the gates as early as possible before a match so that
       the fans do not have any reason to congregate in the vicinity of the
       Stadium;

(b)   the rail and coach operators be requested to ensure compliance with
       the recommendation of the M inister of Sport that a rriv a ls should be
       timed as close as possible to the commencement of m atches and
       departures as soon as possible after the cessation of matches;

(c)   the closure, to both vehicular and pedestrian traffic, of stre e ts in
       "The T riangle” (Vere, Fielding and Bickerton Boads) and possibly
       Leake and Farndale Boads (off Leppings Lane) because of consistent
       complaints by local residents;

(d)   the erection of directional signs (according to ticket numbers) in the
       vicinity of the ground, as well as directions on the tickets them selves.




                                        2.
