3.       Outstanding Accounts

The County Treasurer circulated to each Member present a Schedule of 38
outstanding accounts totalling £61,207.29 gross.

The Chief Constable confirmed that all goods and services continued to be
ordered through the procedures of the Central Purchasing Unit.

RECOMMENDED -

1.     That the 38 accounts totalling £61,207.29 gross now detailed be passed
for payment.

2.       That the County Treasurer be requested to      report to a futuremeeting
on:

(a)      the installation charges for Pay Phones at RAF Bawtry         and

(b)      the cost of audio cassettes.

3.       That the Vice-Chairman of the Environment      Committee .(Councillor R. Walton^
be requested to enquire as to the availability or otherwise of waste skips
from the Environment Department.

     _____Regional Crime Squad - Effects of Decision to Withdraw

A joint report of the County Treasurer and the Chief Constable was submitted
on the personnel currently seconded to the Regional Crime Squad. These
consisted of: .                                          y

1     Chief Inspector
2     Inspectors
12    Sergeants
12    Constables

Additionally, there were 2 civilian clerks and a part-time cleaner based at
Woodhouse.

Whilst the personnel would need to be carried additional to establishment
until such time as appropriate vacancies occurred, it was reasonable to assume
that the 27 police officers and 2 civilian clerks could be absorbed during
the current financial year. As the Woodhouse premises would be utilised for
other purposes, it was envisaged that the part-time cleaner would remain in
post.

   absoEfced aa       Jsttr:rank basfs*   peteatial          ?been estimated
at £167,191. This could be increased by around another £100,000 if the
personnel were absorbed regardless of post or rank.

RECOMMENDED - That recruitment to the South Yorkshire Police be frozen
immediately to enable the personnel currently seconded to the Regional Crime
Squad to be absorbed into the Force establishment at the earliest possible
date after 30th September, 1984, regardless of post or rank, and that if
necessary they be carried supernumerary to establishment for a temporary


 5.        Charges for the Services of Police at Football Matches

 A. jeint report afv d w •      .E x e c u t i v e the Chief Goastable and the County
R ^o tU T ItrK J
Treasurer was circulated to each Member present regarding the payment by
the South Yorkshire Football Clubs for the services of the police during
the forthcoming season with particular reference to the Committee’s
decision of 4th June, 1984, to require payment of a reasonable deposit in
advance for future home games.

The Sub-Committee felt that every consideration had been given to the Clubs
in the past, but the effects of the cost of policing this dispute in the
mining industry meant that the Clubs would have to pay promptly in future.

RECOMMENDED -

1.    That Resolution 2 to Minute 36 of thePoliceCommittee of4th June,
1984, be rescinded.

2.    That the County Treasurer be requested toensurethat future accounts
for the services of police at football matches are rendered to the Football
Club(s) concerned within 7 days of matches taking place with a requirement
for payment within 21 days; should the Football Club(s) concerned fail to
comply on any occasion with this requirement, the Chief Executive be instructed
to commence legal proceedings immediately.

6 . ___ Home Office Circular No. 59/1984

The Chief Executive circulated to each Member present a copy of Home Office
Circular No. 59/1984 which had been received that morning relating to
special payments for additional expenditure incurred as a result of the
miners’ dispute.

RESOLVED - That the County Treasurer be requested to submit a. report on. the
financial implications of the Circular to the next meeting of the Sub-Committee.
