       Force                                      Payment/Action

Northumbria Constabulary            Outstanding balance of £27.82 to be
                                    written off.

North Wales Police                  Outstanding balance of £324.35 to be
                                    written off.

South Wales Police                  Discrepancy of lp to be written off.

3 .______Charges for the Services of the Police at Football Matches

The County Solicitor reported that to date the written judgement in the
High Court case had not been delivered.

RESOLVED - That the position be noted and the Sub-Committee kept informed.

4 ._____ Vehicle Purchase 1985/86

With the Chairman's permission, a joint report of the Chief Constable and
the County Treasurer was circulated to each Member present on the opportunity
which had arisen to purchase at an advantageous price a specialist 4-wheel
drive vehicle.

A vehicle of this type could be used to great advantage by the Police to
not only improve the 4-wheel drive capability of the Force fleet at low
initial cost, but it could also be used as a Towing vehicle for use with
the display caravan and the communications caravan. It would also replace
vehicle 1         which was currently used as a towing vehicle and which would
require replacement in the near future.

The balance remaining in the vehicle purchases budget head was £3,255, and
the additional sum of £245 required to enable the vehicle to be purchased
would not necessitate seeking specific approval to a capital estimate.

The County Treasurer also reported a verbal indication which had been
received that morning to the effect that the County Engineer's Department
had available a 6-wheel drive vehicle which was considered to be surplus to
requirements and was not required by the District Councils. The vehicle
had been acquired in October, 1980, on leasing terms, and was now understood
to be available on the reduced secondary leasing terms.

RESOLVED -

1.     That the Stonefield 4-wheel drive vehicle registration number
KAK 340W be purchased at the price of £3,500 for use by the South Yorkshire
Police.

2.    That the officers be requested to also investigate the reported
availability of a 6-wheel drive Stonefield vehicle on leasing terms from
the County Engineer's Department.

5.____ Items to be discussed in the absence of the public

RESOLVED - That, pursuant to Section 1(2) of the Public Bodies (Admission
to Meetings) Act, I960, the public be excluded from the meeting during
consideration of the following item by reason of the confidential nature
of the business to be transacted.
