                   CONFIDENTIAL




     South Yorkshire Police




REPORT BY THE C H IEF CONSTABLE ON A RESOLUTION BY
ROTHERHAM BOROUGH COUNCIL IN RESPECT OF INCIDENTS
IN ROTHERHAM CONNECTED WITH THE ROTHERHAM UNITED
VERSUS SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL LEAGUE MATCH
        PLAYED ON SATURDAY 20TH MARCH 1 9 7 6




POLICE COMMITTEE
8TH JUNE 1976
                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

                                                  PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL: COPYRIGHT RESERVED
                                                  NOT TO BE PUBLISHED IN WHOLE OR IN PART
                                                  WITHOUT COMMITTEE APPROVAL


                                                                  POLICE COMMITTEE

                                                                  8 JUN E 1976


REPO R T BY CHIEF CONSTABLE




REPORT ON A RESOLUTION BY ROTHERHAM BOROUGH COUNCIL IN
RESPECT O P INCIDENTS IN ROTHERHAM CONNECTED WITH THE
R aT H ^ R H A M U N ITED VERSUS SH EFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL
LEAGUE MATCH PLAYED ON SATURDAY, 20th MARCH 1976


INTRODUCTION

1.      At the m eeting of the Police A uthority on Tuesday, 13 April 1976, a verbal report was m ade
on behalf of the Chief Executive th a t a letter dated 9 April 1976, had been received by him from the
D irector of Legal and Adm inistrative Services of the R otherham Borough Council.

2.     The letter was couched in the following terms:-

       ‘I set o u t below a recom m endation adopted at the m eeting of the R otherham
        Borough Council held on 7 April 1976

       HOOLIGANISM IN TH E TOWN CENTRE AND AT MASBROUGH STATION

       R ecom m enced: T h at the Council:

        (i)    express to the Police A u thority its alarm at the acts of hooliganism
               th at to o k place in the tow n centre and at the railway station on
               March 20th;

        (ii)   ask the Police A u thority to carry o u t an investigation to establish how
               such acts of lawlessness could be allowed to happen and to inform this
               Council w hat measures will be taken to prevent similar incidents in the
               future.

       The Council will be pleased to receive the Police A u th o rity ’s observations in due course.’

3.     I un d e rto o k to report on the R otherham Borough Council’s recom m endation and
accordingly subm it this report.

4.     May I p oint out th a t some of the alleged offenders involved in the incidents described in this
report have n o t y e t been finally dealt with by the Courts and members are asked to treat the
inform ation supplied as confidential.
BACKGROUND INFORM ATION

5.      The background inform ation to the events is th a t R otherham United F ootball Club are in the
Third Division of th e Football League. Their ground, know n as ‘M illmoor’, is situated at Millmoor
Lane, R otherham , and has a crowd capacity agreed with the police of 24,000 (plan of ground at
Appendix ‘A ’). T he Club were due to play Sheffield Wednesday Football Club in a Football League
m atch on Saturday, 20 March 1976, kick-off at 3.00 pm . As this was a ‘local D erby’ game, interest
in which was enhanced by the fact th a t the visiting Club were in the zone for relegation to th e F ourth
Division, a large attendance was anticipated. All th e actions taken by the F ootball Club and the
police were planned on this assum ption. It should be borne in m ind th at th e previous League game
in R otherham betw een these tw o team s was in May 1974, which attracted a gate of just over 4,500,.
and it was 17 years prior to this th a t the teams had previously m et in the Football League. In the
event the attendance on 20 March was 13,856.

CONSULTATIONS WITH THE CLUB .

6.      Consultations to o k place betw een the police and the Board of Directors and M anagement of
the Football Club in an effort to anticipate and prevent problem s inside th e ground. It was decided
to m ake the event an all-ticket game and to segregate the rival supporters so far as was practicable.
Pink tickets for the Tivoli end were issued at R otherham for their supporters and blue tickets for the
Railway end were sim ultaneously distributed at the Sheffield W ednesday ground for their supporters.
U nfortunately, as things turned out, a considerable num ber of Sheffield Wednesday supporters, for
convenience, bought their tickets at ‘M illmoor’ because they live nearer to th at ground; this allowed
rival supporters to mix at the Tivoli end.

POLICE ARRANGEMENTS

7.    • In his O perational Order for the Match, which catered fo r events inside as well as outside the
ground, the Divisional Chief Superintendent identified for the officers perform ing d u ty the likely
problems. These may be summarised as follows:-

        (a)    The ‘local D erby’ atm osphere could excite supporters;

        (b)    The history of hooliganism by R otherham United and Sheffield Wednesday
               supporters necessitated firm police action;

       (c)     The close proxim ity of ‘M illmoor’ to Sheffield would enable supporters to
               arrive early by public transport or their own means, which could result in
               large num bers of football supporters being in R otherham tow n centre before
               and after the m atch;

       (d)     Police personnel needed to be deployed before and after the game in such a
               m anner th a t a strong contingent of officers would be in the tow n centre as
               well as en route to and from th e ground so as to prevent damage and m aintain
               public order.

8.      The Chief Superintendent at R otherham realised at an early stage in his planning th a t his
m anpow er resources would be insufficient effectively to police the football m atch as well as to
provide adequate police supervision elsewhere in his Division, despite m any of his officers volunteering
to w ork overtime. Accordingly, he requested headquarters to provide aid from other Divisions of the
South Yorkshire Police, which was duly arranged.
BEFORE TH E MATCH

9.      At about 10.00 am Sheffield Wednesday       supporters began to arrive in R otherham and it was
clear th a t some were looking for opportunities to cause trouble. A t th at tim e 43 police officers (some
in plain clothes) were on d u ty in the tow n centre specifically to prevent and detect criminal offences and
damage, and to secure public order. A t 11.30 am this num ber was augmented by a further 12 officers,
making 55 on du ty in all. A t 12.30 pm a further 51 officers com m enced d u ty covering routes from the
tow n centre to ‘M illmoor’, and th e police presence was augmented at anticipated trouble spots, including
the railway station, ’bus station and All Saints Square (see plan at Appendix ‘B ’). Thus, before th e game
started there were 94 officers engaged on outside duty.

10.     Twelve persons were arrested for offences under the Public Order A ct and rowdyism and
hooliganism were k ept largely under control, although there was th e usual boisterousness and bantering
betw een supporters as one would expect at a game of this nature. The police were continually breaking
up packs of supporters into smaller groups so as to minimise th e likelihood of serious trouble, but m inor
scuffles did take place.

ALLEGED WIDESPREAD DAMAGE IN PUBLIC HOUSES

11.     In view of th e com m ents attribu ted in th e press to the M ayor of R otherham when the events
of th e 20 March were discussed in Council, further inform ation a bout the alleged widespread damage in
licensed houses was requested. Police enquiries have revealed only three incidents, as follows:-

(i)     Premises ‘A ’

A t about 12 noon officers in plain clothes entered the public house because of the noise. T hey did so
on their own initiative w ithout a call from th e licensee and after the unruly elem ent had been dispersed
one beer glass only was found to be broken. No com plaint was m ade by th e licensee, and there is no
evidence th a t the breakage was intentional.

(ii)    Premises ‘B ’

At 11.00 am the licensee was visited by a Sergeant in plain clothes and advised th at as a consequence
of his advertisem ent in Sheffield newspapers stating live entertainm ent would be available, he could
well have trouble if rival supporters were allowed in the premises. A t 1.00 pm the poliee were called
and found the public house full of Sheffield W ednesday supporters who were singing and shouting.
The licensee requested assistance from th e police to clear and to close the premises. This help was
given and th e supporters were ejected. Afterwards it was found th a t six beer glasses had been broken.

(iii)   Premises ‘C’

One window valued at £5 was broken; a 16 years old you th was arrested and charged with th e offence
by the police. He was subsequently fined £35 for causing damage and ordered to pay th e cost of
replacem ent of the window.

12.    The m ajority of licensees in R otherham refused to supply football supporters with intoxicants
and, no dou b t as a consequence, their premises suffered no violence or damage.

EVENTS DU RING THE GAME

13.     Before and during th e course of the football m atch a num ber of scuffles and fights to o k place
betw een rival supporters. Forty-five persons were arrested in the ground, thereby preventing any
situation from getting o u t of hand. Inform ation was received by the police th a t when the final whistle
sounded the Sheffield W ednesday supporters at the Railway end intended to invade the playing area,
join with their colleagues at the Tivoli end, and attack the R otherham U nited supporters. To
                                                  4

counteract such action a large police contingent was placed around the perim eter of th e playing area
some m inutes before the final whistle sounded which prevented the threatened invasion of the pitch
and confrontation when the game ended with R otherham U nited winning 1 - 0.

EVENTS A FT E R THE GAME

14.      At th e conclusion of the game supporters were supervised to and through the tow n centre and
to the ’bus and railway stations. While again they created a good deal of noise, apart from the incident
at th e railway station, to which I will refer in m ore detail later, there was only one case of damage
reported to the police. This was in Effingham Street where a paint and wallpaper shop due for closure
had goods on display in the entrance. A bunch of supporters, who had becom e detached from the main
group, picked up tw o or three tins of paint and threw one through the window of a television/radio
retailer. The rem ainder of th e paint was spilled on the footpath. The police were quickly on the scene
but despite the fact th at there were a num ber of people in th e shops and th e street at th e time, it was n o t
possible for theb ffen d er(s) to be identified. The replacem ent value of the broken window is estim ated
at £150 and the am ount of damage to carpets and electrical equipm ent was assessed at £500.

DAMAGE AT RAILWAY STATION

15.     The only other major incident of damage of which th e police are aware occurred at R otherham
Railway Station. It was, of course, well know n th a t a considerable num ber of supporters would be
travelling back to Sheffield by train. British T ransport Police had accordingly arranged for their
officers to look after British Rail property. They were, however, unable to contain th e rush of
supporters and about 30 windows at the station were broken. T he request m ade by the British T ransport
Police to South Yorkshire Police for support was rapidly fulfilled and local officers attended in strength.

DAMAGE TO A TRAIN

16.      Assistance was given to th e British T ransport Police in shepherding supporters on to a num ber of
special trains. Despite the fact th at British T ransport Police travelled with th e supporters, considerable
damage was caused to one train, the com m unication cord of which was pulled seven tim es betw een
R otherham and Sheffield, This particular train was scheduled to leave R otherham at 5.20 pm. and
arrive at Sheffield (Midland) station at about 5,30 pm.

17.     A First Division Football League m atch had been held at Bramall Lane, Sheffield but, because
of the troublesom e behaviour of the Sheffield Wednesday supporters, details of which had been passed
to Force Control, officers who had perform ed duty at Bramall Lane were retained on d u ty to supervise
the supporters on their arrival back in Sheffield.

18.    A t 5.50 pm police waiting at Midland S tation were inform ed th at the train had stopped in the
tunnel at Grim esthorpe and a large num ber of supporters were on the railway line. In view of the
obvious dangers movem ents of rail traffic in and o u t of Midland Station were halted. At 6.05 pm , at
the request of the British T ransport Police, a num ber of South Yorkshire police officers entered the
tunnel where the train had remained stationary. A fter some difficulty all the passengers were eventually
persuaded to get back into the train and it com pleted its jourrey to Sheffield w ithout further incident.

19.     Some 60 South Yorkshire police officers were deployed at the Station and in the Sheaf Street
and Pond Street areas. The supporters left the area quietly and m ost dispersed into the Pond Street
and Bridge Street ’bus stations where they boarded their ’buses. Everything had returned to normal
at a bout 7.00 pm.
                                                 5

CONCLUSIONS

20.    The facts stated support the following conclusions:-

        (a)     T hat appropriate police arrangements to prevent anticipated violence,
                disorder and damage to property were made.

        (b)     T hat adequate police m anpow er resources were provided (altogether
                144 officers were on d u ty - see A ppendix ‘C’).

        (c)     T hat the com plaint of ‘lawlessness’ is grossly exaggerated and n o t
                supported by the evidence. >

        (d)     T h a t speedy and firm police action was taken to detect breaches of
                the law as indicated by the total of 66 arrests (See A ppendix ‘C’ which
                details arrests by age groups, nature of charges, football allegiance of
                persons arrested and their tow n of residence).

        (e)     T h a t police resources were deployed to the best advantage on the day.

21.    Football hooliganism is a phenom enon which is virtually impossible for the police wholly to
prevent w ithout adopting measures which the public generally would consider to be repressive, always
assuming th a t the necessary m anpow er is available to carry o u t such measures, which it is no t. The
unruly elem ent is a relatively small, b u t nevertheless significant, proportion of the football going public.
The arrest figures show th a t on average almost every second police officer on d u ty effected an arrest.
So far as the police are aware no persons received treatm ent at hospital for injuries associated with the
football crowds b u t the St. Jo h n Am bulance Brigade dealt w ith the usual m inor casualties com m on to
m atch days inside the ground.

22.      The R otherham Council’s recom m endation asks the Police A uthority to establish ‘how such
acts of lawlessness could be allowed to happen’. This is virtually an impossible question to answer.
One would find as much difficulty in determ ining w hy m urders, rapes, robberies and thefts are ‘allowed
to happen ’. The search for the answers to the causes of crime and disorder has gone on for m any years
w ithout success, and football hooliganism is one of the current m anifestations of the disorder problem.
The area was heavily policed b u t the police cannot be everywhere, particularly when an unruly crowd
is b ent on causing trouble.

23.     The Council also asks the Police Com m ittee to inform them ‘what measures will be taken to
prevent similar incidents in th e fu tu re ’. The Com m ittee is aware th a t the control of police operations
and the deploym ent of m anpow er and resources are the Chief Constable’s responsi bility. As
indicated in my conclusions at paragraph 20 above, I am satisfied th a t all reasonable measures were
taken on 20 March 1976.

24.     I assure the Com m ittee th at appropriate police arrangements will be m ade for any future
football m atches at R otherham , or indeed for any future events anywhere in South Yorkshire, in
accordance with th e considered police assessment of the likely problems.

RECOMMENDATION

25.    As a request has been m ade by th e R otherham Borough Council for the Police A uthority to
forward their observations to the Council, it is suggested th at an appropriate reply be sent, based on
the conclusions set out in this report.




CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                                                                                              APPENDIX                   A
     i ,   •/       r ^ J

   V'i              1 I
   '> :!
   /■/
                i
                /
                       / /-/ MRaostbhoerrohuagmh
                       /
                                                              /
                                                             / i
  ''//                      //     S tatio n'                >
                        7 i



                                                    ( P H>




                                         ( P HJ                                                              C h u rc h



                                                                                                                          o //S U /   ft
                                                                                                  Pentccostat Church/




                                                                                                                                                             [Police Traffic;
                                                                                                                                                             (Control H Q ;


                                                             357m


                            El Sub Sta                                                                                                       S h e lte r
                                                                                                                           323m   +                        To Town CQntrz       \
                                                  M e r c h a n t s Y a rd



                                                   Travelling                                                                                              Victoria

                                                                                                         The Windmill




                                                                                                         T IV
                                                                                                            \
                                                                                                              O \L I
                                                                                                         T e rr ac e s


                                                                             L Twr                                                3




                                                                                                                                             Millmoor Works




                                                                                     Millmoor Football Ground

                                                                                                                                                    SUPPORTERS

                                                                                                                                             ROTHERHAM
                                                                                                                                             (n o in ly )
                                                                                                                                              SHEFFIELD



                                                                                                                                             26- 2m


                                                                         L Twr



                                                                                                                                              '    • 0 M 26 8 7 m
                                                                                            RAILWA

                                                              n i l l m o o r Fo o tb a ll G r o u n d
M!'!!!!i!!n„„.                                                                                                                             South Yorkshire Po I icq
                                                                                                                                            PLANS DEPT. 5 / 7 6
                  APPENDIX        B




:: O

i K"     \
       « V




                                  RPTH\\X   ,
                       VIEW   R




                       o d mO




             ?s
                                                                                APPENDIX ‘C’


            POLICE PERSONNEL ENGAGED ON DUTIES DIRECTLY
                CONNECTED WITH THE FOOTBALL MATCH

                                                                  Special            Grand
  C/Insp.         Insp.        Sgt         Cons.       Total      Constables         Total

                   4            16          102            1.25         19            144




                    ALLEGED OFFEND ERS BY AGE GROUPS


          17/18               19/21                22/25              Over 25           Total

            24                  20                                                          66




                                        CHARGES


                                                     Applications          Using
Assault      O bstruct                  Criminal     F or Bind Over       Obscene     Total
Police       Police         T heft      Damage       at Common Law        Language    Charges

                                            1                                           73




                       ALLEGIANCE OF PERSONS A RRESTED


                            R otherham United              12

                            Sheffield Wednesday            54

                                                           66



                       PLACES OF RESIDENCE OF OFFEND ERS


                            R otherham                     13
                            Sheffield                      44
                            Elsewhere                       9
