                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL


                                        CONFIDENTIAL: COPYRIGHT RESERVED
                                        NOT TO BE PUBLISHED IN WHOLE OR
                                        IN PART WITHOUT COMMITTEE APPROVAL


                                        POLICE COMMITTEE

                                        2 JUNE 1980


REPORT OF THE CHIEF CONSTABLE


EFFICIENCY AND MORALE OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

I have been requested by the Chairman of the Police Committee to answer
allegations made at the County Council meeting on 21 May that there is
low morale within the Force, that there is a low crime detection rate,
that the Force is slow in attending scenes of crime, and there is a non-
effective use of equipment and personnel. Comment was also made during
the meeting that there was a need for more policemen and that "police
cars have been standing around in police stations".

The allegations in general terms suggest that the South Yorkshire Police
is inefficient. Inefficiency in a large organisation does not occur
overnight and therefore in opening my response I would remind members
that during my period of office, which began on 1 February 1979, the
Police Committee has complimented the South Yorkshire Police upon their
efficiency in relation to:-

     a.   the way the Force dealt with the traffic and domestic
          problems stemming from the severe adverse weather
          conditions in February and March of 1979;

     b.   the success of the Police Tattoo, Open Days at police
          stations, and the increased efforts in the community
          liaison field;

     c.   the extensive training being undertaken within the
          Force and in particular the new High Melton residential
          course for cadets;

     d.   the policing of the football derby matches during the
          1979/80 season, and in particular the Boxing Day game
          at Hillsborough between Sheffield Wednesday and
          Sheffield United;

     e.   the Football Association Cup Semi-Final between
          Liverpool and Arsenal;

     f.     the policing of the steel strike which for South
          Yorkshire extended over a period of four months.

The above list does not include the public praise for the effective way
the police dealt with the gangs of youths marauding throughthe Sheffield
shopping   area on Saturdays; or for the reassurance felt bythepublic
from the fact that in the period I have mentioned every enquiry into a
death by unlawful violence has resulted in an offender being charged;
and also from the satisfaction derived from the recent protracted trials
into what has been described as organised crime on a large scale, which
through patience, determination, and sound professionalism on the part
of my officers ended with findings of guilt and heavy deterrent sentences
upon those responsible.

Reference to the national steel strike and the efficiency of the South
Yorkshire Police leads me into reporting that the Home Secretary has on
two occasions written personally to me congratulating the Force, and, to
quote from one letter, he said "A very real debt of gratitude is owed
to the Force for the determined and impartial way in which policing has
been carried out". To have merited such congratulations from the Secretary
of State for Home Affairs indicates that at least for the four months of
the steel strike he considered the Force was operating efficiently, and
presumably with high morale.
              I
The Force has a reputation for maintaining a high level of crime
detection and I found it most regrettable to have to announce at the end
of March that during the first quarter in 1980 crime had increased by
19.66% as compared with the same quarter in 1979, and that the detection
rate had slumped to 43.14%. Other Forces in the region have experienced
similar increases in crime and reductions in detection, but this was not
regarded as comfort for the South Yorkshire Police. It was my view that
the Force's considerable commitment to the steel strike had had some
effect upon the position, and this view has been supported following the
presentation of crime statistics at the end of April covering the first
four months of the year by which time the increase in crime has been
reduced by 4.22% from 19.66% to 15.40%. The detection rate has improved
by .42% to 43.56% but if account is taken of the recent successes in
detection, and which will be included in the statistical calculations
once the cases have been dealt with by the courts, the detection rate at
this time would be 49.76% which is only marginally less than what it was
last year, when police commitments had not been so onerous.

The crime situation has therefore improved markedly since I reported to
the Committee at the end of March 1980. This improvement has occurred
during the first month of the financial year, and during the month when
the so-called 'police cuts' came into effect.

There have been many statements made concerning the effects of the
'police cuts', particularly in relation to the non-availability of man­
power and of police vehicles. When I have checked upon the statements
which have been made, I have invariably found them to be wildly inaccurate.
It is my view that it is irresponsible to make such statements without
first giving me the opportunity to test their accuracy. When inaccurate
statements are made, and are published, rumour becomes rife, and the
community as a whole suffers.

I would like to take this opportunity of making my policy clear concerning
the working of overtime in the Force because this does have a bearing upon
future police effectiveness.

When I was told that my financial provision for 1980/81 had to be reduced
by £1.85m I consulted my senior officers and the staff associations - the
Superintendents' Association and the Joint Branch Board of the Police
Federation. As a result of those consultations a strategy was agreed for
conserving our resources. Part of that strategy was to reduce 'normal
overtime' by closer supervision. However, I gave instructions that our
effectiveness would not be allowed to suffer and that when it was
necessary to work overtime to maintain law and order and efficiency,
overtime would be worked.

An example of necessarily working overtime has brought a successful
result whilst I am preparing this report. Two weeks ago a rape
occurred at Conisbrough, and since then up to 40 officers - 20 detectives
and 20 uniformed officers - have been working a 12 hour day. This
commitment has concluded with a man being charged with rape.

It is accepted by the Chairman of the Police Committee, and I hope by
the members, that overtime will be worked in accordance with operational
requirements; Although we are about to reach our present establishment
of 2752 and are moving to recruit a further 120 officers, a total
establishment of 2872 is still insufficient to adequately police this
area. I claim we require a further 576 above the 120 additional
officers we will be recruiting. Until such time as we obtain more
officers it follows logically that such a deficit must be met by a more
efficient use of our resources, and where appropriate by working overtime
This does not mean that overtime working should not be controlled, to do
otherwise would be contrary- to the well declared policy of Her Majesty's
Government of conserving and making the best use of our resources.

The control of petrol consumption can be achieved without reducing the
service to the public. For instance, officers using panda cars are
being advised to, whenever possible, travel from one point to another,
park their vehicle, and patrol on foot before moving by vehicle to
another location. This was the original concept of using panda cars.

It is my aim to reduce the number of car beat patrols and to return more
men to foot patrol. This has nothing to do with conserving petrol but
to get a greater involvement between the police and the public. Recently
additional officers have been directed to foot patrolling from car beats
and with the introduction in the near future of a complete centralised
emergency system covering the whole of South Yorkshire, with a response
car in each of the 14 sub divisions ready to answer emergency calls,
supplemented by a more efficient use of traffic department resources, I
hope to return still more officers to foot patrolling. As the Force is
60 vehicles below the authorised establishment, any vehicles taken from
car beat patrols will be utilised for other purposes.

Police vehicles are supplied and used for many purposes and it has to be
accepted that there will be occasions when more vehicles than usual are
parked in police station yards. At change-over times it is obvious that
police vehicles will be in police stations in greater numbers than normal
but the public should be aware that due to the organisation of over­
lapping shifts, a number of vehicles are still out on patrol ready to
respond to calls.

When members of the public make complaints against particular officers
and this occasionally includes lateness in attending at scenes of crimes,
it is normal practice for the complaint to be investigated under Section
49 of the Police Act 1964. • It is not police policy to publicly announce
the results of the investigation but the complainant is always informed
and members of the Police Committee are in a position to satisfy
themselves that such complaints are properly investigated. To put the
issue of lateness in attending scenes of crime into perspective, in
South Yorkshire in 1979 it is estimated that the police received in
excess of 50,OCX) emergency calls, and during that period six complaints
of late attendance were received, and only one of the complaints was
substantiated. In 1980 it is again estimated that in excess of 25,000
emergency calls have been received, and police response has attracted
only five complaints, four of which have since been withdrawn, and one
remains the subject of enquiry.

I totally reject statements that the South Yorkshire Police is inefficient.
To the contrary it is efficient and is improving in efficiency, and is
giving excellent service to the public of South Yorkshire. There is a
close working relationship between the management of the Force and the
staff associations, and recently the Superintendents’ Association and
the Joint Branch Board of the Police Federation unequivocally gave me
their support following criticism concerning the 'police cuts'. To have
received such support does not indicate a loss of morale within the Force.
Further, I have> checked with all my divisional and departmental' commanders
and I have received the information that the Force    is in good heart butis
becoming weary of being used as a political football.

1 am very concerned about the South Yorkshire Police being continually
drawn into the political arena and also about criticisms    being made,
usually of a generalised nature, without the Force being given the
opportunity to verify the accuracy of such allegations. It is the policy
of this Force to carefully examine any criticism and take the appropriate
action.  I welcome constructive criticism, ai}d it will always be my
policy to be as frank as is possible in replying to any criticism made
against me personally or against the Force.

My Annual Report for 1979 will be presented to the Police Committee on
2 June. The Report describes the constant efforts being made not only
to maintain but to improve the efficiency of the Force. During the year
under review there were a number of important developments which are
documented in the Report. Many of these developments have been achieved
through co-operation and goodwill between the Chief Constable, the Police
Committee, and the County Council. The efficiency and high morale of the
Force lies within this partnership. I am confident that the Force is
efficient and that the morale is good, but to maintain and improve both
efficiency and morale we must all 'pull together'.




J H BROWNLOW

CHIEF CONSTABLE
