                                                            Cllr R Thwaites,

Mr F. A.Mallett.LL.B.                                       Sheffield.
Chief Executive,                                            S6
South Yorkshire C.C.
                           •   y-v.-

                                                   1st May 1977.


     Dear Mr Mallett,                                          .» t  ** *•
                      arising out of disturbances caused by vandals attending
the F. A.Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough Sheffield on Saturday 23rd April 1977»
the residents attended a meeting to express their anger and concern at the
damage done. They stated ouite bluntly that this incident was the last
straw, and that semi-finals should not be played in the oity in future.
                     I was appointed ohairaan of the meeting, and they instruct*
me to forward the following resolution to you which deals with league matches
as well as speoial football matches, and the action which must be taken.

                     I would like the oomaents of the County Council
regarding the resolution especially on items 6 and 8.
                      I will be arranging another meeting of the residents
 to report on the replies to the resolution.


 Resolution sent to

Prime Minister.
Home Secretary.
Minister of Sport.
Sheffield M.P.S.
South Yorkshire C.C.
Sheffield Distriot Council.
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                  Your‘s simoerely,
                                               Cllr Soy Thwaites.
   Resolution.               Bas- F. AeCxtp S en i-p in al.

             H69 the householders residing in the vicinity of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club.
              Are angry at the wanton vandalism caused by football fana attending
the F»A*Cup Sead-Fiaal on Saturday 23rd Jpril 1977*
              The people in the area were afraid to go out, the shops and poblie
houses were closed and boarded up, and those people who did go out were jostled
by the oroirds*

                    We demand that steps be taken to g-

1* prevent the occurance happening again by either playing semi-finals on a
   hone and away basis at the grounds of the participants, or playing semi-finals
   at Wembley*

2* pay compensation to those people who hare had daaage done to property, and to
   shop owners who have lost business*

3* Mike the football olubs responsible for the cost of any damage done by fans
   and the oost of any extra policing recuired.

Wk. prevent fans travelling by train or ooach, froa entering the town or oity
    until the gates at the groung are opened, and esoort the fans to the grepad,

5* asoort fans who are unable to get into the matoh, to the rail and coach station
   to nake -their way bone*

6* prevent streets being used by fans for oar- parking within the vicinity of 'file
   ground, by restricting parking to residents on a pass system,

 7* hold a public enquiry into the eixomstanees*

 8* give looal author!tiea speoial reserve powers to ban if need be,any match
    where a olibs fans have a reputation for vandalism*

 9* prevent the media from pubioising these aots, wh. i&h give encouragement t
    others*
