                                    Not tot Publication until
                           SO' TH

       JOINT REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, '                   FIRE SERVICE COMMITTEE
       THE CHIEF FIRE OFFICER AND THE CHIEF                     3RD SEPTEMBER, 1981
       CONSTABLE    :

                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

1.     Background

1.1   The County Council's powers and duties under this Act are delegated to the
      Fire Service Committee. On 8th January, 1976, the Committee decided that the
      necessary detailed investigation should be undertaken by Officer Workiqg
      Parties for each of the four Borough Council areas. These Officer Working
      Parties consist of representatives of the Fire Service, the Police, the
      Building Inspectors of the Borough Council, co-ordination being undertaken by
      the Department of Administration.

1.2   Whilst it is Parliament's intention that all sports grounds which have
      accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators should be subject to the provisions
      of the Act eventually, the only grounds designated by the Secretary of State to
      date as requiring General Safety Certificates from the appropriate County Council
      have been certain "International" grounds and those of clubs in the First and
      Second Divisions of the Football League.

2.    Position in South Yorkshire

2.1   The Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. was
       designated by the Secretary of State as requiring to apply to the County
       Council for a General Safety Certificate by 1st January, 1979. Following
       detailed investigations by the Officer Working Party for the Sheffield District,
       the Certificate was granted on 21st December, 1979, after approval by the
       Committee.

2.2   The Officer Working Parties for     the four Districts have also been giving
       informal advice, on request, to    the remainder of the football league Clubs in
       South Yorkshire.

2.3   Following their promotion to the Second Division of the Football League, the
       Barnsley Football Club Ltd. and the Rotherham United Football Club Ltd. have
       been designated by the Secretary of State as requiring to apply to the County
       Council for a General Safety Certificate by 1st January, 1982.

3.    General Safety Certificate

3.1   On 30th November, 1978, the Committee approved a draft General Safety Certificate
       (copy attached) as the basis for the standard certificate to be used throughout
       the County.

3.2   The General Safety Certificate granted to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
      Ltd. on 21st December, 1979, was based on the standard certificate with additions
      to meet the particular conditions at the Hillsborough Stadium.

3.3   Experience gained since the granting of the Sheffield Wednesday General Safety
      Certificate has shown the desirability of incorporating two minor amendments
      to the standard certificate for the following reasons




                                             -1-
     (a)     the Chief Constable feels it essential that, in order to maintain
             public safety, the police commander at a football ground should,
             in consultation with the Holder, have the discretionary power to
             decide the actual moment when the exit gates should be opened. To
             safeguard'the Police and the Club concerned, it is suggested that
             paragraph 10 should be amended accordingly, and

     (b)    as it is standard practice for Institution of Electrical Engineers'
            Certificates to be issued for five years for completely new
             installations and lesser periods for other installations (based on
             the results of tests and the known age of the installation) it is
             felt that the 12 months requirement mentioned in line 2 of paragraph
            26 should be amended accordingly.

4.   Recommendation

     (i)    That the standard South Yorkshire General Safety Certificate be amended
            to read as follows:-

             (a)    Paragraph 10

             "The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on
             the plans, all doors and gates which form an egress route between
             any spectator accommodation and the public highway, or other open
             space outside the stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately
             and easily from the inside and shall be manned at all times the stadium
             is being used for a Specified Activity by at least the number of stewards
             required by Part 2 of Schedule 3. All such doors or gates shall be
             opened by the stewards responsible and secured in the fully open
             position at a time agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable
             and at any other time on evacuation of the stadium or a part thereof on
             being ordered so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding
             of the alarm".

             (b)    Paragraph 26

             "The Holder shall within    months of the date of this certificate and
             thereafter not less than once in each period of five years in respect
             of new installations (and such lesser period as the Chief Fire Officer
             may require in respect of other installations) supply to the Chief
             Fire Officer the certificate of an independent Electrical Engineer as
             to the current compliance or non-compliance of the electrical
             installation within the stadium, with Section E of the I.E.E. Regulations
             or other sections or Regulations for the time being in force relating
             to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings".

     (ii)    That the General Safety Certificate granted to the Sheffield Wednesday
             Football Club Ltd. on 21st December, 1979, be similarly amended.


     F. A. MALLETT                 J. H. BR0WNL0W               H. A. JONES
     Chief Executive               Chief Constable              Chief Fire Officer

     County Hall,
     Barnsley.

     26th August, 1981.



                                      -2-
                                         STA
                                                                     CERTIFICATE No.


                     SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 197-5____
                      GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Address of prem ises for
which this Certificate is
issued.

Occupier of the p rem ises.

Holder of this C ertificate.

Use of the prem ises in                                                             Football matches
respect of which this Certificate
is issued.

1.       This C ertificate is issued by South Y orkshire County Council in respect
         of the p rem ises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated
         by O rder under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as
         a stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.      The term s and conditions set out in P a r t 2 of the Schedule attached hereto
        are hereby imposed.

3.      The te rm s and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South
        Yorkshire County Council consider n ecessary or expedient to secure
        reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in
        respect of which this C ertificate is issued.

4.      The words used in this Certificate and the Schedule attached hereto have
        the meaning assigned to them by P a rt 1 of the Schedule and Section 17 of
        the Act.

5.      The Schedule and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.

6.       This Certificate commences on the                              day of                                   for an
         indefinite period.



        Date                   ...........................   S ig n ed ................................ .......................
                                                                           Chief Executive on behalf of and
                                                                           duly authorised by the South
                                                                           Yorkshire County Council.
                          SCHEDULE

                              PART 1
                          In terp retation

The Act                        means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.

Authorised P erson             means a person authorised in accordance with
                               Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority         means

The Chief Constable            means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                               South Y orkshire Police or, as the case may require,
                               the Police Officer having charge of tfie Stadium on
                               the occasion of a Specified Activity.

The Chief F ire Officer        means the Chief F ire Officer for the time being of the
                               South Yorkshire Ccuriy Fire SbrvicecrWs designated deputy.

The Certificate                means the w ritten General Safety Certificate of
                               which this Schedule forms part.

The County Council             means the South Yorkshire County Council.

The Guide                      means the "Guide to Safety at Spcr ts Grounds" as
                               from time to time amended, issued by the Home Office,
                               or such other code of practice as may be so issued.

The Holder                     means the applicant for and person to whom the General
                               Safety C ertificate has been issued and who is a
                               ’qualified person' for the purposes of the Act.

Invalid C arriage             means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled o r not,
                              constructed o r adapted for use for the carriag e of one
                              person, being a person suffering from some physical
                              defect or disability,

The Plans                     means the document or documents attached to and
                              forming part of the General Safety Certificate and signed
                              by the person signing the Certificate an d /o r any other
                              document or documents which may be added to or
                              substituted for such document or documents and signed
                              on behalf of the County Council.

Specified Activity            means the playing of a Football matdh.

Spectator                     means any person occupying accommodation provided
                              for spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium                   means

Structural P a rts            includes stru c tu re s, components, installations, fabric
                              and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                      includes invalid c a rria g e s.
                                   PART 2

                       G eneral T erm s and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for 1he time being approved in writing by the County Council
shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for a Specified Activity, and he shall
ensure that the term s and conditions of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall notallow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium unless a
Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the several areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the number specified
in P a rt 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the term s and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relating
thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified Activity for one or m ore
of the following:-

(a)   the playing of m usic or singing;

(b)   the provision of news or comment associated with football;

(c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, program m es, new-sheets
       and souvenirs;

(d)   the sale and consumption of refreshm ents;

(e)   any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the prior approval
       in writing;of the Council.

(1)   Where the p rio r written approval of the County Council is required under the term s
      and conditions hereof, an application for that approval shall be made by the
      Holder to the County Council a t least 21 days before the occurrence in resp ect of
      which it is required.

(2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to a lte r o r extend the
       Stadium or any of its installations in a m anner mentioned in Section 8 of the
       Act the Holder shall a t least 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal
       is begun, give notice of the proposal to the County Council.

(!)   The Holder shall ag ree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days (or such
      sh o rter tim e to which the Chief Constable may consent) p rio r to every
      Specified Activity the methods of adm ission to be employed in connection with
      the Specified Activity and the methods to be used for the segregation of home
      and visiting supporters.

(2)   The Holder shall refuse adm ission to, or evacuate spectators from, the
      Stadium or any part thereof at any tim e before or during a Specified Activity
      upon receiving instructions so to do from the Chief Constable.
The Holder shall at his own expense arrang e for the attendance at every Specified
Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure the orderly and lawful
behaviour of the spectators and the number of police officers required at each
Specified Activity shall be agreed between the Chief Constable and the Holder at least
21 days (or such sh o rter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
Specified Activity takes place.

The Holder shall provide and m aintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the County
Council a suitably equipped F ir s t Aid Room and shall arrange in relation to a
Specified Activity for the attendance of such numbers of qualified F ir s t Aid
assista n ts as the Chief Constable may requ ire and in any event not less than one such
a ssista n t for each 2,000 sp e ctato rs. The F i r s t Aid Room shall be adequately signed
and shall be capable of being lit by the em ergency power supply re fe rre d to in
paragraph 12, of this P a r t of this Schedule. The Holder shall ensure that a t all
tim es a doctor employed or retained by the Holder is available to attend a t the F irs t
Aid Room if required and that his whereabouts are known to those in the Police C m tral
Control Room at the Stadium.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity of a Chief
Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as may be required by P a r t 4 of
this Schedule, and shall ensure that the Safety Steward shall be (a) fit and capable
to carry out th eir duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by d ress
(d) provided with written instructions as to th eir general duties in o rd er to c a rry
out the following

(1)    Manning of exits as indicated on the plans

(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering using o r leaving the Stadium

(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any em ergency including raising an
        alarm and extinguishing any fire.

Training ex ercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of an em ergency
shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at the Stadium at le a s t once
every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise m arked on the Plans, all doors
and gates which form an eg re ss route between any spectator accommodation and the
public highway, or other open space outside the stadium, shall be so secured as to
open immediately and easily from the inside and shall be manned a t all tim es by at
least the num ber of stew ards required by P a r t 4 of this Schedule. All such doors or
gates shall be opened by the stew ards responsible and secured in the fully open
position at a tim e before the end of a Specified Activity agreed between the Holder and
the Chief Constable and a t any other tim e on evacuation of the Stadium or a p art
thereof on being ordered so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding of
the alarm .

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief F ire
        Officer exit signs over all exits ■ from the Stadium and all exits from
        spectator accommodation fie rein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
        illuminated by both the main and em ergency lighting system s. Such supple­
        m entary illuminated signs in such locations as the Chief F ire Officer may
       req u ire shall also be provided by the Holder.
(2)    The Holder shall ensure that the co rrid o rs, gangways and sta ircases
       indicated on the plans may be illuminated when required during a Specified
       Activity by both the m ain and em ergency lighting system s.

(3)    The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
       Illuminated whenever adequate natural light is deficient during a Specified
       Activity or as directed by the Chief Constable.

(4)    All means of ingress to and eg ress from the Stadium and to and from any
       spectator accommodation therein shall be maintained free from obstruction
       and with non-slip and even surfaces and in particu lar s ta ir coverings shall be
       secured and maintained so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief F ire
       Officer a separate em ergency power supply for providing electricity
       sufficient to light all em ergency lighting throughout the Stadium, all exit
       signs and powering all the communication system s within the Stadium, such
       em ergency power supply to be operable Independently of the main power
       supply and to come into automatic operation within ten seconds of the failure
       of the la tte r and to be capable of maintaining the necessary power output for
       a minimum of three hours from the failure of the main power supply.

(2)    At le a st once annually a re p o rt as to the condition of the Emergency Power
       Supply certified by a Chartered E lectrical Engineer shall be supplied to the
        Chief F ire Officer.

(3)    Not less than th ree hours p rio r to the occurrence of a Specified Activity the
       em ergency power supply shall be tested for a period of 30 m inutes. Any
       defect revealed in this te s t shall be rectified before the commencement of the
       Specified Activity.

(4)    A competent electrician employed o r retained by the Holder shall be present
       during a Specified Activity.

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain a t the Stadium to the satisfaction of the
        Chief F ire Officer a fire warning system .

(2)    The fire alarm system shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction of the
        Chief F ire Officer.

The Holder shall provide and m aintain a t the Stadium to the satisfaction of the Chief
Constable :-

(1)    A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with such ancillary
       equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

(2)    Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention room and
       for adm inistrative purposes.
(3)    A public address system which may be audible in all parts of the Stadium.
       The police shall, should they so wish, have the u n restricted right to use the
       public address system for police purposes and such purposes will have
       priority over the Specified Activity.

(1)    The Holder shall a t all tim es maintain all stru ctu ral parts of the stadium in
        sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide and in
       all cases to the satisfaction of the Council.

(2)    The Holder shall c a rry out such works of maintenance, rep air and renewal
       to the Stadium as may be required from time to time by the County Council.

The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all operational parts of the Stadium (including
the electrical and communications installations) and all em ergency equipment in good
and efficient working order to the satisfaction of the County Council and shallundertake such
maintenance re p a ir or renewal as may from time to time be n ecessary to maintain
reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and unobstructed and in
the positions allotted on the Plans.

(1)    The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium shall be restricted
       to those areas indicated on the Plans unless otherwise approved for emergency
        purposes by a Police Officer in uniform.

(2)    The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the satisfaction of
        the County Council the access routes for emergency vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that m em bers of the P re s s , T .V . and radio serv ices having
access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are identifiable as such.

Television cam eras and portable equipment shall be placed only in such positions as
may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)    Liquid refreshm ents may be sold or distributed at the Stadium only in
        containers constructed from soft plastic or other soft m aterial, or as allowed
        by the Licensing Justices.

(2)    No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other m aterials which in the
        opinion of the Chief Constable a re capable of use as m issiles shall be
        perm itted to rem ain in any part of the Stadium to which spectators have access.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus m aterial or goods shall be
perm itted to rem ain in any p art of the Stadium except in a place and quantity approved
in writing by the Chief F ire Officer.

No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of the Stadium
without the p rio r w ritten approval of the Chief F ire Officer.
The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
Chartered Engineer (Structural o r Civil) in the presence of a representative of the
Council within     months of the date of the Certificate and at least once in each period
of 12 months th ereafter and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection
there is provided to theCounty Council by the said C hartered Engineer a certificate as to the
cu rren t compliance or non-compliance with good engineering and building practices
and with the relevant B ritish Standard Specifications and Codes of P ractice and with
the appropriate provisions and recommendations d the Guide of all stru ctu ral parts
of the Stadium excluding the crush b a rrie rs and handrails.

(1 )       The Holder shall arran g e for all crush b a rrie rs and handrails within the
           Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions erf the
           Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the
           presence of a representative of the County Council within       months of the date of this
           Certificate and for the resu lts thereot to be notified in writing to the County
           Council.
(2 ) 0 )   The Holder shall ensure that not m ore than        months after the date of this
           Certificate and thereafter not less than once in each period of 12 months a
           representative sam ple of crush b a r rie r s and handrails amounting to not less
           than 20% of the total number of such b a rrie rs and ra ils is tested in
           accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
           (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a reDresentative of the County Council and the
           results thereof notified in writing to the County Council;

      (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush b a rrie rs and handrails so tested and a
           b a r rie r so tested shall not be tested again within a period of 4§ years thereafter
           but shall be tested again within a period of 5^ years thereafter.

The Holder shall within      months of the date of this certificate and th ereafter not less
than once in each period of 12 months supply to the County Council the certificate of an
independent electrical engineer as to the cu rren t compliance or non-compliance of the
electrical installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I . E . E . Regulations or
other sections or Regulations for the time being in force relating to the E lectrical
Equipment of Buildings.

The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and other water
supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as appropriate at least once
annually by a competent person to the satisfaction of the Chief F ire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made available
for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised P erso ns:

(1)        A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium during a
           Specified Activity and to each area of spectator accommodation therein
           mentioned in P a r t 3 of this Schedule.
(2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the Stadium is in use
       for a Specified Activity which causes injury to a spectator, such record to
       include the name, address, age and sex of the spectator injured, the nature
       of the injury and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
       inquiry, and the location of the incident. The Holder shall provide a written
       re p o rt to the County Council within 48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)    A reco rd of the training and instruction given and the ex ercises held in
       accordance with the requirem ents of P aragraph 9 of this p a rt of this Schedule
       such record to include the date and time and duration of the instruction or
       ex ercise, the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
       instruction or exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)    A record of all inspections, te sts, maintenance, rep airs and renewals carried
       out at the Stadium.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall have the right at any
tim e to requ ire the Holder at his own expense to arrange for the conduct of any
inspection or te s t which the County Council may consider to be n ecessary in the in terests
of securing reasonable safety a t the Stadium when it is in use for a Specified Activity.
                                PART 3

                             Ground Capacity


The num ber of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below.
                                     PART 4

                                Safety Stewards

The m inim um num ber of safety Stew ards re q u ire d for each function shall be as
follows

(1)     Manning of exits                                                          Stewards
(2)     Control and direction of spectators entering o r leaving
        the Stadium                                                               Stewards
(3)     Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any em ergency
        including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire                     Stewards

The Stew ards shall be d istrib u te d as follows

Section of Stadium                                  N um ber re q u ire d for each function
                                                          1               2          3
