                South Yorkshire County Council
               F. A . M a lle tt, LL.B., C h ief Executive                    County Hall
                                                                              Barnsley
               J.C . Harris, M .A ., LL.B., (Cantab), County S ecretary       South Yorkshire S 70 2TN
               D ep artm en t of A dm inistration                             Telephone: Barnsley
                                                                              ( S T D 0 2 2 6 ) 86141
                                                                              Telex: 54 7 6 7 5



               O u r Ref:   DV/ JD/ 706             Your Ref:                 D ate : 24th   January, 1983.

                This m atter is being dealt w ith by                          Ext. No.


Dear Member,

Effect of Professional Football on the Community.

Further to my letter of 29th December, 1982, I confirm that the next meeting of the
Working Group to look into the effect of professional football on the community will
be held at 10.30 a.m. on Friday, 28th January, 1983, at the County Hall, Barnsley.

A copy of the Note of the previous meeting held on 15th December, 1982, is attached.

Agenda below.

                                              Yours faithfully,




                                              Chief Executive.


                                                    AGENDA

1.   Discussion with media representatives on the effect of media reporting on the
     problem of hooligansim/vandalism at and associated with football matches.

2.   Charges for Police Services (to                    be considered in the absence of the media).

                                MEMBERS OF THE WORKING GROUP

Representing the Police Committee
Councillors: G. H. Moores, B. P. Flanagan, A. England, D. W. George, M. McCoy,
R. H. Patton, J. peet, P. T. Senior, M. E. Smith,
Magistrate Member: Mr. G. G. Wood.
Representing the Policy Committee
Councillors R. Thwiates and J. C. Cornwell
Representing the Recreation Culture and Health Committee
Councillors J. Brown and D. Gow.
Representing the Barnsley Football Club Ltd.
Mr. G. Buckle (Chairman), Mr. M. J. Spinks (Secretary)
Representing the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.
Mr. I. M. Jones (Chairman), Mrs. S. Louth (Acting Secretary)
Representing the Rotherham United Football Club Ltd.

Mr. J. Layden (Director), Mr. J. E. Bennison (Secretary)

Representing the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd.

One Director (to be nominated), Mr. R. Chester (Company Secretary)

Representing the Sheffield Wednesday   Football Club Ltd.

Mr. H. E. McGee (Chairman), Mr. E. England (Secretary)
                               POLICE COMMITTEE

Notes of a meeting of the Working Group on the Effects of Professional
                     Football on the Community.

                             15th December, 1982.               ’    !
                                                         ^



PRESENT:                                                 ?         ‘ "j      _
                                                          • 'P.. • -vj    -.'*<•#*>
Representing the Police Committee                        ** ...*■?>:,

Councillors G. H. Moores (in the Chair), A. England, B. P. Flanagan, D. W.
George, M. McCoy, R. H. Patton, J. Peet, P. T. Senior, M. E. Smith.
Magistrate Member: Mr. G. G. Wood.

Representing the Policy Committee

Councillor R. Thwaites

Representing the Recreation Culture and Health Committee

Councillors:   J. Brown and D. Gow

Representing the Barnsley Football    Club Ltd.

Mr. G. Buckle (Chairman)

Representing the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.

Mr. I. M. Jones (Chairman)

Representing the Rotherham United Football Club Ltd.

Mr. J. Layden (Director), Mr. J. E. Bennison (Secretary)

Representing the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd.

Mr. R. Chester (Company Secretary)

Representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd.

Mr. H. E. McGee (Chairman), Mr. E. England (Secretary)

An apology for absence was received from Councillor J. C. Cornwell.

1.____ Terms of Reference.

The Chief Executive submitted a report on the Working Group's terms of
reference, as approved by the Police Committee on 1st November, and confirmed
by the County Council on 24th November.

RECOMMENDED - That the terms of reference of this Working Group, be as approved
by the Police Committee and the County Council, namely:-

(a)    to examine the charges for police services in South Yorkshire,
particularly where attendances fall below an agreed pre-determined level, and

(b)    to examine a closer co-operation between the football clubs and the
police to stimulate and encourage young persons towards an interest in the


                                      1   .
  Clubs and to break away from hooligansim at and associated with football
 .matches.

 2.     Charges for Police Services.

 The Football Club representatives pointed out that in no way did they wish
 to cntidise the actual policing of football matches by the South Yorkshire
Police. The service provided was first class and was the envy of many
visiting clubs. What did concern them was the basis of charge for such
policing. In their opinion, the South Yorkshire Police charges were the
highest in the country. Figures in justification of this opinion were given
on both a percentage of the gate takings basis and a cost per head of spec­
 tators basis. The Clubs felt they were suffering a considerable and
continuing disadvantage in comparison with the Football League Clubs outside
  out Yorkshire. Additionally, the Clubs had spent large amounts of money,
and continued to do so, on ground improvements required under the Safety of
  ports Grounds Act, 1975, which had the effect of easing the policing require­
ments at the respective grounds. The Clubs had for some time been involved
in various community schemes, and saw the need for such type of schemes to be
expanded as far as possible. In some cases, re-development proposals (including
in conjunction with, or in co-operation with, the District Councils) incorpor­
ating Community facilities were either in hand or were being actively pursued.
 w p? trham Uni5ed rePresentatives in particular outlined a suggestion that
the Club s gymnasium facilities could be made available for use by the
unemployed.

 The County Council's representatives were not unsympathetic to the views
 expressed, but felt that further information was needed before a decision
 could be reached. The primary concern must be to ensure public peace and
 tranquility. Certainly, the greater involvement of the Football Clubs with the
 Community was most welcome. The provisions of the Police Act, 1964, and of
the Local Government Act, 197 2, in regard to legal powers had also to be
borne in mind. The problem would have to be looked at on both a short and long
term basis. From what had been said, the effect of the Police charges appeared
to be most serious on the Doncaster Rovers Football Club at the present time.
   e Police and Fire Committee of the Association of Metropolitan Authorities
were to look at the subject on a national basis, as requested by the County
Council, on 19th January, 1983.


RECOMMENDED -

1.     That subject to any national criteria which might be forthcoming it
be a recommendation to Policy Advisory Sub-Committee "A" that the charges for
police services levied on_the Football League Clubs in South Yorkshire be
calculated on a differential basis related to the attendance levels.

2•.    That the Chief Constable be requested to prepare a report on the present
criteria for levying charges for police services, possible future criteria
(including the "through the gate" break-even figures now reported), the extent
of co-operation between the clubs and the police, and the extent of community
related activities already being undertaken by the Clubs.

3.     Hooliganism   at and Associated with Football Matches.

The Working Group considered two Reports sponsored by the Football Trust on
the European and World Cup Finals, 1982.

It was accepted that hooliganism /vandalism was not confined - to football
 matches, that there were no simple answers, and that a long term change in
 society's attitudes would also be required. However, factors such as
 unemployment, media reports and player hysteria all had an influence on the
 problem. The Football Clubs had, in fact, already banned news cameras from
 their matches and only admitted the sports cameras.

 if RECOMMENDED - That a further meeting of the Working Group be held in some
    5/6 weeks time to consider further the problem of hooliganism/vandalism at
 ’ and associated with football matches, and that the media be invited to send
* representatives to the meeting to discuss the effect on the problem of media
J reporting.
