N   I




                               Not for F
                               af:er Cc


                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL                          •J   C -D P ^-

                                FIRE SERVICE DEPARTMENT


    REPORT OF CHIEF FIRE OFFICER                                       FIRE SERVICE COMMITTEE
                                                                       7TH FEBRUARY, 1986


         FIRE PREVENTION - REPORT ON THE "COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY                            INTO    CROWD
         SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS GROUNDS - FINAL REPORT"

    1.   Further to the report submitted to the Committee at their meeting
          on 5th September, 1 9 8 5 , regarding the Interim Report of the above
          Committee of Inquiry, I would advise members that the final report
         has now been issued and provides further recommendations to supplement
          those provided in the Interim Report.

    2.   The report deals with the Inquiry by Mr. Justice Popplewell into
          the operation of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 and the steps
          necessary to improve both crowd safety and crowd control at sports
          grounds.

    3.   The report is set out in 6 Chapters

         Chapter 1   - Tragedy at Brussels            -   an   account   of   the        disaster     at
                       Heysel Stadium.

         Chapter 2   - History of Previous Inquiries - a review of the previous
                        inquiries during the past sixty years.

         Chapter 3   - Future Safety at Sports Grounds - deals with the workings
                        of the Act of 1975 and the need for further regulations
                        to protect the public who attend sporting events.

         Chapter 4   - Crowd Control - identifies the problem of hooliganism
                        and the need for additional police powers.

         Chapter 5   - Hooliganism - looks at the extent of hooliganism at
                        football matches and several theories about its cause.

         Chapter 6   -   Recommendations.

         Appendix "E" - Report and     Recommendations            on   the    Structure          of   the
                       Green Guide.

    4.   The comments within this report are restricted to the commentary
         on Chapter 3, the recommendations in Chapter 6 which have a bearing
         on fire safety and evacuation procedures, and the report and
         recommendations on the structure of the Green Guide.     (Chapter 6
         attached as Appendix "A".)




                                            -   1 -
The report examines in detail the various problems which came to
light during the Inquiry.  It identifies that some of the recommendations
in the Interim Report must now be modified, that anomalies in the
existing legislation will require attention and that parts of the
content of the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the
"Green Guide") will need to be changed.

Some changes in the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 are suggested,
namely:-

  (i)   The distinction   between   sports   grounds   and sports    stadia be
        abolished.
 (ii)   A designating order to bring not only Football, but also Rugby
        League, Rugby Union and Cricket within the scope of the Act.
        (Would include the stadia of Owlerton Sports Stadium, Penistone
        Road, Sheffield).
(iii)   One authority be responsible for structural safety.
 (iv)   The power to issue prohibition orders.
  (v)   Annual renewal of safety certificates and also annual inspection
        and power to revoke certificate.

These changes would create only a small increase in the existing
workload of the Officer Working Party but would add considerably
to their powers and their ability to enforce the provisions of the
Act.

Removing the distinction between the existing definitions of sports
grounds and sports stadia will bring grounds with only a single stand
within the designating criteria if there is accommodation for over
10,000 spectators.

There are no grounds within the County, other than the five designated
football grounds, to which this recommendation would apply.

If Rugby Union, Rugby League and Cricket grounds with capacities
over 10,000 are designated there will be no effect on the County
as there are no such grounds.

There are at present three different authorities who              could be the
enforcing authority for structural safety.

  (i)   The Health & Safety    Executive     under   the Health   & Safety   at
        Work, Etc. Act 1974.
 (ii)   The County Council   under Section     10 of the Safety      at Sports
        Grounds Act 1975.
(iii)   The District Council under the Building Act 1984.

Mr. Justice Popplewell appears to favour District Council but leaves
the decision to the Minister.
10.    Realising the weakness of a Section 10 order under the Safety of Sports
       Grounds Act, in that it may take a considerable length of time to
       obtain a hearing in court, Mr. Justice Popplewell sees the prohibition
       order as a more expedient way of rectifying dangerous conditions.

11.    By requiring a renewal of the certificate and a requirement to re-
       inspect annually, coupled with the power to revoke a certificate,
       the local authority will have added powers for dealing with clubs
       if they were dragging their feet. These sanctions will have the effect
       of ensuring that remedial work is expedited.

12.    Recommendations 3, 5, 6 and 7 of the Final Report as listed in Appendix
       "C" all have an effect on the Fire Precautions Act 1971 as follows:-

        (i)   It is considered that there is a need for some further safety
              controls at other sports grounds and sports stadia having a
              stand with a capacity of over 500 to be designated under the
              '71 Act and required to have a Fire Certificate.
              There are eight premises within the County which would most
              probably fall within the ambit of this recommendation.  They
              are listed at Appendix "B".   A further five will need to be
              reassessed.
       (ii)   If indoor facilities are designated there are possibly eight
              premises which may require certification.    These premises will
              be inspected and an assessment of the workload will be provided.
      (iii)   It is recommended that provision be made in both Fire Precautions
              Act 1971 and the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 for authorised
              officers of a Fire Authority to have power to issue a prohibition
              notice.

13.   There are a number of amendments to the recommendations made in the
      Interim Report which are concerned with evacuation procedures.

        (i)   Recommendation One of the Interim Report suggests that evacuation
              procedures should be a matter of police training and form part
              of the pre-match briefing.     In his commentary to this
              recommendation Popplewell suggests that the fire service should
              be involved in pre-planning of evacuation plans and that the
              overall responsibility of the safe evacuation is the primary
              and continuing responsibility of the occupier of the ground.
       (ii)   Recommendation Eleven suggests that stewards should be present
              throughout the event at each exit but is now modified because
              of the introduction of electronic locking and monitoring devices.




                                      -   3 -
14.   Appendix "E" of the Report is attached as Appendix "C". It is obvious
      from the length and complexity of this document that the Officer Working
      Party will need time to assess its full implications on the five grounds
      already designated and the effect on them.




                                                H.E. WRIGHT
                                                Chief Fire Officer




Fire Service Department,
Furnival House,
42-46 Furnival Gate,
Sheffield, SI 4QP.


BM/JMB

27th January, 1986.




                                    -   4 -
   16. Fire authorities should identify and visit all sports stadia in their areas and should prohibit or restrict
the use of any stands which, in their view, constitute a risk to spectators because of the inadequacy of the
fire precautions.

  17. In order to ensure a complete record o f sports grounds a local registration system should be set up.
(Now see paragraph 3.34 and Final Report Recommendation 3)

   18. Consideration should be given as how best to deal with temporary stands and marquees. (Now see
paragraphs 3.94 to 3.96)

  19. The next edition o f the Green Guide should make it clear that it applies to all sports grounds. (Now see
Appendix E, paragraph E8)

  20. Urgent consideration should be given to introducing a membership system in England and Wales so as
to exclude visiting fans. (Now amended. See paragraphs 4.107 to 4.128 and Final Report Recommendation
15)

  21. Closed circuit television should be introduced at League football grounds in England and Wales and in
the Premier Division in Scotland. (Now see paragraphs 4.92 to 4.101)

  22.. There should be a specific offence in England and Wales o f throwing a missile at sports grounds. (Now
see paragraphs 4.45 to 4.47, 4.54-4.55, 4.58-4.74 and Final Report Recommendation 12)

  23. Football clubs should review their arrangements fo r entry and the organisation o f their turnstiles. (Now
see Appendix E, paragraphs E18-20)

  24. Consideration should be given to the design o f a standard, efficient perimeter fence, with proper exits.
(Now see paragraphs 4.136 to 4.138 and also Appendix E, paragraph E29)


B     Provisional Recommendations in the Interim Report
    1. I am minded to recommend that in England and Wales the police should be given the unfettered right
o f search before entry to football grounds by statute. (Now see paragraphs 4.24 to 4.38 and Final Report
Recommendation 11)

   2. I am minded to recommend that Section 10 o f the Fire Precautions Act 1971 should be amended with
a view to giving the Fire Authority power in cases other than those which are regarded as wholly exceptional.
(Now amended. See paragraphs 3.62 to 3.64 and Final Report Recommendation 7)

   3. Linked with the above, I am minded to recommend that consideration be given to introducing
legislation giving powers fo r the Fire Authority to apply to the High Court fo r an injunction (or to the Court
o f Session fo r an interdict in Scotland) under Section 10 o f the Fire Precautions Act 1971. (Now amended.
See paragraphs 3.62 to 3.64 and Final Report Recommendation 7)

  4. I am minded to recommend that Section 10 o f the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 should be amended
in like manner to Section 10 of the Fire Precautions Act 1971 (see Provisional Recommendations 2 and 3)
and an application to the High Court for an injunction (or the Court of Session for an interdict in Scotland)
should be an alternative remedy. (Now amended. See paragraph 3.65 and Final Report Recommendation 8)

   5. I am minded to recommend that the Secretary o f State should exercise his powers to designate all sports
grounds, whatever their size, to include indoor as well as outdoor activities. (Now amended. See paragraphs
3.53 to 3.59 and Final Report Recommendations 5 and 6)

   6 . 1 am minded to recommend immediate designation o f any ground capable o f holding over 5.000 spectators,
to cover all sports grounds, not merely football grounds. (Now amended. See paragraph 3.23 and Final Report
Recommendation 2)

  7.    I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to providing the police with additional
powers o f arrest under the Public Order Act 1936. (Now see paragraph 4.76 and Final Report Recommendation
13)


                                                        63
                                                                                                          APPENDIX "A"



                                                         CHAPTER 6

                                              Summary o f all Recommendations

    A      Recommendations in the Interim Report
       1. Evacuation procedures should be a matter o f police training and form part of the briefing by police
    officers before a football match. (A W see paragraphs 4.17 to 4.19)

      2. The local authority team responsible fo r issuing safety certificates in respect of designated grounds
    should, as heretofore, include police officers.

       3. Early attention should be given by the Home Office Directorate of Telecommunications to consider
    the practicality o f producing a more suitable personal radio fo r the police. (Now see paragraphs 4.102 to
    4.104)

      4. The Green Guide should be amended to include in Paragraph 11 a provision that, wherever practicable,
    roads within a quarter o f a mile o f a sports ground should be kept entirely free o f parked vehicles. (Now see
    Appendix E, paragraph E35)

      5. Consideration should be given to making it a criminal offence in England and Wales to have a smoke
    bomb or similar device at sports grounds.

          6. Those managing sports grounds not governed by safety certificates should give serious consideration, with
        the assistance o f fire authorities, to the presence in a ground o f suitable fire fighting equipment. (Now see
        Appendix E, paragraph E33)

          7. Stewards at all sports grounds should be trained in fire fighting.

    8. In designated grounds it should be a term o f the safety certificate that an adequate first-aid room should
_ be provided.

    .     9. There should be urgent consultation between the Health & Safety Executive and the fire authorities and
        local authorities as to how best to co-ordinate and communicate their inspections and reports.

      10.       Stewards in all grounds should not only be trained in fire precautions and fire fighting (see
    Recommendation 7 above) but should also be trained in how best to help the police in evacuation. (Now see
... Appendix E, paragraph E49)

         -11. Paragraphs 6.14.6 o f the Green Guide should be amended to read: “All exit gates should be manned
        at all times while the ground is used by the public and be capable o f being opened immediately fro m inside by
        anyone in an emergency." (Now see paragraph 4.23 and Appendix E, paragraph E21)

—          12. The Green Guide should be amended to contain a specific provision, in relation to stewards,
        (i) that they should be trained and instructed to deal with any emergency relating to fire or evacuation
           . '(see also Recommendations 7 and 10);
       (ii) that they should be given written instructions about the action to be taken in cases of emergency;
      (iii).: that they should receive practical instruction and training appropriate to their responsibility;
      (iv) that no one should be employed as a steward unless they have been so instructed and trained; and
       (v) that they should be adequate in number, physically and mentally capable of performing their duties,
    .         effectively deployed, effectively supervised and readily identifiable. (Now see paragraph 4.129 and
           - Appendix E, paragraph E49)

    ■      13;-Building o f new permanent stands o f combustible materials should be prohibited as a general rule. (Now
        see paragraphs 3.86 to 3.92)

           14. Suitable and adequate exits should be provided in all sports grounds.

       15. No smoking should take place in combustible stands, that this should be a condition of entry to the
    •ground and that signs to this effect should be prominently displayed.


                                                               62
                                                                    APPENDIX "B"



PREMISES COVERED BY RECOMMENDATION 3

     Address                                      Use              Capacity

1.   Denaby Football Club,                                      Stand 1 - 1,100
     Tickhill Square,                                           Stand 2 -   324
     Denaby,
     Doncaster.

2.   D'id'"’3T,rh Miners' Welfare,           Football           Stand - 6oo
     Hig’j Srrest,                           Cricket
     Pnuv.’orlh ,                            Field Sports
     Barnsley.

     S'scff ie        Analeur Sports Club,   Field Sportr-      Stands and
     AbbP.ycl?1e      Park,                  Football           Pavilions - 500
     S h e ffield .                          Cricket

4.   Oi.’lertor Stadiun,                     Speedway           Stand - 875
     Penistore Road,                         Greyhound Racing
     Sheffield.                              Rugby

5.   Doncaster Racecourse,                   Horae Racing       Various stands -
     Leger We.y,                                                Not calculated but
     D o n c a ste r .                                          well in excess of
                                                                500

     Dillington Greyhound Statliun,          Greyhound Racing   Stand - 400 to 800
     High3tone Road,
     Barnsley.

     Highgatc: Greyhound Stadiun,            Greyhound Racing   Stand - 400 to 800
     Nicholas Lane,
     Goldthorpe.

8.   Bentley Greyhound Stadium,              Greyhound Racing   Stand - 500 to 800
     Newlandti Drive,
     Doncastfsr.
   8. I am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to creating a specific offence o f chanting
 obscene or racialist abuse at a sports ground. (N on see paragraphs 4.48 to 4.54, 4.56-4.74 Final Report
 Recommendation 12)                                                                           - -


 C    Recommendations in the Final Report
     1. The distinction made between sports grounds and sport stadia should be abolished. ( Paragraph 3.14)

   2. Further designation under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 o f sports grounds and sports stadia
 with accommodation fo r over 10,000 spectators where Association Football, Rugby League, Rugby Union and
 cricket is played in England, Wales and Scotland. (Paragraph 3.23)

   3. All sports grounds and sports stadia not already designated under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975
 and having a capacity in a stand o f over 500 spectators should be designated under the Fire Precautions Act
 1971 as premises requiring a fire certificate. (Paragraph 3.34)

   4. One authority should be given the responsibility fo r securing structural safety at sports grounds and stadia
 not designated under the 1975 Act. (Paragraph 3.52)

    5. In England and Wales indoor sports facilities with accommodation fo r over 500 spectators should require
 a fire certificate under the Fire Precautions Act 1971. (Paragraph 3.57)

   6. An urgent review o f the existing legislation on .indoor sports facilities in Scotland should be undertaken
 and i f they are not currently covered by fire regulations such facilities should be designated under the Fire
 Precautions Act 1971. (Paragraph 3.59)

   7. Provision should be made in the Fire Precautions Act 1971 fo r authorised officers o f a fire authority to
 have power to issue a prohibition notice. (Paragraph 3.64)

    8. Provision should be made fo r authorised officers o f the local authority to have power to issue a prohibition
‘ notice under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975. (Paragraph 3.65) -------------             —        -------

   9. There should be (1) annual renewal o f safety certificates issued under the Safety of Sports Grounds
 Act 1975; (2) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the premises prior to re-issuing the certificate
 and (3) power fo r the local authority to revoke the certificate. ( Paragraph 3.68)

    10. The Department o f the Environment should urgently amend the Building Regulations Guidance Codes
 in relation to structural fire precautions in new stands. (Paragraph 3.90)

    11. In England and Wales the unfettered right o f the police to search those who are either entering or
 trying to enter a football ground should be conferred by statute. ( Paragraph 4.38)

   12. In England and Wales consideration should be given to creating an offence o f disorderly conduct at a
 sports ground. (Paragraph 4.74)

     13. The power to arrest under Section 5 o f the Public Order Act 1936 should be widened. ( Paragraph 4.76)

    14. The provisions of Section 3(3 ) o f the Sporting Events (Control o f Alcohol etc) Act 1985 should be
 reviewed in relation to executive boxes. ( Paragraph 4.91)

    15. Consideration should continue to be given to some form o f membership scheme fo r Football League
 clubs in England and Wales. (Paragraph 4.128)




                                                          64
  \



Rec 2     E7. The G roup also recommends that consideration should be given to the production by the
        Home Office, or other appropriate body, o f summary documents, training aids and seminars for
        sports ground management explaining the provisions o f the Green Guide and their application.

        IN T R O D U C TIO N
          E8. The current Guide is aimed at soccer and rugby grounds (GG (Green Guide, 1976 Edition,
        paragraph): 1:1).


           The G roup decided that many of the recommendations in the Green Guide are relevant to
Rec 3   outdoor sports other than football and recommends that the Introduction should say that the
         Guide is applicable as a code o f good practice fo r all sports grounds. The Green Guide should
Rec 4   make it clear, however, that it docs not cover measures to ensure the safety o f spectators from
        hazards presented by the sport itself.

           E9. The Group noted that the references in the Guide to the Building Regulations for England
        and Wales would need to be revised and brought up to date. It was further noted that in Scotland,
        the Building Standards (Scotland) Regulations gave requirements for the construction, alteration,
        extension and change of use of buildings, and included standards in respect of means of escape
        from fire including emergency lighting, access for fire-fighters as well as structural fire precautions.
        The G roup recommends that full account should be taken of national Building Regulations in
        the Green Guide.

        IDE N TIFIC A TIO N OF PROBLEMS
            E10. The current Guide discerns three particular types of safety problem to be considered
        within a football ground and its immediate surroundings (GG: 2.1 to 2.4): (a) those physical
        hazards which may cause individuals to trip, slip or fall; (b) crowd pressures which may be built
        up in normal circumstances (particularly on terraces and exit routes); and (c) crowd pressures
        which may be built up under abnormal conditions. The Group considered that this analysis was
        correct. However, it felt that the need to tackle these problems should be covered in a new self-
        contained section defining, in general terms, good safety design in sports stadia and enumerating
        other important needs such as managing and controlling crowds, maintaining effective fire
        precautions, making proper provision for the disabled and achieving a reasonable standard of
Rec 5   comfort and convenience for spectators. Accordingly, the G roup recommends the incorporation
        o f a new self-contained section on good safety design in sports stadia.

        G E N E R A L CON STR U CTIO N
           El 1. The current Guide recommends that all components and installations should be designed,
        constructed, installed and maintained so as “ to perform safely their required functions” and that
        they should be in accordance with good engineering and building practice, especially as set out
        in all revelant British Standards and Codes of Practice (GG: 3.1).

           The Group approved this recommendation but felt that the reference to British Standards
        might be improved so as to identify those parts of British Standards which are wholly applicable
Rec 6   in the circumstances of the case. The Group recommends that references in the Guide to British
        Standards should be improved accordingly.

           E12. The current Guide recommends that all electrical installations should comply with the
        current edition of the regulations of the Institution of Electrical Engineers (GG: 3.2). The Group
Rec 7   considered that it would be reasonable in some circumstances for the enforcing authority to accept
        a certificate o f satisfaction fro m a chartered electrical engineer in lieu o ffu ll compliance with current
        1EE Regulations and recommends that the Guide so advises. The Group also recommends a
Rec 8   reference to B S 5266: Pt 1 in respect o f emergency lighting.

          E l 3. The current Guide recommends that all parts of the ground used by the general public
        should have a minimum headroom of 2.4 metres (GG: 3.5).

           The G roup could find no clear foundation for this advice and, accordingly, recommends that
Rec 9   in respect o f headroom the Guide should simply advise conformity to appropriate building regulations.


                                                       78
                                                                                           APPENDIX




                                                                                              APPENDIX E

Chairman

W O R K IN G G R O U P ON TH E G R EEN G U ID E
   E l. Shortly after publication of your Interim Report you asked me to establish a Working Group of
appropriately qualified scientifical and technical persons who had practical experience of safety at sports
grounds to assist the Inquiry in its task of reviewing the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(the “ Green Guide”). As you know, and with the kind cooperation of the Home Office, Scottish Office,
Department of Environment, local authority associations and technical consultants to the Inquiry, I was
able to form such a group and this met for a full week (23-28 September) under my Chairmanship.

  E2. Our terms of reference were: “ To review the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(Football) - “ the Green Guide” - and to make recommendations to the Committee of Inquiry on Crowd
Safety and Control at Sports Grounds as to amendments or additions considered necessary to the Green
Guide published in 1976.” A record of the membership of the G roup appears later in this appendix.

   E3. I am pleased to be able to report that the Working G roup completed its work satisfactorily and that
it was found possible on the final day of the G roup’s week to reach general agreement on the various
recommendations for changes which we wished to see made to the Guide. I have since prepared a self-
contained note of these points and have put the G roup’s deliberations into the form of recommendations
for you. This note is set out below for your consideration. I support these recommendations.

   E4. As you will see there are, in total, some 63 recommendations. This should not be taken in any way,
however, as an adverse judgment upon the current Guide. The substantive advice in the Guide stood up
remarkably well to a week of detailed scrutiny by experts and fully justifies the high esteem and confidence
in which it is generally - and internationally - held.

   E5. It remains only for me to record my gratitude to the members of the Group who gave up so much
of their valuable time to assist the Committee in its task; to my fellow Assessor, M r Alan Goodson, for
his encouragement, support and practical advice throughout the week; and to M r Mark de Pulford for his
excellent work as Secretary.

                                                                                    M A R TIN KILLORAN
                                                                                Fire Assessor to the Inquiry


                                      REPO RT AND RECOM M ENDATIONS

           S T R U C T U R E OF TH E G R EE N G U ID E
              E6. The Working Group was dissatisfied with the structure of the current Guide and recom-
Rec 1      mends that the Green Guide should be reorganised so as to reflect more closely the needs o f its
           target audience. (The Group agreed that the target audience of the Guide comprises: (a) sports
           ground management in designated and undesignated grounds; (b) engineers, designers and others
           engaged in the improvement, design appraisal or refurbishment of sports stadia to certificable
           standards; and (c) local authorities responsible for enforcing the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act
           1975.) The G roup considered that, following a general introduction which describes the scope of
           the Guide, sets the scene and briefly discusses the nature and extent of risks to the public at
           sports grounds, the guidance should be re-arranged so as to deal first with general management
           responsibilities and major planning and design matters. (Guidance on these matters should, where
           practicable, include methods for assessing the general safety condition of a ground and the need
           for detailed drawings and plans.) The succeeding categories of detailed guidance should each be
           preceded by a statement of the general functional requirement or aim and should include as much
           appraisal, flow and other diagrams as may conveniently be arranged. The Group considered that
           a possible scheme for the categories of advice in the Green Guide was: Fire (to include a checklist
           and appraisal flow diagram and reference to the need for professional advice). Structural Appraisal
           (to include a method for appraising existing structures and reference to the need for professional
           advice), Ground Control and Ground Management (to identify responsibilities and duties), and
           Inspections, Tests and Maintenance.


                                                      77
Rec 22    routes should always open outwards; and that, where practicable, exit gates should be sited adjacent
          to entrances.     -----       -----

Rec 23        E22. The G roup recommends that a study should be undertaken o f the current use and effectiveness
          o f the exit route signposting and exit marking systems recommended in the Green Guide ( GG: 6.6),
          and that consideration should be given to commissioning further research in this area.

          TERRACES A N D STANDS

          Safe capacity of terraces
               E23. The Guide currently suggests that the exits from each areas of spectator accommodation
           should be so designed that the spectator can leave that area in eight minutes or less (GG: 6.5).
Rec 24     The Group concluded that this so-called "eight minute rule ” was concerncd solely with the effect
           o f crowd turbulence (arising from delays in evacuating specator accommodation) on the rate o f
          flow. It was not related to emergency evacuation time criteria (see paragraph 32 below) and the
           Group recommends that the Guide should make this clear.


          Terrace packing densities
             E24. The Guide recommends packing densities between the limits of 27 and 54 persons per
          10m2 depending on the condition of the terrace or slope and on the extent to which crush barriers
          conform to the Green Guide guidelines on spacing (GG: 15.4). Recommended flow rates from
          the terraces are given at paragraph 16 of the Guide.

             The G roup concluded that the flow rates and permissible spectator densities in the Guide were
          satisfactory and reasonable when taken as a whole and that they accorded with experience.
Rec 25    However, the G roup recommends that flow rate and packing criteria and their relationship ( i f
          any) with those criteria given in respect o f emergency evacuation and crowd turbulences should be
          set out and explained more clearly in the Guide and that further advice should be given as to how
          interpolation between the wide limits suggested in respect o f terrace packing densities may properly
Rec 26    be carried out. The Group further recommends that consideration be given to the possibility o f a
          separate detailed study o f the possible casualties which might be attributable to high packing
          densities.

          Terrace steps and viewing slopes
             E25. The G roup was content with the Guide’s recommendations in respect of terrace steps and
Rec 27    viewing slopes (GG: 7.4). The Group recommends, however, that the surfaces o f terrace steps and
Rec 28    viewing slopes should be even as well as non-slip and that the way in which the maximum desirable
          gradient is specified in the Guide should be improved.

          Terrace gangways
            E26. The Guide states that the aim in respect of terrace gangways should be to ensure that
          every spectator on a terrace is within 12 metres of a gangway or of an exit. (GG: 7.5). The Guide
          further indicates that gangways should be sunk.
            The G roup felt„ that although these recommendations were generally satisfactory, reasons
          should be given for the basic aim stated in paragraph 7.5 of the Guide. Furthermore, it would
Rec 29    be preferable to state the safety objective behind the current recommendation to sink gangways so
          that it could be met in other ways. The G roup recommends accordingly.

          Division of spectator accommodation
             E27. The Guide currently recommends the division of a ground into sections to prevent major
          migrations by spectators, and into sub-sections to minimise the sway and surge of spectators
          (GG: 7.6). The G roup recommends that the Guide should limit the application o f its guidance on
          segregation to terraces at football grounds (See recommendation 57 below).

          Crush barriers and other physical restraints on movements
Rec 30,     E28. The G roup recommends that the Guide should should explain that brick walls and similar


                                                      80
          INSPECTIONS A N D TESTS
            E l 4. The current Guide recommends:
            (i) A detailed annual inspection to ensure compliance with the Green Guide (GG: 4.1);
           (ii) A general visual inspection following each event for damage which might create a potential
                hazard (GG: 4.2); and,
           (iii) Testing of crush barriers in accordance with the Guide on installation and subsequently,
                 normally, at intervals of several years (GG: 4.3).

Rec 10      The G roup recommends that the routine general visual inspection by management advised in the
          Guide should also cover features which might reduce the degree o ffire protection offered and that
Rec 11    there should also be a warning in the Guide against storing hazardous materials under or near stands.
Rec 12    The G roup also recommends that consideration should be given to the inclusion o f additional
          guidance to certifying authorities as to the frequency and content o f inspections.

Rec 13      E l 5. The G roup recommends that regular emergency evacuation drills fo r members o f sta ff
          should be recommended in the Guide.

             E16. On the testing of crush barriers (GG: 4.3 and Appendix C of the Guide) the Group had
          before it no evidence that the current guidance had permitted dangerous or defective crush
          barriers. However, it seemed to a minority of the G roup that certain anomalies exist in the current
          recommendations in the Green Guide as to load factors and testing (for example the table of
          strengths for new crush barriers permitted a different design strength for the bars and posts than
          for the foundations); and there was some evidence that enforcing authorities were unclear as to
Rec 14    the correct procedures. The Group recommends that representatives o f the local authorities, the
          Home Office and appropriately qualified advisers should, together, review the Guide's recommenda­
          tions on the design and testing o f crush barriers in more detail with a view to clarifying the guidance
          in future editions of the Guide (see also paragraph 28 below).

Rec 15       El 7. The Group further recommends that the Guide should advise that any automatic fire
          protection equipment or emergency lighting system should be tested regularly in accordance with
          relevant British Standard codes o f practice.

          INGRESS TO T H E G R O U N D
            E18. The Guide currently recommends that the number and location of turnstiles should be
          planned to achieve the smallest crowd waiting for admission that is consistent with the rate at
          which spectators can be distributed inside the ground (GG: 5.1). The Group recommends that
Rec 16    more detailed guidance to management as to contingency planning in the event o f unusual pressures
          and frustrations (including a reference to the value o f centralised computer-based monitoring)
Rec 17    should be given. The G roup further recommends that the Guide emphasise that turnstiles are not
          acceptable as a means o f escape fro m a ground.

             E19. The G roup considered it desirable that the Guide should specify a notional maximum
Rec 18    free flow rate past a turnstile. The G roup recommends that further consideration be given to
          defining a maximum notional flow rate past turnstiles fo r incorporation in a future edition o f the
          Green Guide.

            E20. The Guide currently recommends that fences forming the boundary to a ground should
          be o f “ appropriate height and strength” to avoid spectators gatecrashing (GG: 5.2). The Group
Rec 19    recommends that boundary walls and gates and any other structure forming part o f the boundary
          should also be o f appropriate height and strength to avoid gatecrashing.

          EGRESS FRO M T H E G R O U N D
            E21. Currently, Section 6 of the Guide makes a number of general recommendations as to
          egress from a sports grounds (GG: 6.1 to 6.13). The Group was generally content with these but
          recommends that the wording in paragraph 6.13 of the Guide should be revised to make it clear
Rec 20,   that escape routes are not to be regarded as an alternative provision only fo r use in emergency. The
Rec 21    Group further recommends that guidance should be included to the effect that doors on exit



                                                        79
         rather than to stipulate more stringent criteria in respect o f notional values. However, represen­
         tatives of the Fire Research Station felt that the 21 minutes should be regarded as a maximum;
         they believed that although individual circumstances might conceivably justify increasing the
         figure, it was not currently possible to assign quantitative values to active or passive fire protection
         measures with sufficient precision to enable specific relaxations to be advocated in the Guide with
         any degree of confidence. A majority of the G roup believed that the notional 8 minutes upper
         limit indicated in the Guide, although lacking any very clear or relevant technical rationale, was
         reasonable and should be retained. Nevertheless, it was the firm view of a minority including Mr
         Platt that 8 minutes is too long a period to allow for the evacuation of any stand under emergency
         conditions and that, although relaxation of the 21 minutes figure might be reasonable in individual
         circumstances, it would be misleading to specify an upper limit in the Green Guide.

           The consensus was that the enforcing authority should decide on relaxations in the light of
         professional experience and individual safety circumstances of a particular ground, but that the
Rec 41   Green Guide should offer more guidance as to what latitude was permissible on evacuation times
         and the circumstances to take into account. In particular, the Green Guide should emphasise that
         escape routes should be designed or chosen so that they provide progressive reduction in difficulty
         or danger to people using them and regard should be had to the likely accumulation o f smoke and
Rec 42   combustion products in those routes. The Group recommends that consideration should be given
         to devising a more scientific method fo r assessing the evacuation o f a stand under emergency
         conditions.

         Fire protection and fire-fighting equipment

Rec 43      E33. The G roup considered that there was currently insufficient evidence as to the value fo r life
         safety o f automatic fire protection equipment fo r the Green Guide to encourage trade-offs between
         such equipment and structural fire protection measures. Any implications that such trade-offs
         were permissible should be removed from the current Guide (eg GG: 10.2). A majority of the
         G roup rejected also the idea that the Green Guide should suggest similar relaxations where
         management expertise and vigilance were at a high level.

Rec 44     On fire detection and fire-fighting equipment, the Group recommends that reference should be
         made to relevant British Standards such as B S 5839: Part 1, B S 5306: Parts 1 and 3 and B S 5423.
         The G roup considered that it was an inefficient and undesirable use of resources for manned fire
         appliances to attend all matches.

           E34. On roof venting, the Group felt that with some stand roof configurations, appropriate
         venting and curtaining arrangements might offer a means of reducing the spread of fire. It was
         agreed however that the science of fire and smoke venting was highly complex and that it was
         not appropriate for the Guide to offer more than a general reference to the issue. However, the
Rec 45   Group felt that some advice on roof venting should be offered in the Green Guide along the lines
         of that proposed by the Fire Research Station in work commissioned by the/ Inquiry. I t was
         agreed that the priority in the Guide was to recommend effective fire precautions relating to the
         early stages of a fire.

         Access for emergency vehicles

           E35. The G roup agreed that the Guide’s recommendations as to access for emergency vehicles
         (GG: 11.30) were soundly based. It was noted that the Interim Report recommendation that
         vehicular parking be banned within quarter o f a mile of a sports ground (when it was in use) had
Rec 46   been made on a “ where practicable” basis. The G roup recommends that the qualification "where
         necessary" should be added to the current Guide’s recommendations on access fo r emegency vehicles.

         Hazardous materials

            E36. The consensus was that it was not practicable for the Guide to offer detailed advice on
         fire spread hazards associated with particular materials. Nevertheless, the G roup recommends
Rec 47   that consultation with expert fire advisers should be indicated in the Guide where substantial use
         of, fo r example, polymer seating is contemplated or o f artificial pitches where forward escape onto
         the pitch might be necessary. (See also recommendation 35 above).


                                                       82
          structures lacking mass or tensile strength are poorly suited to withstand horizontal pressures and
Rec 31    that the Guide should strongly recommend regular structural appraisal by appropriately qualified
Rec 32    personnel. The G roup also recommends that consideration should be given to mounting a more
          detailed review o f current literature on the strength o f crush barriers and the effects o f the various
          types o f loading that might be applied to them (see also paragraph 16 above).

Rec 33      The G roup further recommends that the aim o f the guidance on migrations be restated as ‘‘to
          prevent potentially hazardous migrations" rather than mass migrations as currently indicated in
          the Guide. (See also paragraph 43 below).

          PITCH PERIM ET ER FENCES
            E29. The advice on pitch perimeter fences in the current Guide deals mainly with the crush
          barrier aspects (GG: 7.9). Access to playing pitches and the need for “anti-hooligan” or other
          protective devices is however, referred to in the section on crowd behaviour (GG: 18).

Rec 34       The G roup recommends that the Guide should explain more clearly, preferably by reference to
          standardised specifications, the different functions perimeter fencing may serve and that appropriate
          cross referencing is incorporated in any future edition of the Guide. Th? G roup further recom­
Rec 35    mends that the importance o f allowing fu ll access to the pitch where this is likely to be used as a
          place o f safety in emergency should be made plain. (It was noted that Scottish Building Regulations
          required that protected zones such as stairways led to a place of safety, ie a unenclosed space in
          the open air at ground level or an enclosed space in the open air at ground level with access (of
          defined widths) to an unenclosed space. A pitch could be accepted as a place of safety only if it
          met that requirement. If, however, it was subsequently fenced off, circumstances could arise,
          under Scottish Building Regulations, where a change of use would be deemed to have taken
          place.)

          STAIRWAYS A N D RAM PS
Rec 36       E30. The G roup recommends that the current guidance on stairways and ramps (GG: 9) should
          contain appropriate cross references to advice on egress from the ground (GG: 6). The G roup
Rec 37    further recommends that the Guide should advise that, ideally, the rising and going o f steps should
          be uniform throughout an entire escape system. A minority of the Group felt that the method of
          calculation for access to stairways (GG: 9.4.5) of the Guide was anomalous and should be
          reviewed.

          F IR E PRECAUTIONS
            E31. Guidance on fire precautions is currently contained in section 10 of the Green Guide. It
          covers a variety of important matters including fire resistance, emergency lighting and fire-fighting
          equipment.

            The G roup was not wholly satisfied with the general advice on fire precautions offered by the
Rec 38,   Guide. So far as existing structures were concerned, the Group recommends that detailed advice
          should be given on means o f reducing the rate o f fire growth in existing stands. The G roup believes
          that consideration should be given to incorporating appropriate references to recent work in this
          area commissioned by the Inquiry from the Fire Research Station. In particular, the Group
Rec 39    recommends that the Guide should emphasise the hazards o f developed fires breaking into spectator
          accommodation and the consequent need fo r fire separation under stands to be imperforate. In
Rec 40    addition, the dangers o f fire spread across adjoining stands should be emphasised and half-hour fire
          resistance might need to apply to vertical sections dividing spectator accommodation from other
          areas.

          Evacuation times
             E32. On notional emergency evacuation times, the Guide currently recommends interpolation
          between 2 \ and 8 minutes, with the higher figure applying where a stand is of non-combustible
          fire resisting structure and presents generally a low fire risk (GG: 8.3).

             The G roup was satisfied that there was no case for reducing the 2 \ minutes lower evacuation
          time as recommended in the Guide. The lesson of Bradford was the need for adequate measures
          to inhibit the rate of fire development and spread and to improve the efficiency of fire procedures


                                                       81
          separation and- fire protection equipment, might be vulnerable to vandalism and that certificating
          authorities should be advised to take this into account where appropriate. The G roup recommends
          accordingly.

             E45. On ticketing, the Group agreed that this was not an effective means of crowd control
Rec 59    unless clubs ensured that their arrangements fo r the issue and allocation o f tickets were as efficient
          and effective as possible. The Group recommends that this latter point be strongly emphasised in
          the Green Guide.

Rec 60       E46. On alcohol, the G roup recommends that the guidance on alcohol (GG: 18.4) should be
          reworded to make clear that an important objective was to reduce potential missiles and also that
          the police should be consulted over arrangements for the sale of alcohol at grounds. A reference
          to the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 was also needed.

           E47. The Group were content with the material on police facilities given in the Green Guide
Rec 61   (GG: 17.8) but considered that the Guide should advise adequate vehicular access fo r the unobrusive
         removal o f detainees and secure detention rooms at appropriate grounds. The G roup recommends
         accordingly.

          OTHER M A N A G E M E N T RESPONSIBILITIES
Rec 62      E48. The Group was strongly in favour of the creation of a new section in the Green Guide on
          management responsibilities and recommends that consideration should be given to this. The
          Group considered that it would be helpful if such a section could incorporate a form of
          checklist of necessary tasks organised under broad headings such as: Pre-planning for Emergency
          Procedures, Training of Stewards and First-aid Facilities/Other Medical Provisions. A reference
          to the need for management structure to reflect such responsibilities, preferably including the
          designation of a named individual to take responsibility for the proper execution of such duties,
          was also highly desirable.

            E49. On the question of the relative responsibilities of the police and stewards, the Group felt
Rec 63   that the Guide ought to make it plain that it was the.club's responsibility to control and manage
         spectators in normal circumstances and that the police presence (if there was one) was to deal with
         the law and order problems and provide support and leadership in emergencies. The Group
         recommends accordingly. It was noted that there now existed considerable material on the training
         and deployment of stewards and staff likely to be involved in emergency situations.



M E M B ER S H IP OF T H E WORKING G R O U P ON T H E GREEN GUIDE



Mr M Killoran QFSM Chairman
Formerly Chief Fire Officer, Greater Manchester Metropolitan County Council. Fire Assessor to the.
Inquiry

Professor D V Canter PhD FBPsS FBIM
Department of Applied Psychology, University of Surrey

Mr D H Evans
Police Department, Home Office

Mr P K Franklin MSc MCIOB AFS M REHIS
Scottish Development Department (nominated by Scottish Office)

M r A Goodson OBE QPM
Chief Constable of Leicestershire. Police Assessor to the Inquiry

Professor E H appold1 RDI FEng BSc FICE FIStructE FIOB Hon FRIBA
Buro Happold Consulting Engineers


                                                      84
         -C O M M U N IC A T IO N S
            E37. The Green Guide currently recommends that precise requirements for communications
         within a particular ground be determined alter consultation with the police (GG: 17). The Guide
       . goes on to give examples of the arrangements likely to be needed at larger grounds. The Group
         considered that this advice and the way in which it was expressed was generally satisfactory.
Rec 48, However, the G roup recommends that the advice as to central control points should not be confined
Rec 49 to the largest grounds and that the Guide should emphasise the need fo r ground management and
Rec 50 responsibility to be centralised accordingly. The Group also believed that it would be desirable in
         larger grounds i f public address systems permitted messages to be directed towards specific zones
         o f the ground. The G roup recommends accordingly.

             E38. On emergency audible alarms, the use of coded messages found little support in the
          Group. The need was rather to communicate essential information effectively to the crowd. For
Rec 51    that purpose, a clear system o f communications covering all the various conceivable crises, including
          the fa cility to stop the event, should be devised in consultation with the emergency services. The
          Group recommends that guidance to this effect should be incorporated in the Green Guide.
          Further study was required before pre-set formulae messages could be recommended in the Guide.
          However, it was clear that such messages should be in the active mode, that they should be
          directed towards persons from whom a response is required, and that they should be delivered
Rec 52    authoritatively by trained controllers. The Group considered that there was a need for standard
          guidance covering the use o f public address systems fo r emergency purposes. The Group recommends
          that consideration be given to this.

             E39. The Group considered that the development and operational experience of closed circuit
          television (CCTV) facilities was too little advanced to enable the Guide to be prescriptive as to
          particular systems. However, it was noted that CCTV appeared to have significant value in crime
          prevention and detection and that it had a considerable role to play in aiding emergency
          evacuations, police management information and crowd control. The Group therefore recom­
Rec 53    mends that the provision o f C C T V systems should be encouraged in the Guide.

          CR O W D BEHAVIOUR
             E40. Advice on crowd behaviour is currently set out in the Green Guide in the form of
          recommendations of an earlier working party on crowd behaviour (GG: 18). The Group recom­
Rec 54    mends that the advice fo r management currently presented at paragraph 18 of the Guide should
          be re-organised and expanded so as to explain more fully the major problems and principles of
          crowd control and then go on to elaborate the various methods available which may be relevant
          in certain situations at sports grounds and o f the circumstances under which these might be
          appropriate (see also recommendation (1) above).

Rec 55      E41. The G roup also recommends that the Guide should emphasise the value o f effective planning
         before events, debriefing exercises and fu ll liaison with the police, in order to predict and prevent
         trouble. In particular, the Guide should stress the desirability o f identifying in advance, against
         the local historical background and known travel arrangements, the likely size and nature of the
         crowd.

Rec 56       E42. The Group further recommends that the Guide makes it clear that the responsibility fo r
         pre-planning and liaison lies with club management subject only to the point that the disposition
         o f operational police resources is the sole responsibility of individual chief constables.

            E43. There was considerable discussion in the Group of the segregation issue which, it was
         agreed, had major implications for planning. The consensus was that clear differentiation of
         opposing fans (with ancillary facilities) remained the only viable and prudent course so long as
         crowd violence remained at current levels; and that the best way to achieve such differentiation
         was by spatial separation and physical containment of opposing groups. The Group was anxious,
         however, that segregation should not be encouraged other than where local circumstances made
Rec 57   it absolutely necessary. In particular, at the present time segregation should not be advocated for
         sports other than soccer. The Group recommends accordingly. (See also paragraph 27 above).

Rec 58      E44. The Group agreed that certain fire precautions measures, for example plasterboard fire



                                                      83
Dr C Jones2 BSc MSc PhD FEng FICE
Structural Engineering Unit, West Yorkshire Metropolitan County Council (nominated by the Association
of Metropolitan Authorities)

M r D M ould3
Fire and Emergency Planning Department, Home Office

M r O Palmer AADip RIBA MIBCO
Building Regulations Division, Department of Environment

Mr S Platt
HM Inspectorate o f Fire Services

Mr B Stickley CEng FIStructE
Directorate of Works, Home Office

D r W D Woolley4 BSc PhD FIFireE CChem FRSC
Fire and Materials Division, Fire Research Station

M r M Yates CEng M ICE FIHT
Structural Engineering Department, Devon County Council (nominated by the Association of County
Councils)

M r M H S de Pulford Secretary
Home Office

The following accompanied or substituted for members as indicated by numerals above:
’M r M G T Dickson BA MS CEng MIStructE
2M r H Barber MSc CEng FIStructE
 Mr A Shaw BSc CEng MIStructE
3Mrs R E Davies
■*Mr A Heselden BSc MIFireE




                                              Prim ed for Majesty’s Stationery Office by
                                       Brown Knight & Truscoti Ltd. London and Tonbridge
                                 D em and N o. 0601710 PS5352530           C50 1/86 4146 20648




                                                              85
                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

      JOINT REPORT OF THE COUNTY SOLICITOR                    FIRE SERVICE COMMITTEE
      AND THE CHIEF FIRE OFFICER                              6TH FEBRUARY, 1986

                           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975

1.    Background

1.1   The Committee will recall that the County Council's powers and duties under
      this Act are delegated to this Committee. On 8th January, 1976, the
      Committee decided that any necessary detailed investigation should be
      undertaken by Officer Working Parties for each of the four Borough Council
      areas. These Officer Working Parties consist of representatives of the
      Fire Service, the Police, the Building Inspectors of the Borough Council,,
      co-ordination being undertaken by the Department of Administration.

1.2   Whilst it is Parliament's intention that all sports grounds which have
      accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators should be subject to the
      provisions of the Act eventually, the only grounds designated by the
      Secretary of State to date as requiring General Safety Certificates from the
      appropriate County Council have been certain "International" grounds and
      those of clubs in the Football League (see separate Report on the "Popplewell
      Report" regarding further designations).

2.    Position in South Yorkshire

3.1   Following their designation by the Secretary of State and detailed investi­
      gations and specialist advice given by the Officer Working Parties, General
      Safety Certificates have been granted as follows, after approval by the
      Committee:-

      Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield                   21st December, 1979.
      Wednesday Football Club pic.

      Millmoor Ground of the Rotherham United                 20th February, 1984.
      Football Club Ltd.

      Oakwell Ground of the Barnsley Football                 25th February, 1985.
      Club Ltd.

2.2   Following their promotion to the Second Division of the Football League, the
      Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. were designatedby the Secretary of State
      as requiring to apply to the County Council for a General Safety Certificate
      by 1st January, 1985.

2.3   The Belle Vue   Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd. was
      designated by   the Secretary of State as requiring to apply to the County
      Council for a   General Safety Certificate by 9th August, 1985, following the
      Bradford City   tragedy.

2.4   Both Clubs complied with these requirements, and have been undertaking works
      to meet the provisions of the Act in consultation with the Officer Working
      Parties.
       2.5   All of the required works at the Sheffield United Ground will be completed
             shortly, and those at the Doncaster Rovers Ground concerned with fire
             precautions, fire detection and electrical (including emergency lighting)
             upgrading have been largely completed. The number and siting of the crush
             barriers at the Doncaster Rovers Ground have yet to receive attention.
             However, the Ground capacity has been reduced from a potential in the region
             of 30,000 (bearing in mind the area of the Ground if it fully complied with
             the Act) to 10,759    to take account of such factors.

       3.    General Safety Certificates

       3.1   The Committee on 3rd September, 1981, approved of minor amendments to the
             standard General Safety Certificate previously agreed (on 30th November,
             1978) to be used throughout the County.

       3.2   Paragraph 9 of the standard General Safety Certificate contains provisions
             relating to the appointment of and duties of safety stewards.   It is
             suggested that the following wording arising from the recommendations of
             the Popplewell Report should be substituted for parts (a), (b), (c) and (d)
             of the paragraph

             (i)     that they should be trained and instructed to deal with any emergency
                      relating to fire or evacuation;
             (ii)    that they should be given written instructions about the action to
                     be taken in cases of emergency;.
             (iii)    that they should receive practical instruction and training
                      appropriate to their responsibility;
             (iv)    that no one should be employed as a steward unless they have been
                      so instructed and trained; and
             (v)     that they should be adequate in number, physically and mentally
                      capable of performing their duties, effectively deployed,
                     effectively supervised and readily identifiable.

       3.3   The Committee is also requested to consider the question of whether a fee
             should be charged for the Certificates in view of previous decisions that
             no charge should be made to the Sheffield Wednesday, Rotherham United and
             Barnsley Football Clubs.

       4.    Re commendation

             (i)      That the General Safety Certificate now submitted in respect of the
                      Bramall Lane Ground, Sheffield, and the Interim General Safety
                      Certificate in respect of the Belle Vue Ground, Doncaster, be
                      approved, subject to the suggested amendments to paragraph 9
                      relating to Safety Stewards.

             (ii)     That the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Committee be authorised
                      to agree any amendments necessary should any of the requirements of
                      the Certificates not be able to be complied with in full by the
                      actual date of issue (such amendments not to reduce the overall
                      level of safety to be required at either Ground).

             (iii)    That the Committee make a decision as to whether a charge should be
                      made to the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. and the Doncaster
\lcv$u )rtO c
                      Rovers Football Club Ltd. for the Certificates.

             D. A. HAINSW0RTH,                                     H. E. WRIGHT,
             County Solicitor.                                     Chief Fire Officer.
                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                  INTERIM GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Address of premises for                      Belle Vue Ground,
which this Interim Certificate               Doncaster.
is issued.                                   DN4 5HT

Occupier of the premises                     Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.
        and
Holder of this Interim Certificate.

Use of the premises in respect               Football matches
of which this Interim Certificate
is issued.

1.    This Interim Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council
      in respect of the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium
      designated by Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds
      Act, 1975, as a stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.     The terms and conditions set out in Part 2 of the Schedule attached
      hereto are hereby imposed.

3.     The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South
      Yorkshire County Council consider necessary or expedient to secure
      reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in
      respect of which this Interim Certificate is used.

4.     The words used in this Interim Certificate and the Schedule attached
      hereto have the meaning assigned to them by Part 1 of the Schedule and
      Section 17 of the Act.

5.     The Schedule and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Interim
      Certificate.

6.    This Interim Certificate commences on the            day of
      One thousand nine hundred and eighty six for an indefinite period.




      Date:                                 Signed:

                                                       County Secretary on behalf
                                                       of and duly authorised by
                                                       the South Yorkshire County
                                                       Council.
                         S C H E D U L E

                             PART 1

                         Interpretation

The Act                               means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.

Authorised Person                     means a person authorised in accordance with
                                      Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority                means the Doncaster Metropolitan Borough
                                      Council.

The Chief Constable                   means the Chief Constable for the time being
                                      of the South Yorkshire Police or, as the case
                                      may require, the Police Officer having charge
                                      of the Stadium on the occasion of a
                                      Specified Activity.

The Chief Fire Officer                means the Chief Fire Officer for the time
                                      being of the South Yorkshire County Fire
                                      Service or his designated deputy.

The Certificate                       means the written Interim General Safety
                                      Certificate of which this Schedule forms part.

The County Council                    means the South Yorkshire County Council.

The Guide                             means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds"
                                      as from time to time amended, issued by the
                                      Home Office, or such other code of practice
                                      as may be so issued.

The Holder                            means the applicant for and person to whom the Interir
                                      General Safety Certificate has been issued and
                                      who is a 'qualified person' for the purposes
                                      of the Act.

Invalid Carriage                      means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled
                                      or not, constructed or adapted for use for the
                                      carriage of one person, being a person
                                      suffering from some physical defect or
                                      disability.

The Plans                             means the document or documents attached to and
                                      forming part of the Interim General Safety
                                      Certificate and signed by the person signing
                                      the Certificate and/or any other document or
                                      documents which may be added to or substituted
                                      for such document or documents and signed on
                                      behalf of the County Council.

Specified Activity                    means the playing of a Football match.

Spectator                             means any person occupying accommodation provided
                                      for spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium                           means the Belle Vue Ground, Doncaster.

Structural Parts                      includes structures, components, installations,
                                      fabric and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                              includes invalid carriages.
                General Terms and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for the time being approved in writing by
the County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for
a Specified Activity, and he shall ensure that the terms and conditions
of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium
unless a Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the
several areas of spectator accotimodation within the Stadium shall not
exceed the number specified in Part 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls
relating thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified
Activity for one or more of the following:-

(a)   the playing of music or singing;

(b)   the provision of news or comment associated with football;

(c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes,
       nevs-sheets and souvenirs;

(d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments;

(e)    any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the
       prior approval in writing of the County Council.

(1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is
       required under the terms and conditions hereof, an application
       for that approval shall be made by the Holder to the County
      Council at least 21 days before the occurrence in respect of
      which it is required.

(2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to
       alter or extend the Stadium or any of its installations in a
       manner mentioned in Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall at
       least 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal is begun,
       give notice of the proposal to the County Council.

(1)   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days
       (or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent)
       prior to every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
       employed in connection with the Specified Activity and the
      methods to be used for the segregation of home and visiting
       supporters.

(2)   The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators
       from, the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or
       during a Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to
       do from the Chief Constable.
The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every
Specified Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure
the orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of
police officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed
between the Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or such
shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
Specified Activity takes place.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
of the County Council a suitably equipped First Aid Room and shall
arrange in relation to a Specified Activity for the attendance of such
numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as the Chief Constable may
require and in any event not less than one such assistant for each
2,000 spectators. The First Aid Room shall be adequately signed and
shall be capable of being lit by the emergency power supply referred
to in paragraph 12 of this Part of this Schedule. The Holder shall
ensure that at all times a doctor employed or retained by the Holder
is available to attend at the First Aid Room if required and that his
whereabouts are known to those in the Police Central Control Room at
the Stadium.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as may be
required by Part 4 of this Schedule, and shall ensure that the Safety
Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
(b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress
(d) provided with written instructions as to their general duties in
order to carry out the following:-

(1)   Manning   of   exits as indicated on the plans

(2)   Controland direction of spectators entering      using or
       leaving the Stadium

(3)   Patrollingthe Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
       raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire.

Training exercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of
an emergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at
the Stadium at least once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an egress route between any spectator
accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the
inside and shall be manned at all times the Stadium is being used for
a Specified Activity by at least the number of stewards required by
Part 4 of this Schedule. All such doors or gates shall be opened by
the stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a
time agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable and at any other
time on evacuation of the Stadium or a part thereof on being ordered
so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding of the alarm.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
       the Chief Fire Officer exit signs over all exits from the Stadium
       and all exits from spectator acconmodation therein and shall
       ensure that such exit signs may be illuminated by both the main
       and emergency lighting systems. Such supplementary illuminated
       signs in such locations as the Chief Fire Officer may require
       shall also be provided by the Holder.
(2)   The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and
       staircases indicated on the plans may be illuminated when
       required during a Specified Activity by both the main and
       emergency lighting systems.

(3)   The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph
       shall be illuminated whenever adequate natural light is
      deficient during a Specified Activity or as directed by the
       Chief Constable.

(4)   All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to
       and from any spectator accommodation therein shall be maintained
       free from obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and
       in particular stair coverings shall be secured and maintained
       so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
       the Chief Fire Officer a separate emergency power supply for
       providing electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting
       throughout the Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the
       communication systems within the Stadium, such emergency power
       supply to be operable independently of the main power supply
       and to come into automatic operation within ten seconds of the
       failure of the latter and to be capable of maintaining the
       necessary power output for a minimum of three hours from the
       failure of the main power supply.

(2)   At least once annually a report as to the condition of the
       Emergency Power Supply certified by a Chartered Electrical
       Engineer shall be supplied to the Chief Fire Officer.

(3)   Not less than three hours prior to the occurrence of a Specified
       Activity the emergency power supply shall be tested for a period
       of 30 minutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
       rectified before the coimiencement of the Specified Activity.

(4)   A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder
       shall be present during a Specified Activity.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the
       satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system.

(2)   The fire alarm system shall be tested periodically to the
       satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
of the Chief Constable:-

(1)   A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with
       such ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

(2)   Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention
       room and for administrative purposes.

(3)   A public address sytem which may be audible in all parts of the
       Stadium. The police shall, should they so wish, have the
       unrestricted right to use the public address system for police
       purposes and such purposes will have priority over the Specified
       Activity.
(1)   The   Holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts
       of   the   stadium   in   sound   order   and t o   the   ap p ro p riate   and
       relevant standards in the Guide and in all cases to the
       satisfaction of the Council.

(2)   The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair
       and renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to
       time by the County Council.

The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the
Stadium (including the electrical and communications installations)
and all emergency equipment in good and efficient working order to
the satisfaction of the County Council and shall undertake such
maintenance repair or renewal as may from time to time be necessary
to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and
unobstructed and in the positions allotted on the Plans.

(1)   The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium
       shall be restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans
       unless otherwise approved for emergency purposes by a Police
       Officer in uniform.

(2)   The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
       satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for
       emergency vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the Press, T.V. and radio
services having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium
are identifiable as such.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be placed only in
such positions as may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief
Constable.

(1)   Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium
       only in containers constructed from soft plastic or other
       soft material, or as allowed by the Licensing Justices.

(2)   No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials
       which in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use
       as missiles shall be permitted to remain in any part of the
       Stadium to which spectators have access.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods
shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a
place and quantity approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of
the Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire
Of f icer.
The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably
qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
a representative of the Council within    months of the date of the
Certificate and at least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection there is
provided to the County Council by the said Chartered Engineer a
certificate as to the current compliance or non-corapliance with good
engineering and building practices and with the relevant British
Standard Specifications and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
provisions and recommendations of the Guide of all structural parts
of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers and handrails.

(1)    The Holder shall arrange for all crush barriers and handrails
       within the Stadium to be tested in accordance with the
       appropriate provisions of the Guide by a suitably qualified
       Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
       a representative of the County Council within     months of the
       date of this Certificate and for the results thereof to be
       nptified in writing to the County Council.

(2)(i) The Holder shall ensure that not more than    months after the
       date of this Certificate and thereafter not less than once in
       each period of 12 months a representative sample of crush
       barriers and handrails amounting to not less than 20% of the
       total number of such barriers and rails is tested in accordance
       with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
       (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of
       the County Council and the results thereof notified in writing
       to the County Council;

  (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and handrails
       so tested and a barrier so tested shall not be tested again
       within a period of 4J years thereafter but shall be tested
       again within a period of 5j years thereafter.

The Holder shall within    months of the date of this certificate and
thereafter not less than once in each period of five years in respect
of new installations (and such lesser period as the Chief Fire Officer
may require in respect of other installations) supply to the Chief
Fire Officer the certificate of an independent electrical engineer
as to the current compliance or non-compliance of the electrical
installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I.E.E. Regulations
or other sections or Regulations for the time being in force relating
to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings.

The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
appropriate at least once annually by a competent person to the
satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be
made available for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised
Persons:

(1)    A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium
       during a Specified Activity and to each area of spectator
       accommodation therein mentioned in Part 3 of this Schedule.
(2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the
       Stadium is in use for a Specified Activity which causes injury
       to a spectator, such record to include the name, address, age
       and sex of the spectator injured, the nature of the injury
       and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
       inquiry, and the location of the incident. The Holder shall
       provide a written report to the County Council within 48 hours
       of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)    A record of the training and instruction given and the exercises
       held in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this
       part of this Schedule such record to include the date and time
       and duration of the instruction or exercise, the name of the
       person giving instruction, the nature of the instruction or
       exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)     A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and
       renewals carried out at the Stadium.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council
shall have the right at any time to require the Holder at his own
expense to arrange for the conduct of any inspection or test which the
County Council may consider to be necessary in the interests of
securing reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for a
Specified Activity.
                                PART 3

                            Ground Capacity

The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below:-

Main Stand (seats)                                  1,259
Main Stand (terrace)                                2,500*
Popular Stand Terrace                               4,000*
Rossington End Terrace                              1,000*
North End Terrace                                   2,000*
                                                   10,759


*May be increased above these figures upon the areas fully complying with the
requirements of the Act and the Guide (precise figures to be determined once
scope and extent of the upgrading works are notified and agreed).
                                   PART b

                              Safety Stewards

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall
be as follows:

(1)    Manning of exits                                           10 Stewards
(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
        the Stadium                                                7 Stewards
(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
        including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire      4 Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

Section of Stadium                                  Number required for each function
                                                      (1)         (2)        (3)

Exit   Gate No.l, Rossington End Terrace
Exit   Gate No.2, Main Stand (East Terrace)
Exit   Gate No.3, Main Stand (Block "A")
Exit   Gate No.4, Main Stand (Block "B")
Exit   Gate No.5, Main Stand (Block "C")
Exit   Gate No.6, Main Stand (North Terrace)
Exit   Gate No.7, North End
Exit   Gate No.8, North End
Exit   Gate No.9, Popular Stand Terrace
Exit   Gate No.10, Popular Stand Terrace
Main   Stand Staircase (Block "A")
Main   Stand Staircase (Block "B")
Main   Stand Staircase (Block "C")
Main   Stand Entrance to Directors Box
Main   Stand (upper level)                                                      1
Main   Stand (Executive Club Lounge)                                            1
Main   Stand (Guest Lounge and Directors Lounge;                                1
Main   Stand (Ground Floor)                                                     1
Main   Stand Emergency Staircase (Block "A")
Main   Stand Emergency Staircase (Block "B")
Main   Stand Emergency Staircase (Block "C")
                                  >CRftTT
                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975
                         GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE


Address of premises for                                    Bramall Lane Ground,
which this Certificate is                                , Sheffield,
issued.                                                    S2 4SU.

Occupier of the premises                                  Sheffield United Football Club
         and                                              Ltd.
Holder of this Certificate.

Use of the premises in                                    Football Matches
respect of which this Certificate                         Religious Conventions
is issued.

1.    This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect
      of the premises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated by
      Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as a
      stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.
                              a

2.     The terms and conditions set out in Part 2 of the Schedule attached
      hereto are hereby imposed.

3.     The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South
      Yorkshire County Council consider necessary or expedient to secure
      reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity
      in respect of which this Certificate is used.

4.     The words used in this Certificate and the Schedule attached hereto
      have the meaning assigned to them by Part 1 of the Schedule and Section 17
      of the Act.

5.    The Schedule and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.

6.    This Certificate commences on the              day of            One thousand
      nine hundred and eighty six for an indefinite period.




      Date:                                 Signed:


                                                      County Solicitor on behalf of
                                                      and duly authorised by the South
                                                      Yorkshire County Council.
                         S C H E D U L E


                             PART 1

                         Interpretation

The Act                  means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.

Authorised Person        means a person authorised in accordance with
                         Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority   means the City of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council,

The Chief Constable      means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                         South Yorkshire Police or, as the case may require, the
                         Police Officer having charge of the Stadium on the
                         occasion of a Specified Activity.

The Chief Fire Officer   means the Chief Fire Officer for the time being of the
                         South Yorkshire County Fire Service or his designated
                         deputy.

The Certificate          means the written General Safety Certificate of which
                         this Schedule forms part.

The County Council       means the South Yorkshire County Council.

The Guide                means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" as from
                         time to time amended, issued by the Home Office, or
                         such other code of practice as may be so issued.

The Holder               means the applicant for and person to whom the General
                         Safety Certificate has been issued and who is a
                         'qualified person' for the purposes of the Act.

Invalid Carriage         means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled or not,
                         constructed or adapted for use for the carriage of one
                         person, being a person suffering from some physical
                         defect or disability.

The Plans                means the document or documents attached to and forming
                         part of the General Safety Certificate and signed by the
                         person signing the Certificate and/or any other document
                         or documents which may be added to or substituted for
                         such document or documents and signed on behalf of the
                         County Council.

Specified Activity       means the playing of a Football Match or the holding of
                         a Religious Convention.

Spectator                means any person occupying accommodation provided for
                         spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium              means the Bramall Lane Ground, Sheffield.

Structural Parts         includes structures, components, installations, fabric
                         and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                 includes invalid carriages,
                General Terms and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for the time being approved in writing by
the County Council shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for
a Specified Activity, and he shall ensure that the terms and conditions
of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium
unless a Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the
several areas of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not
exceed the number specified in Part 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls
relating thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified
Activity for one or more of the following:-

(a)   the playing of music or singing;

(b)   the provision of news or comment associated with football;

(c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes,
       nevs-sheets and souvenirs;

(d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments;

(e)    any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the
       prior approval in writing of the County Council.

(1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is
       required under the terms and conditions hereof, an application
       for that approval shall be made by the Holder to the County
      Council at least 21 days before the occurrence in respect of
      which it is required.

(2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to
       alter or extend the Stadium or any of its installations in a
      manner mentioned in Section 8 of the Act the Holder shall at
       least 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal is begun,
      give notice of the proposal to the County Council.

(1)   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days
       (or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent)
      prior to every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
      employed in connection with the Specified Activity and the
      methods to be used for the segregation of home and visiting
      supporters.

(2)   The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators
      from, the Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or
      during a Specified Activity upon receiving instructions so to
      do from the Chief Constable.
The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at e v e r y
Specified Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure
the orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators and the number of
police officers required at each Specified Activity shall be agreed
between the Chief Constable and the Holder at least 21 days (or such
shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
Specified Activity takes place.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
of the County Council a suitably equipped First Aid Room and shall
arrange in relation to a Specified Activity for the attendance of such
numbers of qualified First Aid assistants as the Chief Constable may
require and in any event not less than one such assistant for each
2,000 spectators. The First Aid Room shall be adequately signed and
shall be capable of being lit by the emergency power supply referred
to in paragraph 12 of this Part of this Schedule. The Holder shall
ensure that at all times a doctor employed or retained by the Holder
is available to attend at the First Aid Room if required and that his
whereabouts are known to those in the Police Central Control Room at
the Stadium.

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity
of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as may be
required by Part h of this Schedule, and shall ensure that the Safety
Stewards shall be (a) fit and capable to carry out their duties
(b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress
(d) provided with written instructions as to their general duties in
order to carry out the following:-

(1)   Manning   of exits as indicated on the plans

(2)   Controland direction of spectators entering      using or
       leaving the Stadium

(3)   Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including
       raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire.

Training exercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of
an emergency shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at
the Stadium at least once every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans,
all doors and gates which form an.egress route between any spectator
accommodation and the public highway, or other open space outside the
stadium, shall be so secured as to open immediately and easily from the
inside and shall be manned at all times the Stadium is being used for
a Specified Activity by at least the number of stewards required by
Part 4 of this Schedule. All such doors or gates shall be opened by
the stewards responsible and secured in the fully open position at a
time agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable and at any other
time on evacuation of the Stadium or a part thereof on being ordered
so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding of the alarm.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
       the Chief Fire Officer exit signs over all exits from the Stadium
       and all exits from spectator accommodation therein and shall
       ensure that such exit signs may be illuminated by both the main
       and emergency lighting systems. Such supplementary illuminated
       signs in such locations as the Chief Fire Officer may require
       shall also be provided by the Holder.
(2)    The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and
        staircases indicated on the plans may be illuminated when
       required during a Specified Activity by both the main and
       emergency lighting systems.

(3)    The signs mentioned in sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph
       shall be illuminated whenever adequate natural light is
       deficient during a Specified Activity or as directed by the
       Chief Constable.

(4)   All means of ingress to and egress from the Stadium and to
       and from any spectator acconmodation therein shall be maintained
       free from obstruction and with non-slip and even surfaces and
       in particular stair coverings shall be secured and maintained
       so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of
       the Chief Fire Officer a separate emergency power supply for
       providing electricity sufficient to light all emergency lighting
       throughout the Stadium, all exit signs and powering all the
       communication systems within the Stadium, such emergency power
       supply to be operable independently of the main power supply
       and to come into automatic operation within ten seconds of the
       failure of the latter and to be capable of maintaining the
       necessary power output for a minimum of three hours from the
       failure of the main power supply.

(2)   At least once annually a report ag to the condition of the
       Emergency Power Supply certified by a Chartered Electrical
       Engineer shall be supplied to the Chief Fire Officer.

(3)   Not less than three hours prior to the occurrence of a Specified
       Activity the emergency power supply shall be tested for a period
       of 30 minutes. Any defect revealed in this test shall be
       rectified before the commencement of the Specified Activity.

(4)   A competent electrician employed or retained by the Holder
       shall be present during a Specified Activity.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the
       satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system.

(2)   The fire alarm system shall be tested periodically to the
       satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction
of the Chief Constable:-

(1)   A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with
       such ancillary equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

(2)   Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention
       room and for administrative purposes.

(3)   A public address sytem which may be audible in all parts of the
       Stadium. The police shall, should they so wish, have the
       unrestricted right to use the public address system for police
       purposes and such purposes will have priority over the Specified
       Activity.
 (1)   The Holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts
       of the stadium in sound order and to the appropriate and
       relevant standards in the Guide and in all cases to the
       satisfaction of the Council.

(2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair
       and renewal to the Stadium as may be required from time to
       time by the County Council.

The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the
Stadium (including the electrical and communications installations)
and all emergency equipment in good and efficient working order to
the satisfaction of the County Council and shall undertake such
maintenance repair or renewal as may from time to time be necessary
to maintain reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and
unobstructed and in the positions allotted on the Plans.

(1)    The parking of vehicles within the boundary of the Stadium
       shall be restricted to those areas indicated on the Plans
       unless otherwise approved for emergency purposes by a Police
       Officer in uniform.

(2)    The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the
        satisfaction of the County Council the access routes for
       emergency vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the Press, T.V. and radio
services having access to the public and playing areas of the Stadium
are identifiable as such.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be   placed only in
such positions as may be agreed between the Holder   andthe Chief
Constable.

(1)    Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium
       only in containers constructed from soft plastic or other
       soft material, or as allowed by the Licensing Justices.

(2)    No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials
       which in the opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use
       as missiles shall be permitted to remain in any part of the
       Stadium to Which spectators have access.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods
shall be permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a
place and quantity approved in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of
the Stadium without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire
Officer, and the existing oil-fired boiler in the John Street Stand
shall not be used until the boilerhouse has been upgraded to the
satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer or an alternative form of
heating has been agreed by the Chief Fire Officer.
The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably
qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
a representative of the Council within    months of the date of the
Certificate and at least once in each period of 12 months thereafter
and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection there is
provided to the County Council by the said Chartered Engineer a
certificate as to the current compliance or non-compliance with good
engineering and building practices and with the relevant British
Standard Specifications and Codes of Practice and with the appropriate
provisions and recommendations of the Guide of all structural parts
of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers and handrails.

(1)    The Holder shall arrange for all crush barriers and handrails
       within the Stadium to be tested in accordance with the
       appropriate provisions of the Guide by a suitably qualified
       Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of
       a representative of the County Council within    months of the
       date of this Certificate and for the results thereof to be
       notified in writing to the County Council.

(2)(i) The Holder shall ensure that not more than    months after the
       date of this Certificate and thereafter not less than once in
       each period of 12 months a representative sample of crush
       barriers and handrails amounting to not less than 20% of the
       total number of such barriers and rails is tested in accordance
       with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
       (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of
       the County Council and the results thereof notified in writing
       to the County Council;

  (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and handrails
       so tested and a barrier so tested shall not be tested again
       within a period of    years thereafter but shall be tested
       again within a period of    years thereafter.

The Holder shall within    months of the date of this certificate and
thereafter not less than once in each period of five years in respect
of new installations (and such lesser period as the Chief Fire Officer
may require in respect of other installations) supply to the Chief
Fire Officer the certificate of an independent electrical engineer
as to the current compliance c>r non-compliance of the electrical
installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I.E.E. Regulations
or other sections or Regulations for the time being in force relating
to the Electrical Equipment of Buildings.

The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and
other water supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as
appropriate at least once annually by a competent person to the
satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be
made available for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised
Persons:

(1)    A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium
       during a Specified Activity and to each area of spectator
       accommodation therein mentioned in Part 3 of this Schedule.
(2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the
       Stadium is in use for a Specified Activity which causes injury
       to a spectator, such record to include the name, address, age
       and sex of the spectator injured, the nature of the injury
       and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
       inquiry, and Lhe location of the incident. The Holder shall
       provide a written report to the County Council within 48 hours
       of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)    A record of the training and instruction given and the exercises
       held in accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this
       part of this Schedule such record to include the date and time
       and duration of the instruction or exercise, the name of the
       person giving instruction, the nature of the instruction or
       exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)    A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and
       renewals carried out at the Stadium.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council
shall have the right at any time to require the Holder at his own
expense to arrange for the conduct of any inspection or test which the
County Council may consider to be necessary in the interests of
securing reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for a
Specified Activity.
                                     PART 3

                                 Ground Capacity


The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below:-

South Stand (Seats)                                7,948

Bramall Lane

   Seats                                           2,958
   Terrace                                         7,354

John Street

   Timber Section Seats                            1,200
   Concrete Section Seats                          1,490
   Timber Section Terrace
     (right-hand-section)                      1,048
     (left-hand section)                         -*
   Concrete Section Terrace                    2,832

Spion Kop

  General Area                                13,930 f
  Disabled Section
    Wheelchairs                                      40
    Attendants                                       80
  Childrens Section                                 220


                                              39,100


               Subject to Pitch Permeter
               Gates being acceptable and
               adapted as necessary            4,320


                                              43,420


              *0n completion of agreed
               work in John Street Terrace          589


                                              44,009
                                     PART 4

                                S afety   S tew ard s

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall be
as follows:

(1)     Manning of exits                                                         19 Stewards
(2)     Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
         the Stadium                                                             36 Stewards
(3)     Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
         including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire                    4 Stewards

The Stewards shall be distributed as follows:

Section of Stadium                                  Number required for each function
                                                      (1)          (2)        (3)

Final   Exit Gates
  "A"    (Shoreham Street)                               1
  "B"   to "L" (John Street)                            11
  "M"   to "0" (Bramall Lane)
  two   on Gate "0"                                     5
  "R"   and "S" (South Stand)                           2

Control and Direction
  Bramall Lane Stand                                                6
      "      " Terrace                                              3
  John Street Stand                                                 9
             " Terrace
     (Timber Section)                                               2
     (Concrete Section)                                             2

Spion Kop
  Main Area
  Disabled/Childrens area

South Stand

Patrolling the Stadium, etc.
  John Street Stand
  Bramall Lane Stand
  South Stand

In addition, the following internal gates (constituting part of the means of
escape from the Ground) must be permanently manned by Safety Stewards if in
future this function is not performed by police officers:-

  Pitch Perimeter Gates to John Street Terrace                     Nos. 1 to 4
  Gates between John Street Timber Stand and Terrace               Nos. 5 to 2
  Gate between the two parts of the John Street
  Timber Stand Terrace                                             No. 9.
