                             *   ,

                             ^ 6'f ^ ifiie « llo n                 until

                                             C o m m ittee M eeting


                                     SOU TH Y O R K S H I R E COUNTY COUNCIL

                                         FIRE S E R V I C E DE PA RT M E NT



JOINT REPO RT OF CHIEF EX E CU TIV E                                                    FIRE SE RV IC E COM MIT TEE
A N D CHIEF FI R E OF FI CE R                                                           6TH JUNE, 1985



        FIRE P RE V E N T I O N - SA FET Y OF SPORT S GROUNDS A C T 1975

        Fo ll o wi n g the B r a d fo r d Fo ot ba ll Club di sa st er an urgent r e v i e w of the
        sports gro un ds and sta di a w it hi n the Coun ty was imm ediately commenced.
        The terms of re f e re n c e of this r e v i e w we re :-

        (a)   to ex ami ne all sports gro un ds of wh a t e v e r size or sporting activity;

        (b)   to pa r ti c u la rl y ex amine        stands        and        a c c om m od a t io n   pr o vi d e d for
              sp ect at or s or players;

        (c)   to give inte ri m advic e on                   any  m a t t e r w h ic h gave rise to a risk
              of fire or em er ge n cy ev ac ua t i on of the premise s and to f o l l ow this
              wi th w r i tt e n re c o mm e n d a t i o n s if necessary;

        (d)   to re a s se ss the p r ov is i o n s r el a t i n g       to      fire      safety      at   the     four
              d es i gn a t e d footba ll grounds; and

        (e)   to asse ss the r e q u i r e m e n t s of the Sa fe ty of Sports Grounds Act
              1975 in re sp ect of D on cas te r           Footba ll Club in the event of a
              De si g n a t i n g O rd er be i ng made.

2   .   The initial survey r e v e a l e d a total of 30 sports gr oun ds at w h ic h stands
        were p r o v id e d for sp ec ta tor s and ac c om m o d a t i o n was p r o v i de d for players
        and officials.        The m a j o r i t y of these grou nd s are con si d er e d satisfactory.
        In four cases r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s have    been m a d e and ne g ot ia ti on s are now
        takin g place to r e m ed y the faul ts             wh i ch came to light during the
        inspections.

3.      A more comprehensive survey is now under way to          assess these grounds
        in accordance with a letter dated 16th May received from Home Office
        (copy attached as Appendix " A " ) . -The"results of this survey will, where
        necessary, be forwarded to Home Office for the attentionof the Inquiry
        into Safety Sports Grounds being held under the Chairmanship of Mr. Justice
        Popplewell.




                                                      -   1   -
4.    As the Committee will recall, the County Council*s powers and duties under
      the Act are part of this  Committee's terms of reference.  On 8th January,
      1976, the Committee decided that their functions should be exercised
      through Officer Working Parties for the four Borough Council areas,
      consisting of representatives of the Police, the Fire Service and the
      Building Inspectors of the Borough Councils, with co-ordination being
      undertaken by the Department of Administration.

5.    Of the five Football League Grounds in South Yorkshire, three (Barnsley
      Rotherham United and Sheffield Wednesday) have already been granted General
      Safety Certificates by the County Council under the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act, 1975, following their designation by the Secretary of State
      and the carrying out of inprovements.

6.    The Bramall Lane Ground of the Sheffield United Football Club Ltd. was
      designated by the Secretary of State in July, 1984 on the Club's
      promotion to the Second Division.  The Club has already carried out a number
      of improvements to the Ground, the remainder to be completed in the next
      few months.

7.    Only the Belle Vue Ground of the Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.
       currently remains undesignated (the Club remaining in the Third Division),
       but the County Council is continuing to work on a goodwill basis with the
       Club and has provided certain advice.  The Home Secretary has of course,
       announced in the House of Commons that all Clubs in the Third and Fourth
       Divisions are now to be designated.

8.    The County Council has also since 1979 had a policy of "winter" and
       "summer" inspections of all five Football League Grounds b y Officer
       Working Parties (comprising representatives of the Police, the Fire
       Service, the County Council and the District Council’s Building Surveyor).
       Such inspections have been welcomed by the Football Clubs, who have always
       displayed a responsible attitude on safety matters.

9.    Naturally, the forthcoming "summer" inspections will take into account the
       lessons of the recent tragic events at Bradford and any revised advice and
       requirements which may be issued by the Home Office and/or information
       from Mr. Justice Popplewell's Inquiry.

10.   A precis of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 is attached as
       appendix "B" to this note, together with a copy of the Standard General
       Safety Certificate (Appendix "C") approved by the Committee on
       30th November, 1978, as the basis of the standard certificate to be used
       throughout the County.


      J. C. HARRIS                          H, E. WRIGHT
      Chief Executive                       Chief Fire Officer




Fire Service Department
Furnival House
42-46 Furnival Gate
Sheffield  S1^4QP
BM/JMB

22nd May 1985
                                                                                                  'A *
                                                           y j '-i ('

                                           HOME OFFICE
                                  Queen Anne's Gate, London, S             ^     n t T w S
                                             Direct line: 01-213        n«na tHiw _
                                                                                  wof * * * * *
                                         Switchboard: 01-2

Our reference:    FIR/85 8/14/7                                                mu   ttttH
                                                                                                   ?T
Your reference:

                                                          16 May 1985

 To all Chief Fire Officers


 Dear Chief Officer


 SAFETY AT SPORTS STADIA

 In the statement which the Horae Secretary made to the House of
 Commons on Monday, 13 May about the fire tragedy at,. Bradford City
 football ground, he said that he was asking chief fire officers
 immediately to visit uncertificated sports stadia in their areas
 to advise management on the steps they should take to secure proper
 standards of crowd safety in their particular circumstances.




 2.  I know that following the Bradford fire, many chief fire officers
 will have already begun to review fire safety at football stadia
 in their areas, and that others will have this matter in hand. The
 purpose of this letter is to ask you, in accordance with the Home
 Secretary's request, to arrange for visits to be made to all
 uncertificated sports stadia in your area to discuss fire safety
 arrangements with management. For this purpose you will wish to have
 regard to th-e definition of a "sports stadium" for the purposes of
 the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.    This is provided in section
 17 read in conjunction with section    1 of the Act.  But since the
 combined effect of the relevant definitions is a little complicated
 you may find it helpful to have the    attached synthesis (see Annex)
 which sets out what the definitions    together comprise.   You will wish
 to note that the definition embraces stadia used for purposes other
 than football, eg athletics, cricket, tennis.    In his statement,
 the Home Secretary indicated that one of the matters which would no
 doubt be discussed was the opening and locking of gates, and more
 generally chief fire officers will wish to bear in mind the advice
 contained in the Home Departments Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
 (Football) which was published in 1976 and is obtainable from HMSO.

3.  In carrying out these visits and discussions, chief officers
will wish to have regard to the Home Sec r e t a r y ’s announcement that
he intends to designate all grounds in the Third and Fourth Divisions
of the Football League so that they become subject to the system of
safety certification under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
You will note from- the statement that the timing of implementation is
being urgently discussed with the football authorities, but in
visiting such grounds fire authorities will want to consider, in
the light of the Horae Departments Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
(Football) what measures they will be recommending when designation
takes effect.

4.  Although there are no immediate plans to designate other sports
stadia under the 1975 Act, pending the results of the inquiry into
the operation of the Act by Mr Justice Popplewell, which was also
announced by the Home Secretary, chief fire officers will wish to
bear in mind the provisions of section 10 of that Act.   If in the
course of visits to these stadia it becomes apparent that there would
be a serious risk to spectators in the event of fire and that
appropriate remedial measures are not being taken, chief fire officers
will wish to consider inviting their Co.uncil to take action under
section 10 of the 1975 Act.

5.  In his statement, the Home Secretary recognised that the visits
to sports stadia would be the more comprehensive if chief fire
officers were accompanied by other members of the local authority
safety teams, but to avoid any delay he considered that the duty
fell best initially on chief fire officers.  No doubt you will be
liaising With the chief executive on this matter, and for this
purpose I am sending a copy of this letter to him.  A copy of this
letter is also being sent to chief officers of police.

6.     Mr Justice Popplewell has already indicated that he would find
it helpful to his inquiry, and particularly in the context of making
an interim report or recommendations as suggested in the Home
S e c r e t a r y ’s statement, to have an early indication of the outcome of
the programme of visits to uncertificated sports stadia.            I should
therefore be grateful if you would let me have reports on the number
and types of uncertificated stadia in your area giving a brief out­
line of the results of your visits and discussions with management^
and taking account of any views of other parts of the local authority
safety team and the police.            This should include the extent to which
the crowd safety arrangements of each stadium are regarded as
satisfactory and, if not, the steps which are being taken to make
them satisfactory.            (Priority should of course be given to those
Third and Fourth Division grounds in your areas as yet undesignated
Under the 1975 Act.)            It would be helpful if these reports could be
sent to me progressively in stages as parts of the task are completed
and copied to the Chief Executive, co-ordinator of the safety teams
and the chief officer of police.            All reports should reach me not
later than 12 July.            In the light of these preliminary reports,
Mr Justice Popplewell may wish to seek further information.

7.  I recognise that this task will represent an additional burden
for your fire prevention department, and that it will probably be
necessary to make short-term adjustments to your priorities.
However, I know that I can rely on your cooperation to ensure that
the fire service does all that it possibly can to prevent a
repetition of the kind of tragedy which occurred in Bradford.

8..   The Home Office will,   of course, keep local authorities informed
E.R.



       of developments concerning the future designations which are to be
       made under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.




                                                 SIR PETER,. DARBY
t   •     *

        E.R.

                                                                    ANNEX


               SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975


               The effect of section 1 read with section   17 is that a sports
               stadium is defined as any place -


                 where sports or other competitive activities take place
                 in the open air; and

                 where accommodation has been provided for spectators
                 consisting of artificial structures or of natural
                 structures that have been artificially modified for the
                 purpose; and
                                                                 j.
                  that accommodation wholly or substantially surrounds the
                  area used for activities taking place on the ground; and

                  in the opinion of the Secretary of State the stadium has
                  accommodation of more than 10,000 spectators.
                                                                                                                      AWEhVIK “IS**

SOUTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL

FIRE SERVICE DEPARTMENT


A P P E N D I X TO C O M M IT T EE REP O R T - FI RE PR E V EN T I O N - SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS

Safety of Sports Gro und s Act                  1975

1.   The    purpose   of    the Act         is to mak e p ro v i si o n s for safety at sports stadia
     and other sports grounds.

2.   Power is g i ve n to the S e c r e t ar y of State, un d e r S e c ti o n 1 of the Act,
      to make D e s i g n a t i n g O r d er s w h i c h w o u l d r e q u i r e sports stadi a w i t h
      capaci tie s of mo r e that 10,000 sp ec ta t o rs to be co ve re d by a safety
      certificate.       Un d e r S e c ti o n 6(2) he may m a k e r e g u l a t i o n s for sec u r in g
      safety in sports grounds.               No such r e g u l a t i o n s have been ma d e to date.

     Note:     Sports  S t a d iu m  and Sport s G ro un d are d e f in e d in Sec ti on 17.
               They are di f f er e n t types of premis es and are t r ea t e d se pa rat ely
               by the v a r yi n g pr o vi s i o n s of the Act.

3.   The Se c re tar y of State has made D e s i g n a t i n g O rd e rs in res p e ct of all
      1st D iv isi on and 2nd D i v i s i o n clubs and c e r t a i n Rugby grounds.          As a
      resu lt of these order s the g r o u nd s at Barn sl ey , R o t h e r h a m and Sh e f f i e l d
      are all r e q u i r e d to have safety cer ti ficates.    Even if a club is re l eg a t e d
      to the 3rd Di vision, as is the case w i t h R ot her ham , the re q u ir e m e n t s
      of the Act are still imposed.

4.   The Safety    C e r t i fi c a te ,    which      is       the       principal              do cu men t    of    en fo rc e me n t
      of the Act, m u st co n ta in : -

      (a)    terms and con di t i on s           n e ce s s ar y      to secure r e a s o n a b l e            safety;

      (b)     details      of the m a x i m u m num b e r of spe ct a to r s a d m it t e d to the stadium;

      (c)    maximum       n u mb e r      of   s pe c t at o r s         ad m i t t e d    to   diff er ent         parts   of   the
             stadium;                                                                                            ^

      (d)    the n u mb e r and size of entrances,                           exits         and acces s to such e nt r an ce s
             and exits;

      (e)    requirements         to       maintain       such            entran ce s,        exits     and     access       the ret o
             free from ob s tr u ct ion s;

      (f)    the number,        st r en g t h and s i tu at io n of c ru s h barriers.

5.   Applications         for c e r t i f i c a t e s are mad e to the C o unt y Council.   Terms
     and co nd it ion s imp o s ed by the ce rt if i c at e are d e t e r m i n e d by a joint
     o ff ic er s w o r k i n g party.         Such terms and co n di t i o n s are drawn from an
     a p p ro v e d code of pr a ct ic e - The Gr ee n Code.



                                                            -    1    -
6.    There is an app ea ls pr o ce d u re aga in st any de ci s i on of the County Council.

7.   Section 10 gives the Coun ty Cou nc i l po wer to co m pl a i n to a Magistrates'
      Court in any case w h e r e d an ge ro us co n d it i o ns exist. The Court may
     prohi bit the use of the w h ol e or any part of a "Sports G r o u n d " * u n t i l
     w o r k is carr ied out to re du ce the danger.

8.   The Coun ty     Council   may   appoint   i ns pe c to r s   to   enforce   the   pr ov is ion s
      of the Act.

9.   Pines of up to £400 may be imp os ed for an off enc e if a perso n is found
     guilty on summary co n v ic t i on or to a fine or i m pr i so nme nt up to two
     years on co n vi c t i o n on indictment.




BM/J MB

22nd May,    1985.




*     Sports ground" means any open air sports ground where there is structural
     accommodation for spectators.  The ground need not be subject to the
     licensing system or have any particular spectator capacity.




                                           - 2 -
                                                                                    CERTIFICATE No.


                         SOUTH YOBI'SHIBE COUNTY COUNCIL
                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT. 1975
                           GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Address ol prem ises lor
which this Certificate is
issued.

Occupier of the prem ises.

Holder of this Certificate.

Use of the prem ises in                                                                            Football matches
respect of which this Certificate
is issued.

1.       This Certificate is issued by South Yorkshire County Council in respect
         of the prem ises described above, being a Sports Stadium designated
         by Order under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975 as
         a stadium requiring a Safety Certificate.

2.      The term s and conditions set out in Part 2 of the Schedule attached hereto
         are hereby imposed.

3.      The term s and conditions hereby imposed are those which the South
         Yorkshire County Council consider necessary or expedient to secure
         reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for an activity in
         respect of which this Certificate is issued.

4.      The words used in this Certificate and the Schedule attached hereto have
        the meaning assigned to them by Part 1 of the Schedule and Section 17 of
        the Act.

5.      The Schedule and Plans attached hereto all form part of this Certificate.

6.       This Certificate commences on the                                              day of                                  for an
         indefinite period.



        D a t e ...........................................................   S igned........................................................
                                                                                           Chief Executive on behalf of and
                                                                                           duly authorised by the South
                                                                                           Yorkshire County Council.
                         S C H E D U L E

                             PART 1
                         Interpretati on

The Act                       means the Safety of Sports Ground Act, 1975.

Authorised Person             means a person authorised in accordance with
                              Section 11 of the Act.

The Building Authority        means

The Chief Constable           means the Chief Constable for the time being of the
                              South Yorkshire Police or, as the case may require,
                              the Police Officer having charge of the Stadium on
                              the occasion of a Specified Activity.

The Chief Fire Officer        means the Chief Fire Officer for the time being of the
                              South Yorkshire County Fiie Service <r his obsignated deputy

The Certificate               means the written General Safety Certificate of
                              which this Schedule forms part.

The County Council            means the South Yorkshire County Council.

The Guide                     means the "Guide to Safety at Spcr ts Grounds" as
                              from time to time amended, issued by the Home Office,
                              or such other code of practice as may be so issued.

The Holder                    means the applicant for and person to whom the General
                              Safety Certificate has been issued nnd who is a
                              'qualified person1 for the purposes of the Act.

Invalid Carriage              means a vehicle, whether mechanically propelled or not,
                              constructed or adapted for use for the carriage of one
                              person, being a person suffering from some physical
                              defect or disability.

The Plans                     means the document or documents attached to and
                              forming part of the General Safety Certificate and signed
                              by the person signing the Certificate and/or any other
                              document or documents which may be added to or
                              substituted for such document or documents and signed
                              on behalf of the County Council.

Specified Activity            means the playing of a Football match.

Spectator                     means any person occupying accommodation provided
                              for spectators at the stadium.

The Stadium                   means

Structural Parts              includes structures, components, installations, fabric
                              and associated parts of the Stadium.

Vehicles                      includes invalid carriages.
                                  PART 2

                      General Terms and Conditions


The Holder or his nominee for the time being approved in writing by the County Council
shall be present whenever the Stadium is used for a Specified Activity, and he shall
ensure that the terms and conditions of the Certificate are complied with.

The Holder shall not allow spectators to be admitted to the Stadium unless a
Specified Activity is taking place.

The number of spectators to be admitted to the Stadium and to the several areas of
spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the number specified
in Part 3 of this Schedule.

Subject to the terms and conditions hereof and to the statutory controls relating
thereto, the Stadium may be used ancillary to a Specified Activity for one or more
of the following:-

(a)    the playing of music or singing;

(b)    the provision of news or comment associated with football;

(c)    the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities, programmes, new-sheets
       and souvenirs;

(d)    the sale and consumption of refreshments;

(e)    any other use ancillary to a Specified Activity which has the prior approval
       in writing of the Council.

(1)   Where the prior written approval of the County Council is required under the terms
      and conditions hereof, an application for that approval shall be made by the
      Holder to the County Council at least 21 days before the occurrence in respect of
      which it is required.

(2)   If whilst the Certificate is in operation it is proposed to alter or extend the
       Stadium or any of its installations in a manner mentioned in Section 8 of the
       Act the Holder shall at least 21 days before the carrying out of the proposal
       is begun, give notice of the proposal to the County Council.

(1)   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days (or such
      shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) prior to every
      Specified Activity the methods of admission to be employed in connection with
      the Specified Activity and the methods to be used for the segregation of home
      and visiting supporters.

(2)   The Holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate spectators from, the
      Stadium or any part thereof at any time before or during a Specified Activity
      upon receiving instructions so to do from the Chief Constable.
The Holder shall at his own expense arrange for the attendance at every Specified
Activity of an adequate number of police officers to secure the orderly aid lawful
behaviour of the spectators and the number of police officers required at each
Specified Activity shall be agreed between the Chief Constable and the Holder at least
21 days (or such shorter time to which the Chief Constable may consent) before a
Specified Activity tabes place.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of the County
Council a suitably equipped F irst Aid Room and shall arrange in relation to a
Specified Activity for the attendance of such numbers of qualified F irst Aid
assistants as the Chief Constable may require and in any event not less than one such
assistant for each 2,000 spectators. The F irst Aid Room shall be adequately signed
and shall be capable of being lit by the emergency power supply referred to in
paragraph 12, of this Part of this Schedule. The Holder shall ensure that at all
tim es a doctor employed or retained by the Holder is available to attend at the First
Aid Room If required and that his whereabouts are known to those in the Police CsitraL
Control Room at the Stadium.                                                           "

The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every Specified Activity of a Chief
Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as may be required by Part 4 of
tills Schedule, and shall ensure that*the Safety Steward shall be (a) fit and capable
to carry out their duties (b) properly trained and instructed (c) identifiable by dress
(d) provided with written instructions as to their general duties In order to carry
out the foil owing

(1)    Manning of exite as indicated on the plans

(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering using or leaving the Stadium

(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency including raising an
       alarm and extinguishing any fire.

Training ex ercises relating to the action to be taken in the event of an emergency       ^
shall be held for Safety Stewards and Staff employed at the Stadium at least once
every three months.

The Holder shall ensure that, except where otherwise marked on the Plans, all doors
anH gates which form an eg ress route between any spectator accommodation and the
public highway, or other open space outside the stadium, shall be so secured as to
open immediately and easily from the Inside and shall be manned at all tim es by at
least tiie number of stewards required by Part 4 of this Schedule. All such doors or
gates shall be opened by the stewards responsible and secured in the fully open
position at a time before the end of a Specified Activity agreed between the Holder and
the Chief Constable and at any other time on evacuation of the Stadium or a part
thereof on being ordered so to do by a police officer in uniform or by the sounding of
tiie alarm.

(1)    The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the Chief Fire
       Officer exit signs over all exits • from the Stadium and all exits from
       spectator accommodation tie rein and shall ensure that such exit signs may be
       illuminated by both the main and emergency lighting system s. Such supple­
       mentary illuminated signs in such locations as tiie Chief Fire Officer may
       require shall also be provided by tiie Holder.
(2)   The Holder shall ensure that the corridors, gangways and staircases
      indicated on the plans may be Illuminated when required during a Specified.
      Activity by both tiie main and emergency lighting system s.

(3)   The signs mentioned In sub-paragraph (1) of this paragraph shall be
      illuminated whenever adequate natural light Is deficient during a Specified
      Activity or as directed by the Chief Constable.

(4)    All means of Ingress to and eg ress from tbs Stadium and to and from any
       spectator accommodation therein shall be maintained free from obstruction
       and with non-slip and even surfaces and In particular stair coverings shall be
       secured and maintained so that they do not constitute a source of danger.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain to tiie satisfaction of the Chief Fire
      Officer a separate emergency power supply fcr providing electricity
      sufficient to light all emergency lighting throughout the Stadium, all exit
      signs and powering all the communication system s within the Stadium, such
      emergency power supply to be operable Independently of the main power
      supply and to come Into automatic operation within ten seconds of tiie failure
      of the latter and to be capable of maintaining tiie necessary power output for
      a minimum of three hours from the failure of tiie main power supply.

(2)   At least once annually a report as to tiie condition of the Emergency Power
      Supply certified by a Chartered Electrical Engineer shall be supplied to tiie
      Chief Fire Officer.

(3)   Not le s s than three hours prior to the occurrence of a Specified Activity the
      emergency power supply shall be tested for a period of 30 minutes. Any
      defect revealed in tills test shall be rectified before the commencement of tiie
      Specified Activity.

(4)    A competent electrician employed or retained by tiie Holder shall be present
       during a Specified Activity.

(1)   The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction o f the
       Chief Fire Officer a fire warning system .

(2)   The fire alarm system shall be tested periodically to the satisfaction of the
       Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall provide and maintain at the Stadium to the satisfaction of He Chief
Constable :-

(1)   A Police Central Control Room which shall be provided with such ancillary
      equipment as the Chief Constable may require.

       Accommodation for the exclusive use of the police as a detention room and
       for administrative purposes.
(3)    A public address system which may be audible in all parts of the Stadium.
       The police shall, should they so wish, have the unrestricted right to use the
       public address system for police purposes and such purposes will have
       priority over the Specified Activity.

(1)    The Holder shall at all tim es maintain all structural parts of the stadium in
       sound order and to the appropriate and relevant standards in the Guide and in
       all cases to the satisfaction of the Council.

(2)    The Holder shall carry out such works of maintenance, repair and renewal
       to the Stadium as may be required from time to time by the County Council.

The Holder shall at all times maintain all operational parts of the Stadium (including
the electrical and communications installations)and all emergency equipment In good
and efficient working order to the satisfaction of the County Council and shall undertake such
maintenance repair or renewal as may from time to time be necessary to maintain
reasonable safety within the Stadium.

The notices specified on the Plans shall be maintained legible and unobstructed and in
the positions allotted on the Plans.

(1)    The parking of vehicles within the boundary o f the Stadium shall be restricted
        to those areas indicated on the Plans unless otherwise approved fcr emergency
        purposes by a Police Officer in uniform.

(2)    The Holder shall provide and maintain within the Stadium to the satisfaction of
        the County Council the a ccess routes for emergency vehicles shown on the plans.

The Holder shall ensure that members of the P ress, T .V . and radio services having
a ccess to the public and playing areas of the Stadium are identifiable as such.

Television cameras and portable equipment shall be placed only In such positions as
may be agreed between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

(1)    Liquid refreshments may be sold or distributed at the Stadium only In
        oontalners constructed from soft plastic or other soft m aterial, or as allowed
        by the Licensing Justices.

(2)    No accumulation of rubbish, bricks, stones or other materials which in the
        opinion of the Chief Constable are capable of use as m issiles shall be
        permitted Id remain in any part of the Stadium to which spectators have a ccess.

No accumulation of flammable rubbish, dirt, surplus material or goods shall be
permitted to remain in any part of the Stadium except in a place and quantity approved
in writing by the Chief Fire Officer.

No flammable gases or liquids shall be stored or used in any part of the Stadium
without the prior written approval of the Chief Fire Officer.
The Holder shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified
Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a representative of the
Council within    m o n t h s of the dale cf the Certificate and at least once in each period
of 12 months thereafter and the Holder shall ensure that after each inspection
there is provided to the County Council by the said Chartered Engineer a certificate as to the
current compliance or non-compliance with good engineering and building practices
and with the relevant British Standard Specifications and Codes of Practice and with
the appropriate provisions and recommendations cf the Guide of all structural parts
of the Stadium excluding the crush barriers and handrails.

(1)       The Holder shall arrange for all crush barriers and handrails within the
          Stadium to be tested in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the
          Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or Civil) in the
          presence of a representative of the County Council within       months of the date of this
          Certificate and for the results thereof to be notified in writing to the County
          Council.
(2)(i)    The Holder shall ensure that not more than       months after the date of this
          Certificate and thereafter not less than once in each period of 12 months a
          representative sample of crush barriers and handrails amounting to not less
          than 20% of the total number of such barriers and rails is tested in
          accordance with the Guide by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer
           (Structural or Civil) in the presence of a reD resentatlve of the County Council and the
          results thereof notified In writing to the County Council;

      (ii) a record shall be kept of those crush barriers and handrails so tested and a
            barrier so tested shall not be tested again within a period of 4 | years thereafter
            but shall be tested again within a period of 5 i years thereafter.

The Holder shall within      months of the date of this certificate and thereafter not less
than once in each period of 12 months supply to tiie County Council the certificate of an
independent electrical engineer as to the current compliance or non-compliance of the
electrical installation within the Stadium with Section E of the I.E . E. Regulations or
other sections or Regulations for the tim e being in force relating to the Electrical
Equipment of Buildings.

The Holder shall arrange for all fire extinguishers, fire hydrants and other water
supply within the Stadium to be inspected and tested as appropriate at least once
annually by a competent person to the satisfaction of the Chief Fire Officer.

The Holder shall make and keep the following records which shall be made available
for inspection at all reasonable time to Authorised Persons:

(1)       A record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the Stadium during a
          Specified Activity and to each area of spectator accommodation therein
          mentioned in Part 3 of this Schedule.
(2)    A record of any accident or incident occurring whilst the Stadium is in use
       for a Specified Activity which causes injury to a spectator, such record to
       include the name, address, age and sex of the spectator injured, the nature
       of the injury and how it was caused, as far as can be ascertained by diligent
       inquiry, and the location of the incident. The Holder shall provide a written
       report to the County Council within 48 hours of all such accidents or incidents.

(3)    A record of the training and instruction given and the ex ercises held in
       accordance with the requirements of Paragraph 9 of this part of this Schedule
       such record to include the date and time and duration of the instruction or
       exercise, the name of the person giving instruction, the nature of the
       instruction or exercise, and the name(s) of the person(s) instructed.

(4)    A record of all inspections, tests, maintenance, repairs and renewals carried
       out at the Stadium.

Notwithstanding the provisions of this Schedule the County Council shall have the right at
time to require the Holder at his own expense to arrange for the conduct of any
inspection or test which the County Council may consider to be necessary in the interests
of securing reasonable safety at the Stadium when it is in use for a Specified Activity.
                                PART 3

                             Ground Capacity


The number of spectators admitted to the Stadium and to the various areas
of spectator accommodation within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures
specified below.
                                 PART 4

                            Safety Stewards

The minimum number of safety Stewards required for each function shall be as
follows

(1)    Manning of exits                                                 Stewards
(2)    Control and direction of spectators entering or leaving
       the Stadium                                                      Stewards
(3)    Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with any emergency
       including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire            Stewards


The Stewards shall be distributed as follows

Section of Stadium                             Number required for each function
                                                   1           2          3 ____
