       (a)     Christmas Function, Young and Old       -   £350

       (b)     Youth Fishing Competition               -   £ 70

       (c)     Sea Fishing Trip                        -   £ 90

       (d)     Outdoor Pursuits, Birchfield Lodge      -   £621

(iv)   £940 to 'A1 Division (all to be met from the Division's ad hoc
       allocation) for the following schemes:

       (a)     Sponsored Walk                          -   £600

       (b)     Rugby Kit                               -   £340

(v)    a further £1,000 be allocated to the Police Transport Budget from the
       balance of the Police Urban Action Budget.

74.    Visits to South Yorkshire Football League Grounds by the Chairman
       and Vice-Chairman

The Chief Constable submitted a report on the visits by the Chairman and
Vice-Chairman to Football League Grounds in the County on 27th and 28th June,
1985, in the light of disorder and safety problems experienced at football
matches in both this country and abroad.

So far as was possible, the Police intended to police football grounds in a
"community style".  Closed circuit television was thought to be helpful,
and the segregation of home and away spectators would continue to be sought.
Emergency evacuation procedures at the Grounds were being reviewed.  Together
with other propositions such as the ban on the sale of alcohol at Grounds,
improved police facilities and efficient public address systems, it was
considered  that the policing of the Grounds and crowd safety during the coming
season would be enhanced.

Liaison with the County Council's Officer Working Parties responsible
(through the Fire Service Committee) for Safety of Sports Grounds Act matters
continued to take place.

So far as the Grounds themselves were concerned, there were considered to be
no particular problems at Rotherham United, Sheffield United or Sheffield
Wednesday.   At Barnsley, there were a number of minor problems which were
receiving attention, but the major problem was the lack of space to instal
additional turnstiles and coach parking facilities for visiting spectators.
The only other Ground was that of Doncaster Rovers, where the problems were
immense.   These had been recognised for some time and would have been resolved
had the improvement proposals submitted to the Football Improvement Trust by
the Club in January 1985 and approved for grant aid not been subsequently
deferred by the Trust in view of the demand for funds from football clubs
generally following the Bradford City tragedy.   Urgent discussions were
continuing between the Officer Working Party for the Doncaster District and the
Club to enable action to be taken before the start of the season.

RESOLVED -

1.     That   the contents of the report be noted.

2.    That Magistrate Member Mr. J. Wood be requested totake such action    as he
is able to assist in the Barnsley Football Club having theuse of additional
adjacent land, which would undoubtedly benefit both the residents of Barnsley
and general policing problems at the Ground.
