85.      Working P arty on Hooliganism at Football Matches

Consideration was given to a report of the first meeting of the
working party relating to hooliganism at soccer matches, which
contained a number of recommendations aimed at alleviating the
problem.

RESOLVED - That the report be refe rred to Policy Advisory Sub­
com m ittees ’A' and 'B' for further consideration and that particular
attention be given to the recommendations of the working party
as follows:-

(i)      An immediate approach should be made to the Football Association/
         Minister of Sport to ensure that no further Semi-Final matches
         are held in South Yorkshire.

 (ii)    An immediate approach should be made to the Home Secretary for
         the Hillsborough Stadium to be designated under Section 1
         of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

 (iii)    The County Council (possibly involving the A .M .A .) should seek
          the legislative powers refe rred to in this report.

 (iv)     Further discussions be held with M agistrates/Licensed V ictuallers/
          B rew eries e t c . , to g e t agreed a procedure for banning the sale of
          intoxicating liquer on certain match days.

 (v)     That the County Council follow through these recommendations
          with positive action assisted by a co-ordinating officer/m em ber/
          working party.                             ^

 (vi)     That an approach be made to the Football Clubs staging matches
          necessitating the attendance of police over and above the
          number generally deployed, regarding a financial contribution
          from the Club towards the cost of police provision outside the.
          ground.

 86.     Electoral Arrangements in Sheffield

 Consideration was given to a report of the Chief Executive on the
 scheme for electoral boundaries for Sheffield Metropolitan D istrict
 Council put forward by the Boundary Commission, and the implications
 of the four district schemes for the County Council.


                                   A .15
