(d)      Opening of Football Club Facilities to the Community

RESOLVED -

 1.      That a meeting be arranged as soon as possible between the Vice-
 Chairman of the Police Committee, the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the 'A'
(Doncaster)Divisional Liaison Committee, a representative of the Police
 Community Liaison Department and representatives of Doncaster Rovers
 Football Club Ltd. to discuss possible schemes and that a report on the
 outcome of the meeting be submitted to the Steering Committee as soon as
 possible.

2.     That the Chief Constable continue to hold meetingswith Barnsley
Football Club Ltd. to identify possible schemes.

3.     That the Chief Executive be requested to make the necessary
investigation into possible improvements in the 'Sports Vans Scheme'.

 (e)     Circulation of Notes of Divisional Liaison Committees

RESOLVED - That, in addition to the previously agreed circulation, the
Chief Executive be requested to submit a copy of the notes of the relevant
Divisional Liaison Committees to the Sheffield City Council's Urban
Strategy Panel.

 (f)     Football League Grounds

RESOLVED - That a   meeting to discuss the availability to the community of
ground facilities   and the charges for police attendances at grounds in
future seasons be   arranged as soon as possible after the necessary information
has been supplied   by the Football League Clubs.

ALSO RESOLVED - That the Football League Clubs be advised that the agreed
instalment plan for the payment of fees for policing football matches will
be enforced, and that failure to comply with the terms of the agreement
will mean that instructions will be given for action to be taken in the
Courts to recover any outstanding sums.

 (iii)    "C" (Rotherham) - 26th August, 1983

A note of the meeting of the "C" (Rotherham) Divisional Liaison Committee
held on 26th August, 1983, was considered by the Committee.

 RESOLVED - That the note of the meeting of the "C" (Rotherham) Divisional
 Liaison Committee (including action to be taken) be noted and circulated
 as previously agreed.

 (iv)     Urban Action Assistance for Divisional Liaison Committee and
          Community Action Panel Schemes

 A joint report of the Chief Executive, the Chief Constable and the County
 Treasurer was submitted on three schemes which had been approved by the
 Chairman of the Police Committee and the Chairman of the Urban Action
 Working Party in order that the necessary arrangements could be made as
 soon as possible.




                                   E   18
