                                                                                   «




seek planning consent for the provision of a prefabricated building for use
in connection with firearms training at Far Cliffe Quarry, Warmsworth/
Sprotborough.

100.   Pay and Price Variations

A joint report by the Chief Executive, the Chief Constable and the County
Treasurer was submitted on recent increases in pay, allowances and prices
for which provision had not been made in the 1980/81 Revenue Budget.

The increases could not be financed within the Committee's budget without
reducing the level of services which was provided for in the approved revenue
budget for the current year.

RESOLVED - That the Policy Finance and General Purposes Sub-Committee be
recommended to approve of (a) a supplementary revenue estimate of £1,235,550 net
to be met from the contingency for pay and price increases and (b) diversions
totalling £13,000 gross from Supplies & Services (£1,438,200) to Premises (£1,18^J^0C

101.   Revision of Charges for Undertaking Consumer Protection Prosecutions

A joint report by the County Prosecuting Solicitor and the County Treasurer
was submitted on a possible revision of the charges (which had operated
since 1st April, 1978) for undertaking Consumer Protection Prosecutions.

The County Prosecuting Solicitor reported the views of the Chief Consumer
Protection Officer on the prop osal s.

RESOLVED - That the scale of charges for prosecutions undertaken by the
County Prosecuting Solicitor on behalf of the Consumer Protection Department
be increased to the amounts shown below with effect from 1st April, 1981:-

                         Not Guilty Pleas     £105
                         Guilty Pleas                £50
                         Advice Only                 £35

102.Special Course   - Police Staff College 1981

A report of the Chief Constable was submitted  on the selection of Detective
Constable N. G. Bettison to attend the Special Course (for young officers with
potential) to be held at the Police Staff College from 5th January to
18th December, 1981.

RESOLVED - That Detective Constable          |be congratulated on his most
meritorious performance in being selected for the Special Course.

103.   Hooliganism

The Chairman referred to what appeared to be the increasing incidence of
hooliganism, both actually at matches and in and around the grounds, as well
as in town centres, before and after football matches, and invited the
Committee to put forward views and comments.

Many constructive comments .were made, and it was evident that in the short
term much could be achieved if concerted action were to be taken by the
Football Association, the Foothall League, individual Clubs, the Referees
Association, the Professional Footballers Association, the Police, the
Courts, the Media, and last, but by no means least, parents.   In the longer
term, a change in social attitudes would be needed.



                                    D.2
The Chief Constable thanked the Committee for the many constructive comments
made, and reported that a meeting had already been arranged for later in the
week between representatives of the South Yorkshire Football Clubs and
Senior Officers of the South Yorkshire Police to discuss the problem.  He
agreed that a concerted effort would be necessary to ensure that the
momentum continued.

RESOLVED - That, following the meeting(s) to be held by the Chief Constable,
a Presentation be arranged for the Committee (possibly towards the end of
November), and that the Leader of the County Council and the Leader of the
Opposition also be invited to be present.

104.   Vehicle Sub-Committee

RESOLVED - That the report of the meeting of the Vehicle Sub-Committee held
on 15th September, 1980, be approved and the following recommendation
confirmed:-

Specialist Prison Van

RESOLVED - That, in the interests of economy, approval in principle be given
to the acquisition during 1981/82 of a custom built body prison van on a
commercial chassis, and that the Chief Constable and the County Treasurer
be requested to investigate and report on the estimated cost and financing
of such a vehicle.

105.   Buildings Sub-Committee

RESOLVED - That the report of the meeting of the Buildings Sub-Committee
held on 25th September, 1980, be approved and the following recommendations
confirmed

A.     Additional Stabling and Exercise Facilities for Police Horses
       and Dogs

RESOLVED - That, subject to the approval of the Secretary of State, the
Policy Committee be recommended to make every effort to purchase Ring Farm,
Low Cudworth, as additional stabling and exercise facilities for police horses
and dogs, associated storage and office accommodation.

®•     Barnsley Traffic Centre - Roofing of Car Wash

RESOLVED - That, in view of the estimated cost of £8,425, the proposal to
roof the Car Wash at the Barnsley Traffic Centre be abandoned.

C.     Police Headquarters - Car Parking

RESOLVED - That, following the agreement reached with the Probation Service
to occupy the site on a 60/40 basis in favour of the Police, the Lands and
Buildings Sub-Committee be recommended to authorise the Estates Surveyor
to conclude the negotiations for the replacement car parking site at
Johnson Street/Brunswick Road, Sheffield.

106.   Items to be Considered in the Absence of the Public

RESOLVED - That, pursuant to Section 1(2) of the Public Bodies (Admission
to Meetings) Act, 1960, the public be excluded from the meeting during
consideration of the following items by reason of the confidential nature
of the business to be transacted.
