 2.    That the Police Authority formally approve the retirement of Mr. J. H.
 Brownlow, as Chief Constable, with effect from 31st December, 1982, and his
 entitlement under Regulation 19 of the Police Pensions Regulations 1973, to the
 appropriate pension payments; that his appointment as one of Her Majesty's
 Inspectors of Constabulary be noted, and that in accordance with Regulation 68
 of the Police Pensions Regulations 1973, his annual pension be withdrawn for
 such period as Mr. Brownlow is employed in the latter capacity.

 3.     That the action of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman in authorising the
 advertising of the post (in "Police Review" on 5th November) and the
 circulation of details to all police forces be confirmed.

 4.     That the Chairman be authorised to discuss with the Home Secretary as
 a matter of urgency a reduction in the usual fourteen day consultation period
 on applicants required by the Home Office after the closing date for
 applications.

5.    That a Sub-Committee (consisting of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman,
together with the Chairmen of the six Divisional Liaison Committees, a
member of the Opposition, and a Magistrate Member, with the Chairman and
Vice-Chairman of the Policy Committee present as observers), be appointed
with authority to select a short-list of candidates for interview.

6.    That the interviews be undertaken by the full Police Committee, with
the Chairman and Vice-Chairman of the Policy Committee present as observers,
and that Her Majesty's Inspector of Constabulary Mr. L. Byford also be
invited to be present.

7.     That the short-listed candidates be invited to have dinner the night
before the interviews with the Short-Listing Sub-Committee and appropriate
Officers, including Her Majesty's Inspector of Constabulary Mr. L. Byford.

13 7.   Home Secretary - Visit to South Yorkshire

The Chairman informed the Committee that the Home Secretary, the
Rfc. Hon. W. Whitelaw, was to visit South Yorkshire on Friday, 19th November,
1982.

The Chairman of the Buildings Sub-Committee reported that, in consequence,
it would be necessary to rearrange the date of the next Buildings Sub-Committee.

RESOLVED -

1.     That, in order to enable the Committee and appropriate officers to
discuss matters of mutual interest with the Home Secretary, a questions/
answer session, followed by lunch, be held at the County Hall, Barnsley, and
that the Leader of the County Council and the Leader of the Opposition also
be invited to be present.

2.  ^ That, in view of the visit, the next meeting of the Buildings Sub-
Committee be held on Monday, 22nd November, 1982, at 10.00 a.m.

13 8.   Seminar on the Effect of Professional Football on the Community

Further to minute 112(2) of 4th October, 1982, a brief note on the Seminar
held at the County Hall, Barnsley, on 27th October, 1982, on the effect of
professional football on the community (including charges for police on loan
to private employers) was considered by the Committee.

At the Chairman's request, the Chief Executive read out the contents of a letter
which had been received from Mr. A. J. H. Ward, a Director of Rotherham
United Football Club Ltd., thanking the Committee on behalf of all the
South Yorkshire football clubs for their invitation to attend the seminar,
but expressing concern regarding the level of charges for police services at
football matches.
                                   F.2.
RESOLVED -

1.    That it be a recommendation to the Home Office through the Association
of Metropolitan Authorities that a group from interested organisations be
appointed to look at a national approach to the football hooliganism problem,
its cost to the community, the charges which should be levied upon football
clubs for policing, and other solutions to make the game more acceptable to
the community at large.

2.    That, in the meantime, a small group representing Members of the Police
Authority and of the County Council,the Police, the Chief Executive, the County
Treasurer and the Football Clubs be constituted to examine:-
(a)    charges for police services in South Yorkshire, particularly where
        attendances fall below an agreed pre-determined level, and

(b)    a closer co-operation between the football clubs and the police to
        stimulate and encourage young persons towards an interest in the
        Clubs and to break away from hooliganism at and associated with
        football matches.

3.    That the Chief Constable's initiative in drawing the attention of the
football clubs to the action which may be taken by the police for
misbehaviour on the football field be fully supported.

139.   Prosecuting Solicitors Society of England and Wales

The County Prosecuting Solicitor submitted a report informing the Committee
that he had been elected President of the Prosecuting Solicitors Society of
England and Wales to serve for the year commencing October 1982 to September 1983.
He had previously held the office of Vice-President during 1981/82.

Congratulations on his appointment were expressed to Mr. Rose by the
Committee, who felt the appointment was an honour not only to Mr. Rose but to
South Yorkshire as well.

Mr. Rose thanked the Committee for their congratulations. He particularly
undertook to keep the Committee informed of the latest developments with
regard to the Government's proposals for an independent prosecuting service.


140.   Community Liaison Digest

The Chief Constable submitted a report on the commitment by the South Yorkshire
Police to working with and on behalf of the community.

141.   Chief Constable's Quarterly Report (July to September)

A.     Establishment and Strength

The Chief Constable reported on the authorised establishment and actual strength
of the Force as at 30th September, 1982, and the changes which had occurred
since 1st July, 1982.

B.     Secondments to Central Services

The Chief Constable reported details of two secondments to central services.




                                      F.3.
