(ii)   £2,500 for transport, to be administered by the Recreation Culture and
Health Department.

(iii) £18,000 for the 6 Divisions, utilisation of the money to be closely
co-ordinated through the relevant Community Action Panels and Divisional Liaison
Committees.

(iv)   £500 to the Double Six Club for the purchase of indoor games equipment.

C.     Community Liaison Steering Committee - 11th April, 1985

RESOLVED - That the report of the meeting of the Community Liaison Steering
Committee held on 11th April, 1985, be approved as a correct record and the
following items confirmed:-

(i)    Home Office Circular No. 2/85 - Arrangements for Local Consultation
        between the Community and the Police outside London

RESOLVED -

1.     That it be a matter for each Divisional Liaison Committee to consider
to what extent it would be beneficial for the public and the media to be
involved in their deliberations, possibly even by having separate structured
public forums on particular matters of local concern.

2.     That it be a matter for each Divisional Liaison Committee to consider
how best to involve youngsters in deliberations on activities which it is
intended should be organised for them, whether by way of formal or informal
arrangements.

3.     That should the present situation regarding non-attendance by District
Council representatives at Divisional Liaison Committee and Community Action
Panel meetings not improve, consideration be given to inviting nominations
from District Parties as an alternative.

(ii)   Community Constables

RESOLVED -

1.     That the community policing policy be fully supported and extended
wherever possible, and that where Section Station facilities are not already
available, consideration be given to utilising community facilities, empty
council houses, etc. as an interim measure.

2.     That the Chief Constable be requested to ensure that local County
Councillors are advised by the Divisional Commanders of public meetings organised
by the South Yorkshire Police which are to take place in their areas.

 (iii) Hooliganism at, and associated with, Football Matches.

RESOLVED -

1.     That the Chief Executive be requested to supply the Steering Committee
with a copy of the County Council's Standard General Safety Certificate and the
overall report on Football Grounds originally compiled by the Chief Constable
some little while ago.

%.     That the Chairmen and Vice-Chairmen of the Divisional Liaison Committees
oe requested to visit the appropriate Football Grounds in company with their
Divisional Commanders to see the facilities which exist and hear of the problems
which are encountered.
