                            POLICE COMMITTEE
                          FINANCE SUB-COMMITTEE

                              11th June, 1985

PRESENT: Councillor G. H. Moores, CBE, (in the Chair),
Councillors: B. P. Flanagan (Vice-Chairman), W. Layne, M. E. Smith.

Apologies for absence were received from Councillors J. Bower, R. J. McElvenney
M. McCoy, R. H. Patton and P. T. Senior and, on other Council business, from
Councillors P. Collins and R. Walton.

1^     Minutes of Previous Meeting

RESOLVED - That the Minutes of the meeting held on 4th June, 1985, be approved
as a correct record.

2.     Financial Statement

The County Treasurer circulated to each Member present a report in the up-dated
form requested at the meeting of the Sub-Committee held on 11th September,
1984, which showed that the estimated additional expenditure incurred
(adjusted to take account of the substitution of actual costs where available)
was now estimated at £27,954,800.  The total eost to South Yorkshire and the
other Police Authorities who had provided officers (based on both basic
salary and overtime costs) for policing the coal industry dispute in South
Yorkshire now amounted to an estimated total cost of £51,892,975.

RESOLVED - That the Financial Statement be noted.




3.____ Outstanding Accounts

The County Treasurer circulated to each Member present, a Schedule (No. 46)
of 9 accounts totalling £44,453.98 gross.

The Chief Constable answered Members' queries, and confirmed that all supplies
and services had been obtained using the recognised procedures, including
those of the Central Purchasing Unit.

RESOLVED - That the 9 accounts totalling £44,453.98 gross, as detailed in
Schedule No. 46 now submitted, be passed for payment in accordance with the
authority previously granted by the Police Committee.

_4.____ High Court Action - Sheffield United Football Club

Following the concern expressed at the Police Committee on 3rd June, the
Chief Executive circulated to each Member present a report on the
steps which were being taken to bring this case to trial.


As late as March 1985, the Club had been given leave to enter an amended
defence and counterclaim, as a consequence of which statements had had to be
obtained from some 25 police officers and the former Assistant Chief Constable
(Operations).

Counsel had been told of the urgency, and an early date would be requested in
view of the length of time the debts had been outstanding and the importance
of having the matter settled before the start of the next football season.

In reply to queries from Members, the Chief Executive confirmed that the
matter had been discussed with the District Auditor, who was satisfied with
the action being taken.
The Chief Executive pointed out that the High Court could only concern itself
with applying the law as it stood at present, and would have to disregard
views as to what the law should be or the moral obligations of football clubs
following recent tragic events.
RESOLVED - That the report be noted.
5 .____ 1985/86 Football Season
The Sub-Committee discussed what appropriate action might be able to be taken
with regard to the forthcoming football season.
RESOLVED -


1.     That the officers be instructed tosend letters  to the South Yorkshire
Football Clubs seeking confirmation within 21 days that they require the
services of police at football matches during the forthcoming season, and that
they will pay the costs in accordance with the appropriate schedule of charges.

2.    That the Sub-Committee consider   thepositionfurther after    the
expiration of the 21 day period.

6 .____ Civilianisation

The Chairman reported on the conversation which he had with Giles Shaw, M . P . ,
Minister of State at the Home Office, on his recent visit to South and
West Yorkshire to see and hear of the steps being taken to restore police and
public relationships in the wake of the coal industry dispute.  The Minister
had expressed his delight at the many community efforts being undertaken.

At the same time, the Chairman had taken the opportunity of raising the
subject of the financing of the civilianisation programme in the South
Yorkshire Police, but the Minister had made it very clear that no additional
Home Office money would be forthcoming and that the Authority would have to
look to its own resources to provide the finance.

RESOLVED - That the Chief Constable be requested to report to a future meeting
of the Sub-Committee on the feasibility of meeting the cost of implementing
the civilianisation programme from within the existing budget.
