RESOLVED -

1.     That the additional costs of policing the coal industry dispute in
South Yorkshire of some £30.2m, as well as the total cost if normal time
working is also added of some £54. lm, be noted.

2.     That the thanks of the Sub-Committee to the Assistant County Treasurer
Mr. P. Appleyard, and the Force Finance Officer, Mr. E. Pidd, in particular
for the temendous efforts made to keep the Authority fully informed on the
financial aspects of the dispute be recorded, and that letters on behalf of
the Sub-Committee be sent to both the two officers concerned as well as
generally to the remainder of the staff.

4^     Charges for the Services of Police at Football Matches

At the Chairman's request, the County Solicitor confirmed that the letter
requested at the previous meeting of the Sub-Committee had been sent to the
Lord Chancellor's, office, and also reported that to date the written judge­
ment in the High Court case had still not been delivered.

The Sub-Committee again expressed disquiet at the continuing delay, and recalled
the serious implications for both the police and the football clubs nationally,
whatever the outcome of the High Court case. Another factor besides the
operational factor was the effect on the budgets of Police Authorities,
particularly the Police Joint Authorities in the Metropolitan areas, should
the judgement be in favour of the football club. In Shire Counties, the Police
Authorities would be able to seek financial support from their County Councils,
but in the Metropolitan areas the Joint Police Authorities had no such avenues
open to them as the Government had direct control of their budgets for the
first three years of their existence.

However, there appeared to be little that the Sub— Committee could do further
to expedite the judgement being delivered.

RESOLVED - That, whilst continuing to express disquiet at the continuing delay,
the Sub-Committee reluctantly note the position.

5^_____ School Crossing Patrol Application

With the Chairman's permission, the Chief Constable recalled Minute 154 of the
Police Committee of 27th January, 1986, and reported the reasons for the delay
in carrying out the appeals procedure (set out in Police Committee Minute 133B
of 29th October, 1979). This involved a site visit by the Chairman and Vice-
Chairman of the Police Committee.

RESOLVED - That in view of the imminence of the Easter School Holidays and
the abolition of the County Council, the application for a School Crossing
Patrol in Jenkin Avenue outside Limpsfield Middle School be referred to the
Sheffield City Council.

6._____ West Bar D.H.Q. Sheffield - Alterations to Provide Interview Rooms

With the Chairman's permission, a report of the Chief Architect was circulated
to each Member present on the five tenders which had been submitted for this
project, following the invitation of tenders from the eight contractors
approved by the Sub—Committee on 11th February, 1986.
