(ii)    Proposed Police Sub-Divisional Headquarters, Wombwell - Outstanding
        Land.

RESOLVED - That, subject to the consent of the Secretary of State, it be a
recommendation to the Lands and Buildings Sub-Committee that the terms agreed
for the outstanding area of land required for the Wombwell Sub-Divisional
Police Headquarters, be agreed as now reported.

(iii)   Solid Fuel Installations at Operational Police Premises

RESOLVED -

1.     That the action of the Chief Constable in authorising the acceptance of
a single quotation for the associated boiler attendance at the four police
properties now named (from Powerminister Engineering Ltd., Sheffield in the sum
of £3,340) as provided for under Standing Order 54(3), be approved.

2.     That, subject to (a) an approach to the Chairman of the Policy Finance
and General Purposes Sub-Committee for a waiver of Standing Order 48, and (b)
expenditure of £3,284 in accordance with the provisions of Standing Order 55,
approval be given to the proposals to provide interim boiler attendance
facilities for the period 10th January to 10th April, 1983, at the four police
properties in question.

(iv)    Rossington Police Houses - Nos. 1 and 2 Station Road

RESOLVED - That the Chief Architect be requested to prepare a report for
submission to the Sub-Committee on the costing of the proposal.

        New Police Post, Exchange Street, Sheffield

RESOLVED - That, subject to the consent of the Secretary of State, the Lands
and Buildings Sub-Committee be recommended to approve the terms now reported
for the provision of a new police post in Exchange Street, Sheffield.

(vi)    Wombwell Sub-Divisional Headquarters

RESOLVED - That whilst bearing in mind the County Council's policy on the use
of asbestos in new premises, it be a recommendation to Policy Sub-Committee
’A 1 (Executive) that the use of the slates originally designed for use at the
Wombwell Sub-Divisional Headquarters be approved in view of the factors now
reported.

(vii)   Rotherham Divisional and Sub-Divisional Headquarters

RESOLVED - That the urgent action taken in an attempt to ensure the completion
of the Heating and Ventilation   sub contract of this project be confirmed.

C-      Working Group on the Effects of Professional Football on the Community
         (15th December, 1982).

RESOLVED - That the note of the meeting of the Working Group on the Effects of
Professional Football on the Community held on 15th December, 1982, be approved
and the following recommendations confirmed.

(i)     Terms of Reference

RESOLVED - That the terms of reference of the Working Group, be as approved by


                                    D. 5.
the Police Committee and the County Council namely:-

(a)   to examine the charges for police services in South Yorkshire,
particularly where attendances fall below an agreed pre-determined level, and

(b)    to examine a closer co-operation between the football clubs and the
police to stimulate and encourage young persons towards an interest in the
Clubs and to break away from hooliganism at and associated with football
matches.

(ii)   Charges for Police Services

RESOLVED -

1.    That subject to any national criteria which might be forthcoming, it
be a recommendation to Policy Advisory Sub-Committee "A" that the charges for
police services levied on the Football League Clubs in South Yorkshire be
calculated on a differential basis related to the attendance levels.

2.    That the Chief Constable be requested to prepare a report on thepresent
criteria for levying charges for police services, possible future criteria
(including the "through the gate" break-even figures now reported), the
extent of co-operation between the clubs and the police, and the extent of
community related activities already being undertaken by the Clubs.

(i ii ) Hooliganism at and Associated with Football Matches.

RESOLVED - That a further meeting of the Working Group be held in some 5/6
weeks time to consider further the problem of hooliganism/vandalism at and
associated with football matches, and that the media be invited to send
representatives to the meeting to discuss the effect on the problem of media
reporting.

187.   Statement of Capital Payments and Commitments.

A.     Statement

RESOLVED - That the Statement of Capital Payments and Commitments be received.

B.     Improvements to Concrete/Pavings and Drainage at Niagara Grounds,
       Sheffield.

Further to minute 121(i)a of 4th October, 1982, a joint report of the Chief
Executive, the Chief Constable, the County Planning Officer and the County
Treasurer was submitted on a scheme for improvements on concrete areas, pavings and
drainage within the Horse and Dog Compound at the Niagara Grounds, Sheffield.

There was provision for the expenditure within the Committee's 1982/83 Capital
Programme.

The Chief Constable confirmed that the scheme was within the terms of Home
Office Circular No. 37/1980, which authorised minor works costing less than
£L2,000 to be undertaken without reference to the Secretary of State where
they were carried out at the same time as works of repair and maintenance. In
addition, with the Chairman's permission, a supplementary report on the project
was circulated.

RESOLVED -

1.     That application be made to the Policy Finance and General Purposes

                                     D. 6.
