                              POLICE COMMITTEE
                  FINANCE AND GENERAL PURPOSES SUB-COMMITTEE

                 PH)          12th November 1985


PRESENT:  Councillor G. H. Moores, C.B.E. (in the Chair)
Councillors: B. P. Flanagan (Vice-Chairman), J. Bower, P. Collins, D. W. George,
W. Layne, M. McCoy, R. H. Patton, P. T. Senior, M. E. Smith, R. Walton,
(Interim) South Yorkshire Police Authority: Councillor T. Butler.

Apologies for absence, on other Council business, were received from Councillors
W. K. Martin and R. J. McElvenney, and also from Councillors R. Burford and
(Interim) South Yorkshire Police Authority Magistrate Members Mrs. B. R.
Bullivant and Mr. J. W. Thompson.

1.    Minutes

RESOLVED - That the minutes of the meeting of the Sub-Committee held on 5th
November, 1985, be approved as a correct record.

2.    Charges for Police Services   at Sporting Events

In accordance with Sub-Committee Minute 3.2 of 29th October, 1985, a joint
report of the Chief Constable and the County Treasurer wassubmitted giving
details of the charges made to football clubs for the services of the police
during the current season up to 27th October, 1985, together with similar
information for the corresponding period of the 1984/85 season. Details of
charges made to other users of police services (Doncaster Racecourse, Yorkshire
County Cricket Club, Wickersley Agricultural Society, Sheffield City Council
and Mission England) from 1st April, 1985, were also given.

Schedules showed details of spectator attendance figures, number of officers
employed and number of officers charged for (in accordance with the criteria
agreed by the Police Committee) and the amounts charged, net of value added
tax.

At the Chairman's request, the Chief Executive also read out the contents of
a letter dated 7th November, 1985, addressed by the Doncaster Rovers Football
Club Ltd., to the Chairman.

The Sub-Committee discussed the detailed figures shown in the schedules,
which illustrated that as- well as not paying for any police outside of the
grounds, the football clubs were actually only paying for a small percentage
of the police inside of the grounds.   Other bodies were charged on an actual
number and hours basis.   In effect, the Police Authority were subsidising
the football clubs, and contrast was made with recent pronouncements by the
Football League on the future of Third and Fourth Division Clubs.

RESOLVED -

1. That no action be taken on the letter addressed to the Chairman by the
Doncaster Rovers Football Club Ltd.

2. That the officers be thanked for the very full and informative report on
charges for the services of the police at sporting events.

3 .____Replacement of Damaged Equipment

In accordance with the indication given at the previous meeting, a joint report
