                                                                                               /J&-

               Mike Boocock                 From:          Joanne Dally
               Andrew Turner
               Tracy Holmes

Copies:        Neil McKay                   Date:          17 February 1998
               Neil Priestley
               Anthony Fisher
               Rowan Malley
               Phill Shields
               Gillian Tutt
               Anne Holroyd

World in Action Programme: Hillsborough Disaster - Allegations re SYMAS

Confidential

Ken Threlfall has telephoned me today regarding last night’s World in Action programme
about Hillsborough. Ken did not actually see the programme but it is his understanding
that it contained various allegations about the emergency services and how they ‘got it
wrong’.

The programme apparently made specific reference to named police officers and also
made specific claims about the ambulance service and the alleged failure of its major
incident procedure. The programme suggested that at the height of the tragedy there was
just one vehicle in the ground and 42 outside, waiting for permission to deploy.

The programme also featured a former member of staff of the ambulance service who
repeated his claims that he had been unable to assist live casualties because of the orders
issued at the time.

Surprisingly, SYMAS has not received any media inquiries following the programme but
Ken has asked to review all the documentation as a contingency in order to prepare a
suitable line if required.

The Home Secretary is expected shortly to announce whether or not he will order the
reopening of an inquiry into the disaster. (Informally, it is understood that he is unlikely
to consider that any significant new evidence has come to light and that he will therefore
decline the request). The announcement may be imminent now that the Sheffield
Wednesday/Liverpool match has been played.

I have asked to be kept informed of developments.

If anyone happened to video the programme, Ken Threlfall would like to borrow the tape.
