DEP/pTMENT OF HEALTH
                EGISTEBED NUMBER
FILE
OFFICE
(REGISTRY)
NUMBER

                                          A    fi           Ib g w C iH

                 RELATED PAPERS               D (UTi
  MS M
               BEGINS              ENDS




             Title of F S
                                          TRANSIT MAR                      RECORD MATTERS

                                                                                        spare space
                                                        Referred to
                                                                                   or changes/notes
      BRING FORWARD
      MARKINGS ONLY
             To Whom




                                                                          Branch Review Decision
                                                                          (see HQ permanent
                                                                            instructions

                                                                          -DESTROY NOW

                                                                          —D E S T R Q ^ J S ^ - - ' ' ( y e a r )
                                                                          (ajjM^gRSrZto 5 years after
                                                                            st action)

                                                                                                      ECOND
                                                                                     IN                  (25 years
                                                                           fter first action)

                                                                          Boldly delete inappro­
                                                                          priate ite m s //




       To be noted after                                                  Name
        settlement by
                                                                          Grade

                                                                          Branch ,$?S.                          .S

                                                                          Date....:..i.^]..|.<ij!

                                                                          Index noted (initials)


                                                                      8307296, 12/89, C 400, 2213/1, 15121   02637
     EF 491 H
                                          loOOO®
                          ||s ^ 3 S 9 g « N W » »


                                                    . * tilt




            DH 003739yo



!l'/'
i
J
:■C
  *aiSSv.
                                                             fo« w u                                v w f t S S f f li''
              r ii                            A \■■"'VI^-A    *                           c>n.o\r^ s~




                                          ■ M t:

             l-W >        C   u   J   a   '

                                      P(        <^a_a__           d L ^ O            *Z-.       —
                                                                                                        v    ^       r v    ^

                                                                                     OV^

 /b



                                                                      S                   /
                                                                      v^_eu«A         ^             i_uOiO



              tr^ A s -
                              ✓ /                                                ^    __________ —                               4 -^




                                                                          '0<S                2^ 5"              4     "3               •
                                                   -p?4/V^VA>->x3




                                                                      “iT
                                                                      s
                                                              T j: o ^ i
             {A ^A A ^


                                              f l      S _ ^                  c^ )c ^ . -              L a X W                  '^a-v^


                          (jf\Vo>J3lo^CTx>— ^ — ®-                        .



      <a\
                                                                       Cy                                            ( f ^ T C J L a J2_/V v ^~


              Soc^fi.'-                                  CW-v V^C^r \o V-Vr
             \^Yex,                 f \o ^ c \Q j^           G^u^.



                          r
                                                                  ^       ^                         ecAAAi ^—                               . / e-r-
CODE 18-77


  l* -A (
                                                       §r




                       fl        «J>-            /4 - o c -       ~:L      I

  ^        tj\^v       to'      ^            I                                                                                             I A ' < ^




          X iz L ^                               %x> i~                                                                    L
                p^^ioc^               *1 k -          &       r        ^ ^ = e~                                            W
                (UrlU*^^-                                                            v^CS             '
                                        f-l \))sjg<vj <!--j/V'-


                                          U M U eA ^
                                        <K^                              T U a - A j S _VW*_£2J4-Cj                        Tt^si?


                                                                                                           uj                IVU_-»3 ^

                                                                                                                                           2-01   -
                                                                                                                     ^ £c%k)c~ '




                                                                                                          X{K


                                                                                U ^ O ~                                        I           2^/S



                                                       £?

                                                                                                  \          6 }rv ~ )
         ^Le                             /                l                    /C*    S £(        J^vJL t-v4- ^Vv^luiirv/t'




         4=«=*^vW^^            3* | ^                     ^
          (Q^        1^1 \m.    Q? .     f\J--oft N-sljkJLu ^        (AM       ^ 0 ^ a s L t^ l                 )~ t* U L A S -\


                            tAA^JL v \ _ a ^ —o^-i
                                                 t-a «r»^         iA^C^— ^            ^      I            —f "Cvcn^l ^CA^J

                                 ^a/wq^^y^te_j&$              \2-^ a
               W - ^ mZoJ       >-eW-w/                                                                                             A s6
                                          ff




                     ^\        «^_o_o_           A^c.         °\ ^                           ^             (v^UvoJ

\jj^ ^                                \AAJ^                                                               C J ^ j o ^ W
                                                                        Jb.)aJjL9 L
•
                                                          Reference..


             .




                   O'* Doc lO 1 ^ 3 A^cxvtoid po/ (SOH'j (Xbfc&ib'oo
                              O w 3 oDO o    c^rxovJ   o ^ a C K a ^ e |o ^ e /<xfca
                 ve/M .^/sk#
                      (PL&ix & q,          G oc. IO.                         JU U U LM J*


                                     o .




CODE 18-77
                                                                                                     ©>


To:           Mr. D. Gilroy                                          Our ref:   529/SSI/I6/9/19A
              ACI, P&B (North)                                                  529/SSI/I6/9/ISA
              Leeds Office
                                                                     From:
                                                                                sbi, f&n (.rjorcnj
                                                                                Manchester Office

                                                                     Date:      7 September, 1992


CIVIL HffiRGENCXES : HILLSBOBOOGH DISASTER

1.                You will see from the copy programme enclosed that a two day
                  conference is to be held on "Lessons from Hillsborough". This is a
                  substantial event which is likely to be of interest to SSI and others
                  concerned with the aftermath of disasters.                        -

2.                I notice that Don Brand is listed as one of the main speakers.

3.                SSI was in close contact with the Hillsborough inter-agency group from
                  the outset and offered support and advice at a number of points.
                  Maire Gibson undertook the liaison role. A copy of the final report,
                  dated 20 June 1991, is also enclosed.

4.                Further to my previous requests for guidance and those of Mr.____
                  for clarification of management responsibility, this is obviously
                     evant to current concerns and I was wondering whether I ought to
                        I have another commitment on 20 October but I am free on 21
                     :dber. However there are wider implications and I think you may
                    e h -t~r> r lo o i H o -Fr>y~ y Q in-ftftl •p|




inspector
Manchester Office




hi I i s 7.   9
                                             n(A

   HILLSBOROUGH INTER-AGENCY GROUP
                    AND
                                        Da
   NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK




                               n
                           \
MANAGING THE RESPONSE TO A DISASTER:
    LESSONS FROM HILLSBOROUGH



             Two day conference
                                         \




                     on

           20th - 21st October 1992


                      at

          Britannia Hotel Manchester
                  PROGRAMME
                                                     o
                     DAY ONE




Chair:   Pauline Farrell,
         ex D irector of Social Services Sefton, and
         Chair of the Planning Sub-Group.
10.00    Registration and refreshments
10.30    Don Brand, Deputy Chief Inspector
         Department of Health.
11.15    Refreshments
11.45    Workshops
12.45    Lunch
2.00     Workshops repeated
3.00     Refreshments                    >
3.30     Workshops repeated
4.30     Free time
7.00     Reception                             ’       .
7.30     Dinner



                                             '■/Ft
o                            BOOKING FORM


Managing the response to a disaster: lessons from Hillsborough w
20-21st October 1992
Cost £165 to include overnight accommodation and all meals
Please reserve me a place
(Block capitals)
Name         _________                 . _______ - ■- - -

Job Title

Organisation

Address



                                              Postcode

Phone No.

Cheque enclosed for £....................

Please invoice my organisation £.....

Invoice to:


Please mark workshop preference in order of priority (1,2,3 etc. )
see programme
[] a [] b [] c [] d [] e [] f [] g [] h                    7/
If you have any special needs e.g. dietary, mobility, please indicatejhere
                                                           -   X
Please return form to: Ann Vandersypen, Conference Organiser,
NISW, 5-7 Tkvistock Place, London WC1H 9SS. Tel. 071 387 9681
(Photocopies of this form may be used for bookings). No refunds will be
given for cancellations of less than 14 days notice.
                            PROGRAMME
    o
   •                           DAY TWO


       Chair:      Councillor Steinke, ex Chair, Sheffield City
                   Council Social Services Committee, j
       9.30        Tony Allen, Chief Executive Berkshire
                   Chairman National Working Party on Disaster
                   Response.
       10.30       Refreshments
       11.00       Workshops repeated
       12.30       Lunch
       2.00       Tim Newbum, Co-ordinator, NISW research
                  project on "Social Work After Hillsborough"
       3.00       Refreshments
       3.30       Final presentation - Panel comprising: Pauline
                  Farrell, David Mason, Tim Newburn and
                  David Whitham
       4.30        Close


The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group comprises representatives from
the nine local authorities that have been centrally involved in the social
services response to the Hillsborough Disaster. The purpose of the
conference is to share our experiences in the belief that this will enable
those authorities who are faced with future disasters to manage a more
effective response.                                           / /
There will be a total of eight workshops. (Listed overleaf). These will be
repeated so that each delegate will be able to attend a total of four
workshops during the two day period.
                      WORKSHOPS

     Managing the early days
                                                              o
                     Deputy D irector Fam ily & Community
     services, snerneld (retired).
     David Mason Director Warwickshire Social Services
     Rev. Stephen Lowe Archdeacon of Sheffield
     Setting up administrative support systems
     Paddy M arley A ssistant D irecto r L iverpool Social
     Services
                  ex Cheshire Social Services
     Managing a response to two disasters
     Councillor Joan Taylor (Chair Social Services Committee,
     Nottinghamshire)
     David Whitham Nottinghamshire Social Services
     Establishing a social work response
                      Knowsley Social Services
                  ex Cheshire Social Services
                Sheffield Family & Community Services
     Memorials. Inquests and Anniversaries
                    Liverpool Social Services
                       Sheffield Family & Community
     Services
     Managing and Sustaining the Social Work Response
                     Liverpool Social Services
                  Liverpool Social Services

g-   Inter-Agency and Inter-departmental Support/Liaison
               ix Lancashire Social Services
h.   Caring for social work staff.
                 ]Staffline Co-ordinator after Hillsborough
     Tim Nexvbum National Institute for Social Work
                                                      7
                                                     W. I. Murray, LL.B.
                                                     City Solicitor, Secretary to the Council
                                                     P.O. Box No. 88
                                                     Municipal Buildings

 LIVERPOOL                                           Dale Street
                                                     LIVERPOOL L69 2DH

                                                     Telephone: 051-227 3911
                                                      Direct Line : 051-225 2436
                                                     Fax: 051-225
                                                     DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                     Vour ref
                                                     Our ref

                                                                20th June, 1991

 TO:    The Director of Social Sex ?i e

        Wirral                 Cheshire
        Knowsley               Lancashire
        St. Helens             Nottinghamshire
        Sefton                 Sheffield




 Dear Sir/Madam,

 Report of the Hillborough Inter-Agency Group

 I attach, for use within your Authority, a copy of the final
 report of the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group on its role
 since April, 1989.

 Yours faithfully,




 City Solicitor.


 c.c.     Ms.    J. Harper,       B.A.S.W.
          Ms.    M. Gibson,       S.S.I.
          Mr.    D. Mason,        Liverpool S.S.D.
          Mr.    T. Newburn,      N.I.S.W.




When calling or telephoning please ask for   Mr.
                  REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INTER-AGENCY GROUP




    The Creation of the Group

    The Hillsborough Disaster occurred on Saturday, 15 April 1989. The first
    contacts between the Merseyside Authorities and other Agencies took place
    on Sunday, 16 April when the Merseyside Authorities agreed to a policy of
    one response to help victims. At that meeting it was agreed to utilise
    the experience of Centre for Crisis Psychology. A briefing meeting was
    held on afternoon of 17 April to which political representatives and
    Directors were invited and the Director of Liverpool Social Services
    Department outlined the position to date. He asked, and it was agreed,
    that daily meetings of the Authorities affected would be held and would be
    attended by representatives who would be authorised to act. A first
    meeting of these senior managers was held later that day (17 April 1989)
    and this in effect was the first meeting of the Inter-Agency Group. At
    that meeting there were representatives from Cheshire, Knowsley,
    Lancashire, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral Social Services Departments,
    Merseyside and St Helens Probation Services.

    The Group was joined at its early meetings by representatives of
    Merseyside Police Service, Fire Service and the Emergency Planning Unit.
    The meetings were also attended, from time to time, by representatives of
    BASW who provided a Staffline. There have been 38 meetings oftheGroup.

    The Role of the Group

    To meet the stated objective of providing one response, the role of the
    group evolved during its early meetings and whilst no formal terms of
    reference were drawn up it can be seen that its role was to co-ordinate
    the inmediate short term assistance and to plan the longer term response
    to the effects of the tragedy. Tasks undertaken included:-
      To identify service provision which could best be met on an
        inter-authority Inter-Agency basis.
      To co-ordinate training activities.
      To provide a link to the trust fund.
      To assist authorities with publicity and information leaflets.

    The Inter-Agency Group became the main route for exchange of information
    between the agencies of the activities, incidents, responses, and
    interventions occurring throughout the region and the rest of the country.
    From the meeting on 28 April 1989 the Inter-Agency Group was joined by
    representatives from Sheffield and Nottinghamshire Social Services
    Departments.



    The Activities of the Group

    The Group was concerned to ensure the continuation of the Helpline which


                                          1
WT3AEW
    had been set up on a 24 hour basis in accommodation provided by Liverpool
    Social Services Department and agreed that resources should be
    concentrated to maintain and staff one Helpline rather than individual
    agencies providing their own. Maintenance of the Helpline was a feature
    of many of the meetings and advice was given by Childline in its
    administration. Kent Social Services Department also provided a personal
    computer system which had been utilised during the Zeebrugge Disaster.
    This equipment was put into action to create a data base of referrals and
    offers of help. Co-ordination of offers of help to staff the Helpline and
    to maintain the data base were dealt with by the Group.

    A major task of the Group was the organisation of training programmes of
    staff from several of the agencies. A post of Training Co-ordinator was
    funded by NWASSA to work alongside Centre for Crisis Psychology and to
    continue the work when that organisation had completed its task. Liaison
    was established from an early date with the voluntary sector and the
    Director of Sefton undertook, on behalf of the Group, to act as the main
    link to voluntary agencies. Other activities in the early days of the
    Group were the preparation and distribution of leaflets and contact with
    the Education Authorities in the region.

    One of the first decisions made by the IAG was to set up a planning group
    under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard Parker, Professor in Social
    Work, Manchester University to prepare a planning document for
    presentation by the end of April.

    The report of the Planning Group was presented to a meeting of the Group
    on 26 April 1989. That report envisaged the creation of a Joint
    Management Committee which would supervise activities of a co-ordinator
    who would be responsible for Helpline, the data base, outreach
    co-ordination and referrals and training staff support. This organisation
    known as the Hillsborough Support Unit would cost approximately £340,000
    per year and would have an anticipated lifespan of two years. This report
    was presented to Directors of Social Services and senior politicians on 28
    and 29 April 1989. This unit would have subsumed the activities of the
    Inter-Agency Group if it had been created. However, this unit was not
    established and therefore the work of the Inter-Agency Group continued.

    From the beginning of May the frequency of meetings were reduced to
    weekly. At that time it became apparent to the Group that there was a
    need to consider Social Security implications and a meeting was convened
    of Welfare Benefit advisers to the core authorities and their
    recommendations were accepted.

     In line with the decision of the senior politicians that attempts should
     be made to raise funds for co-ordination work from all external sources
     the Director of Social Services for Liverpool undertook this task on
     behalf of the Group and the Liverpool Social Services Department
     administered receipt of such funds and disbursement. The Group recognised
     from an early stage that evaluation of the response to the tragedy and the
    .lessons learnt from the experience would be useful if carried out by an
     external agency. The Group pursued this possibility eventually funding
     was obtained from the Joseph Rowntree Trust to enable the National


                                          2
WT3AEW
    Institute of Social Work to undertake this evaluation which is now
    proceeding.

    The issue of a creation of a unit was the subject of a further meeting of
    senior politicians on 6 September 1989 when support for the creation of a
    unit in modified form was forthcoming. In the event the posts were
    subsequently advertised throughout the constituent Authorities but no
    suitable applicants were received. After consultation with first line
    managers the Inter-Agency Group recommended to constituent Authorities
    that to create the unit at the late stage (early 1990) would serve little
    useful purpose and recommended that the Inter-Agency Group should continue
    as an information exchange thus the Group has maintained its presence.

    The Group played a leading role in the organising and arranging the
    Training of staff in various aspects of disaster responses. The Group
    also supported a series of seminars held at Burton Manor, Wirral, for
    Social Workers working with victims of the tragedy.

    The Group also liaised with the Hillsborough Trust Fund on various issues
    which have arisen over the two year period.

    The need to support staff working in a stressful environment was
    recognised at an early stage and the group negotiated with BASW to provide
    a staffline service which was made available to staff working in the
    agencies.

    The Successes and Failures of the Group

    First of all the Group can claim to have been extremely successful in the
    transfer of information between the Agencies. It is difficult to conceive
    how this would have been possible without the existence of such a Group.
    It was also possible, as part of the information exchange, for the various
    agencies, in particular the local authorities, to agree to certain
    actions, although it must be recognised from the outset that the
    Inter-Agency Group had no locus or authority to interfere with the
    responsibilities of individual Directors of Social Services.

    A second success for the Group was the training programme. This
    was perhaps the most co-ordinated work which affected all the local
    authorities and other agencies and was clearly seen as a corporate
    programme and recognised as such by all participants. There is no doubt
    that the ability of the Authorities to respond, and the strength of their
    position in the event of a future tragedy, has been increased as a result
    of the training programme due almost entirely to the activities of the
    Centre for Crisis Psychology together with the Training Co-ordinator and
    Training Officers in the Social Services Departments.

    Thirdly the identification of a focal point of referral for planning,
    organisational, administrative and financial matters was another success
    of the Group.

    Fourthly it has been possible to represent the situation and problems and
    lessons arising out of the tragedy from the basis of the shared experience


                                          3
WT3AEW
    and shared knowledge which it would have been difficult to replicate. The
    policies adopted by NWASSA in respect of Emergency Planning may well have
    the seeds in the experiences gained via the IAG. The Director of Social
    Services for Liverpool was very successful in raising funds from various
    sources to enable various corporate activities including training to
    proceed. However the Inter-Agency Group itself cannot claim much credit
    for this.

    Another success lay in identifying particular periods of continuing stress
    for staff, eg., at anniversaries; during the inquest proceedings; during
    the transition period following the cessation of Hillsborough work and
    organising preventive staff care policies via the BASW Staffline Service,
    in the forum of group meetings to de-brief, individual counselling and
    conferences to plan and share experiences.

    One of our failures in staff careterms was in leaving it too late to
    reach many clerical and adminf ti :i 5 taf   although seme staff were
    helped in coping with difficul ie o r nr Lr,j to their existing posts.

    Because of the basic lack of resour ,s available to the Group, it failed
    to relieve individual officers in scxtie of the Authorities from
    considerable pressure of work arising out of the activities of the Group.
    Attempts were made to share out scxtie of this work but with hindsight
    perhaps more could have been done in this regard.

    There also appeared to be a perception particularly amongst front line
    staff that the Inter-Agency Group had more authority than it could have
    realistically. There seemed to be an assumption that the IAG could
    influence the service delivery provision within authorities. This clearly
    could never be the case, it may be that the first decisions taken by the
    Group were interpreted as the exercise of operational policy when in fact
    they were agreements on operational practice which were required as an
    immediate response. A criticism made was that the Group seamed to spend a
    considerable amount of time on financial matters rather than considering
    the needs of individual victims. It is suggested that this is a
    misinterpretation of its role but an analysis of matters considered by the
    Group is attached.

    It will be noted that the Group never had formal aims and objectives
    although it is my perception that regular attenders of the Group
    understood instinctively what the role of Group was. However, we never
    considered formalising a role and function. It may be that this amiission
    led to sane misunderstandings referred to above as to the Group's role.




                                          4
WT3AEW
    DRAFT REPORT APPENDIX 1



    Analysis of Matters Dealt with by the Inter-Agency Group

    The following table indicates the number of occasions on which the
    subjects have been discussed in the 38 meetings of the Inter-Agency Group.

          Helpline                                 23
          Funding and Financial Matters            23
          Training and Seminars                    22
          Research and Evaluation                  20
          Staffline and BASW                       17
          Trust Fund                               16
          Interlink                                14
          Victims and Survivors                    12
          Database                                 12
          Forward Planning                         10
          IAG, Role and Membership                 10
          Leaflets                                  9
          Inquests                                  8
          Communications between agencies           8
          Publicity Matters                         7
          Support Unit                              7
          Voluntary Sector                          7
          Welfare Benefits                          6
          Personnel Issues in SSD's                 6
          Matters concerning Police                 5
          Education and Schools                     5
          Drop-In Centre                            4
          NWASSA                                    4
          Sheffield Issues                          3
          Other tragedies and emergencies           3
          Family Support Group                      2




    DlO/WJT/KEH/1/l/lO
    9 May 1991




WT3AEY
t
                                                     Ref:    529/SSI/16/9/19


    To:    ACI                                       From:   Mrs
           Inspectors                                        SSI NW Region
           SSI NW Region
                                                     Date:   22 May 1991


    HIIISBOROUGH DISASTER

    1.     Colleagues may be interested in the attached which

           a)      reports on the last meeting of the inter-agency group; and

           b)      provides a summary of activity.




    Inspector
                                INTER AGENCY MEETING
                                                                                        l*\
                                      10TH MAY, 1991




         PRESENT:    Mr. W. Twist        -    Social Services, Lancashire, Chair
                                         -    Social Services, Knowsley
                                         -    Social Services, Cheshire
                     Mr. D. Mason        -    Social Services, Liverpool
                     Mr. P. Marlev       —    Social Services, Liverpool
                                         -    Social Services, Wirral
                                         -    Social Services, Sefton
                                         -    Social Services, Sheffield
                                         -    Social Services, Sheffield
                                         -    Social Services, Nottinghamshire
                                         -    First Line Managers Group
                                         -    BASW
                                         -    BASW - Staffline
                     Ms. P. Farrell           Formerly Sefton Social Services
                     Mr. T. Owen              Formerly Cheshire Social Services
                                              City Solicitor's, Liverpool
                                              City Solicitor's, Liverpool




                     Apologies for absence were submitted from Mr.
                     (St. Helens), Mr.              ^Merseyside Probation)
                     and Ms.I             (Liverpool).




NO.                                  MINUTE                                        ACTION


467.   Inquests

       The Group noted that the Inquests had concluded. It wished
       to record its thanks to all those who had assisted in ensuring
       that staff cover had usually been provided during the Inquest
       proceedings.  It particularly wished to place on record its
       appreciation of the assistance and facilities made available
       by Sheffield.


468.   Hillsborough Centre

       Whilst the use of the Hillsborough Centre for Hillsborough
       related activities is continuing, the Group was advised of a
       drop in the number of Hillsborough referrals and a continuing
       change of emphasis and direction away from Hillsborough work
       by staff remaining at the Centre.


469.   Hillsborough Interlink

       The difficulties referred to at the last meeting which were
       hampering the distribution of the Hillsborough Interlink have
       been resolved by the contribution of £250 from the resources
       of the Group. It is understood that the Trust Fund has agreed
•                                   MINUTE                                   ACTION



469      to fund a further issue of the newsletter and that decisions
Cont'd   about the frequency of its publication thereafter rests with
         the Editorial Board.


470.     Inter-Agency Support

                     reported that the Burton Manor Conference had
         proceeded as planned, with the theme of "termination".
         Approximately 50 people attended and the Forum provided an
         opportunity for people to talk about "ending" their Hillsborough
         work and their re-entry into other work. The Group noted the
         report and allocated £350 to meet the costs of holding the
         Conference.


471.     Co-ordinating Role - Bid to Trust Fund

         Paddy Marley gave further information about the submission
         made previously to the Trust Fund for an unspecified contri­
         bution from the Charitable Fund towards the cost of the disaster
         response co-ordinating role. In his discussions with the
         Trust Fund Manager, it had been suggested that the problem of
         making a contribution from a Charitable Fund to a Local
         Authority could be resolved by the contribution being made
         to each Authority's equivalent of, in Liverpool's case, the
         Lord Mayor's Charitable Appeal Fund, on the basis that Social
         Services Departments would thereafter be permitted to influence
         the use of that particular contribution.  It was stressed
         however that decisions had not yet been made and the general
         question was still under consideration. It is anticipated
         that the outcome will be dealt with by direct contact between
         the Trust Fund Manager and individual Local Authorities.


472.     Resources of the Group

         The Group noted that it had, at its disposal, a surplus
         balance of £11,067.64 for use on Hillsborough related
         activities.

         Several suggestions for utilising the resources were forth­
         coming viz:-

         (a)   a Writer's Workshop - to formulate and record the
               experiences and expertise of staff;

         (b)   a National Seminar on the response of the core authorities
               to the Hillsborough disaster;

         (c)   offset the administrative costs (presently being met by
               Liverpool) of the various groups utilising the Hillsborough
               Centre;

         (d)   extend the work of              (of the Children's
               Society);
                                    MINUTE                                      ACTION


472      (e)   commission a professional report evaluating the work
Cont'd         of the Inter Agency Group; and

         (f)   underwrite the cost of disseminating the research
               findings of Tim Newburn.

         Following a full and detailed discussion, the Group endorsed
         the suggestion that the concept of a Workshop (or similar)
         should be explored further. The purpose of such a Workshop
         would be to provide an opportunity for individual staff to
         record and evaluate, for the benefit of others who may become
         involved in responding to future disasters, the skills that
         have been acquired from their personal experiences and
         involvement in the Hillsborough disaster. The point was made
         that a wealth of material about disasters is available dealing
         with, for example, post-traumatic stress, but very little
         about the management of disasters and sustaining the disaster
         response over a long period of time; or about questions such
         as whether you create specified staff teams or ask staff to
         carry disaster work alongside their normal case load, etc. A
         record of the experiences of all involved would provide the
         basis for material on the management of a disaster which the
         Group believe would be of great interest elsewhere and would
         serve also to promote and recognise the vital role which was
         undertaken by Social Workers.

         To progress matters, the Group appointed a Planning Sub-Group
         comprising the undermentioned persons to explore further and
         in detail the scope for proceeding with an appropriate form
         of Workshop, designed to fill the vacuum which the Group
         believes to exist and further, to consider how best to
         document the skills and experiences which exist within the
         core authorities.

         The Sub-Group is to comprise the following:-



                              Pauline Farrell                              P.   Farrell
                              David Whitham                                D.   Whitham
                              Tim Newburn                                  T.   Newburn
                              Paddy Marley                                 P.   Marley




         It was further agreed that the Sub-Group be requested to
         bring proposals forward to the Chair within 6 weeks if
         possible and that, as an in-principle agreement to the idea
         of a Workshop has now been given, the Chair be empowered on
         behalf of the Group, to take any necessary decisions on the
         details arising,

         (NOTE:    The aforementioned Officers are asked to note that
                   following the meeting, arrangements were made for the
                   Sub-Group to meet at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 18th
                   June 1991 in the Hillsborough Centre, Liverpool).
                                 MINUTE                                 ACTION



473.   Report on the Role of the Inter Agency Group

       In accordance with Minute No. 464 of this Group of 8th March,
       the Chair circulated a draft report on the role and activities
       of the Inter Agency Group since its inception, including his
       personal observations on the successes and failure of the
       Group.

       The Group endorsed the draft document - a copy of which is
       appended to these Minutes - but agreed that prior to formal
       circulation to Authorities of the final report, any comments/
       amendments/additions on the draft document should be submitted
       direct to the Chair by 31st May for consideration. Thereafter,
       the final report will be forwarded to Authorities and at that
       stage may be used to acquaint Members of the activities of
       the Group since April 1989.


474.   Vote of Thanks

       The Group concluded its business by placing on record its
       sincere thanks and appreciation of the work undertaken over
       many months by the Chair and by all those other Officers who
       have assisted in the response to the Hillsborough disaster.
       Whenever necessary in the future, an alternative method of
       consultation will be utilised.




       The meeting was followed by an informal, farewell luncheon,
       at the expense of those participating.
                                                                   O iRAFT^
                                     CRAFT REPORT


                            HILLSBOROUGH INTER-AGENCY GROUP

                               COMMENTS OF THE CHAIRMAN


     The Creation of the Group

    Hie Hillsborough Disaster occurred on Saturday, 15 April 1989. The first
    contacts between the Merseyside Authorities and other Agencies took place
    on Sunday, 16 April when the Merseyside Authorities agreed to a policy of
    one response to help victims. At that meeting it was agreed to utilise
    the experience of Centre for Crisis Psychology. A briefing meeting was
    held on afternoon of 17 April to which political representatives and
    Directors were invited and the Director of Liverpool Social Services
    Department outlined the position to date. He asked, and it was agreed,
    that daily meetings of the Authorities affected would be held and would be
    attended by representatives who would be authorised to act. A first
    meeting of these senior managers was held later that day (17 April 1989)
    and this in effect was the first meeting of the Inter-Agency Group. At
    that meeting there were representatives from Cheshire, Knowsley,
    Lancashire, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral Social Services Departments,
    Merseyside and St Helens Probation Services.

    The Group was joined from time to time by representatives of Merseyside
    Police Service, Fire Service and the Emergency Planning Unit. The
    (teetings were also attended, from tine to time, by representatives of BASW
    who provided a Staffline. There have been 38 meetings of the Group.

    The Role of the Group

    To meet the stated objective of providing one response, the role of the
    group evolved during its early meetings and whilst no formal terms of
    reference were drawn up it can be seen that its role was to co-ordinate
    the immediate short term assistance and to plan the longer term response
    to the effects of the tragedy. Tasks undertaken included:-
    To identify service provision which could best be met on an
    inter-authority Inter-Agency basis.
    To co-ordinate training activities.
    To provide a link to the trust fund.
    To assist authorities with publicity and information leaflets.

    The Inter-Agency Group became the main route for exchange of information
    between the agencies of the activities, incidents, responses, and
    interventions occurring throughout the region and the rest of the country.
    From the meeting on 28 April 1989 the Inter-Agency Group was joined by
    representatives from Sheffield and Nottinghamshire Social Services
    Departments.




                                            1
WT3AEW
•     *




          The Activities of the Group

          The Group was concerned to ensure the continuation of the Helpline which
          had been set up on a 24 hour basis in accomodation provided by Liverpool
          Social Services Department and agreed that resources should be
          concentrated to maintain and staff one Helpline rather than individual
          agencies providing their own. Maintenance of the Helpline was a feature
          of many of the meetings and advice was given by Childline in its
          administration. Kent Social Services Department also provided a personal
          computer system which had been utilised during the Zeebrugge Disaster.
          This equipment was put into action to create a data base of referrals and
          offers of help. Co-ordination of offers of help to staff the Helpline and
          to maintain the data base were dealt with by the Group.

          A major task of the Group was the organisation of training programmes of
          staff from several of the agencies. A post of Training Co-ordinator was
          funded by NWASSA to work alongside Centre for Crisis Psychology and to
          continue the work when that organisation had coirpleted its task. Liaison
          was established from an early date with the voluntary sector and the
          Director of Sefton undertook, on behalf of the Group, to act as the main
          link to voluntary agencies. Other activities in the early days of the
          Group were the preparation and distribution of leaflets and contact with
          the Education Authorities in the region.

          One of the first decisions made by the IAG was to set up a planning group
          under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard Parker, Professor in Social
          Work, Manchester University to prepare a planning document for
          presentation by the end of April.

          The report of the Planning Group was presented to a meeting of the Group
          on 26 April 1989. That report envisaged the creation of a Joint
          Management Committee which would supervise activities of a co-ordinator
          who would be responsible for Helpline, the data base, outreach
          co-ordination and referrals and training staff support. This organisation
          known as the Hillsborough Support Unit would cost approximately £340,000
          per year and would have an anticipated lifespan of two years. This report
          was presented to Directors of Social Services and senior politicians on 28
          and 29 April 1989. This unit would have subsumed the activities of the
          Inter-Agency Group if it had been created. However, this unit was not
          established and therefore the work of the Inter-Agency Group continued.

          From the beginning of May the frequency of neetings were reduced to
          weekly. At that time it became apparent to the Group that there was a
          need to consider Social Security implications and a nesting was convened
          of Welfare Benefit advisers to the core authorities and their
          recoomendations were accepted.

          In line with the decision of the senior politicians that attenpts should
          be made to raise funds for co-ordination work frcm all external sources
          the Director of Social Services for Liverpool undertook this task on
          behalf of the Group and the Liverpool Social Services Department
          administered receipt of such funds and disbursement. The Group recognised
          from an early stage that evaluation of the response to the tragedy and the


                                                2
    WT3AEW
     lessons learnt from the experience would be useful if carried out by an
     external agency. The Group pursued this possibility eventually funding
     was obtained from the Joseph Rowntree Trust to enable the National
     Institute of Social Work to undertake this evaluation which is now
     proceeding.

     The issue of a creation of a unit was the subject of a further meeting of
     senior politicians on 6 September 1989 when support for the creation of a
     unit in modified form was forthcoming. In the event the posts were
     subsequently advertised throughout the constituent Authorities but no
     suitable applicants were received. After consultation with first line
     managers the Inter-Agency Group recommended to constituent Authorities
     that to create the unit at the late stage (early 1990) would serve little
     useful purpose and recommended that the Inter-Agency Group should continue
     as an information exchange thus the Group has maintained its presence.

     The Group played a leading role in the organising and arranging the
     Training of staff in various aspects of disaster responses. The Group
     also supported a series of seminars held at Burton Manor, Wirral, for
     Social Workers working with victims of the tragedy.

    The Group also liaised with the Hillsborough Trust Fund on various issues
    which have arisen over the two year period.

    The need to support staff working in a stressful environment was
    recognised at an early stage and the group negotiated with BASW to provide
    a staffline service which was made available to staff working in the
    agencies.

    The Successes and Failures of the Group

    These must of necessity must be personal observations in that views about
    the effectiveness of the Group must be coloured by an individual's
    perception. At this stage, therefore, these views necessarily are mine
    and members of the group are invited to add or amend these according to
    their own viewpoint.

    First of all I do believe that the Group can claim to have been extremely
    successful in the transfer of information between the Agencies. It is
    difficult to conceive how this would have been possible without the
    existence of such a Group. It was also possible, as part of the
    information exchange, for the various agencies, in particular the local
    authorities, to agree to certain actions, although it must be recognised
    from the outset that the Inter-Agency Group had no locus or authority to
    interfere with the responsibilities of individual Directors of Social
    Services.

    A second success for the Group was the training progranne. This
    was perhaps the most co-ordinated work which affected all the local
    authorities and other agencies and was clearly seen as a corporate
    programme and recognised as such, I believe, by all participants. There
    is no doubt that the ability of the Authorities to respond, and the
    strength of their position in the event of a future tragedy, has been


                                           3
WT3ABM
    increased as a result of the training programme due almost entirely to the
    activities of the Centre for Crisis Psychology together with the Training
    Co-ordinator and Training Officers in the Social Services Departments.

    Thirdly the identification of a focal point of referral for planning,
    organisational, administratative and financial matters was another success
    of the Group.

    Fourthly it has been possible to represent the situation and problems and
    lessons arising out of the tragedy from the basis of the shared experience
    and shared knowledge which it would have been difficult to replicate. The
    policies adopted by NWASSA in respect of Emergency Planning may well have
    the seeds in the experiences gained via the IAG. The Director of Social
    Services for Liverpool was very successful in raising funds from various
    sources to enable various corporate activities including training to
    proceed. I am not clear, however, that the Inter-Agency Group itself can
    claim any credit for this.

    Because of the basic lack of resources available to the Group, it failed
    to relieve individual officers in some of the Authorities from
    considerable pressure of work arising out of the activities of the Group.
    Attempts were made to share out some of this work but with hindsight
    perhaps more could have been done in this regard.

    There also appeared to be a perception particularly amongst front line
    staff that the Inter-Agency Group had more authority than it could have
    realistically. There seamed to be an assumption that the IAG could
    influence the service delivery provision within authorities. This clearly
    could never be the case, it may be that the first decisions taken by the
    Group were interpreted as the exercise of operational policy when in fact
    they were agreements on operational practice which were required as an
    immediate response. A criticism made was that the Group seemed to spend a
    considerable amount of time on financial matters rather than considering
    the needs of individual victims. This in my view is again a
    misinterpretation of its role but an analysis of matters considered by the
    Group is attached.

    It will be noted that the Group never had formal aims and objectives
    although it is my perception that regular attenders of the Group
    understood instinctively what the role of Group was. However, we never
    considered formalising a role and function. It may be that this amission
    led to some misunderstandings referred to above as to the Group's role.

    Conclusion

    This note represents the personal thoughts as, Chairman of the Group from
    May 1989, with regard to its role and performance of the Group as seen
    through my eyes They are presented to the Group with an invitation that
    participants are asked to indicate whether- they share in my perceptions
    and whether they feel that there ought to be a formal final report
    prepared on behalf of the Group. If this is the case I would recommend
    that a small number of officers volunteer and be deputed to put together a
    final report which could be circulated to Group members.


                                          4
WT3AEW
     □RAFT REPORT APPENDIX 1



    Analysis of Matters Dealt with by the Inter-Agency Group

     The following table indicates the number of occasions on which the
     subjects have been discussed in the 38 meetings of the Inter-Agency Group.

          Helpline                                  23
          Funding and Financial Matters             23
          Training and Seminars                     22
          Research and Evaluation                   20
          Staffline and BASW                        17
          Trust Fund                                16
          Interlink                                 14
          Victims and Survivors                     12
          Database                                  12
          Forward Planning                          10
          IAG, Role and Membership                  10
          Leaflets                                   9
          Inquests                                   8
          Communications between agencies            8
          Publicity Matters                          7
          Support Unit                               7
          Voluntary Sector                           7
          Welfare Benefits                           6
          Personnel Issues in SSD's                  6
          Matters concerning Police                  5
          Education and Schools                      5
          Drop-In Centre             „               4
          NWASSA                                     4
          Sheffield Issues                           3
          Other tragedies and emergencies            3
          Family Support Group                       2




    DlO/WJT/KEH/l/l/lO
    9 May 1991




WT3AEX
                                                                   I (o        11
             ®££3im-
                   DH (SSI)

                  -1    f^AY 1 9 9 1                             0772 264275

                       N WREGiQN
                                                                 Mr. W. Twist,
                                                                 Chair,
                                                                 Hillsborough Inter-Agency
                                                                  Group,
                                                                 Lancashire County Council,
                                                                 Eastcliffe County Offices,
                                                                 PRESTON,
                                                                 PRl 3EA.


                                                                 29th April,   1991.



Dear Colleague,

                       Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group

     I refer to my letter of 15th March about the final meeting
of the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group and the luncheon thereafter.

     This is just a brief note to say that whilst the venue of
the 11.00 a.m. business meeting on Friday, 10th M a y remains the
same (i.e. Town Hall, Castle Street, Liverpool, 2), the buffet
luncheon is now to be held at 12.30 p.m. in the L'Oriel
Restaurant, Oriel Chambers, Water Street, Liverpool, 2.

     In the event that you have not yet responded, could I ask
you to please let             (051 225 2436) know your intentions
as soon as po s sible.

     In case it is of assistance, a map is enclosed for your use.

                                       Yours sincerely,




                                   n.i ■   Mr . W. T w i s t ,
                                 '             Chair.
                                                                                                                                                          LIVERPOOL F.C. „
                                                                                                         HUM*                                             EVERTON F.C. ^

                                                                                                                                                             SO U T H PO R T ^




                                                   Q ueensw ay                                                                                                                                           _
                                                                                                                                                                                                         g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST-      \
                                                                                                                                                                                                             A NNE S T . £
                                              ?      Tunnel P       %                                                                                                                                    z    PO L ICE - c
                                                                                                                                                                                                         «   STA TION i



                                                           CH A PELSTR EET
  & BIRK E N H EA D




                                                                                                                                                Tunnel
                                                                                TOWN 2
                                                                                                         MOOR FIELDS
                                                                                                         STATION
                                                                                                                                           ( B ir k e n h e a d )   0H^f?CHIL                                                 T° WS2W
                             ROYAL LIVER
                                                                                                                  DW-E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kington
                              BUILDING                         m
                                                          W ATER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         t-      ISLINGTON
  TO WALLASEY




                                  CUNARD
                                 BUILDING.        uJ
                                                             BR UN SW ICK '*   ST                                                                                     S T .J O H N ’S
                                                                                                            W) C O O K ST                                             G A RD E N S
                        =    POR T OF
                            LiV E RPOO L
                             BUiLDING                          STATION                   2     MATHEW ST                                                                                                     %%
                                                                                                                                         street
                                                             j^ESSTBEET.DERBY
                                            ISLAND
                                                                                                                            MERSEYTRAVEL                                                                                             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Sc°rsr
                      MARiTlME
                      MUSEU
                                                                                                                            INFORMATION                                                                      ?>
                      GAR
                                                                               COURTS
                                                                                                                                                                                              (MAIN LINE &
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -       %
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5 CO PPERA S       C
                                                                                                                                                                                        *yQ   UNDERGROUND)                ui    HiLL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          w   PO LICE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST A TION
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .  ►
                                                                                                                                                             CLAYTON                                                          ST, HELENS,
Ofcifck                                                                                                                                                      SQUARE                                                           KNOWSLEY,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SAFARI PARK,
                                                                           CANNING                                                            RANELAGH ST R E E T                                                             PRESCOT

                              ALBERT
                              DOCK                                                                                                                          CENTRAL
                                                                                                                                                            STATION




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              m
                                    DUKES 0               W A P PIN G
                                                            BASIN



                              ALBERT
                               DOCK
                             COACK&                                                                                                                                                                                           UNIVERSITY
                             CARPARK


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       «

                                           Q U E E N 'S
                                             GATE                                                                                  N E L SO N S T




                                                                         FESTIVALPARK
                                                                         LIVERPOOL AIRPORT &
                                                                         SPEKE HALL




                                                  A visit to M erseyside W elcome                                    designer collections                                                                1 Liverpool Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                         2 Walker Art Gallery
                                     C entre w ill provide all the travel and                                        from top fashion
                                                                                                                                                                                                         3 Museum of Labour History
                                     visitor information you need. T hen                                             houses nestling                                                                     4 Sc Georges Hall
                                                                                                                                                                                                         5 Bluecoat Art Centre
                                     w hy not take a trip around the rest o f                                        com fortably w ith                                                                  6 University of Liverpool
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Art Gallery
                                                                 C layton Square Shopping                            an interesting range o f lifestyle
                                                                                                                                                                                                         7 Tate Gallery
                                                                 C en tre ? - it’s the ultim ate                     m erchandise and n ovelty stores.                                                   8   Merseyside Maritime Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                                         9   Open Eye Gallery
                                                                 in style.                                                  A n d a fter your shopping w h a t                                          10   Liverpool Cathedral
                                                                         L ight, bright and                          b etter than to relax over a ta sty snack                                          11   Metropolitan Cathedral
                                                                                                                                                                                                        12   Playhouse Theatre
                                                                 m o d em . A dventurous yet                         in our stylish Cafeteria?                                                          13   Everyman Theatre
                                     tasteful —for those w ho                                ■ . . v , ; - - ■■                                                                                         14   Liverpool Empire
                                                                                                                                                      C la yto n Square
                                                                                                                                                                                                        15 Philharmonic Hall
                                     appreciate lifis finer things                                                          :■■■         really is the shopping                                         16 Neptune Theatre
                                                                                                                                                                                                        17  Unity Theatre
                                     C layton Square is m ost                                                                            experience.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        18 Royal Court Theatre
                                     definitely for you.                                       CLAYTON                                               A n d it’s ju st w aiting                          19 Odeon Cinema

                                                  You’ll find exclusive                                                     ■            to be discovered b y you.
                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                        21
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Camion Cinema
                                                                                                                                                                                                           National Express Coaches
                                                                                                                                                                                                        22 Merseyside Welcome Centre
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Clayton Square
                                                                                                                                                                                                        23 Albert Dock Tourist
                                                       C la yto n Square Shopping C en tre, C layton Square, L iverpool 1.                                                                                 Information Centre
                                   SOCIAL SERVICES INSPECTORATE
                                   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
                                   North Western Region
■ s     .                          Warwickgate House
                                   Warwick Road
                                   OldTrafford
£ * v                              Manchester
                                   M16 0R U

                                   Telephone 061-872 6724 Ext



                                        Our ref:    529/SSI/16/9/19a ^


                                        Date: 22 March 1991


Mr W Twist
Chair
Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group
Lancashire County Council
East Cliffe County Offices
Preston
ER1 3EA.



Dear Mr Twist

HTTTRFORnOGH INTER-AGENCY (533UP

Thank you for your letter of 15 March 1991.

I am sorry that I have not been able to attend meetings of the above for many
months but have been kept in touch with what has been going on by
conversations with David Mason and                  Receiving the minutes of
meetings also helps.

I had an interesting conversation with Tim Newboume, the researcher and this
reminded me again of the tremendous amount of work which has been undertaken
on a collaborative basis by the Merseyside authorities. Quite an achievement
I feeli

It was kind of you to invite me to the last meeting of the group and to lunch
afterwards. I would like to attend and will do my utmost to be there. May I
pay on arrival?

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely




inspector


c.c. Mr
                                                                                                     (       ^ I [&)
                                               Limited by guarantee: Registered No. 726022 England       *        / 1   I


                                               NATIONAL INSTITUTE
           IK \bi>
                                               FOR SOCIAL WORK
       n     u a 1991                          Registered Office:

            Rh^'-VEO                           5-7 TAVISTOCK PLACE
           M W (-* f»tOM
                                               LONDON WC1H 9SS
                                               Telephone:   071-387 9681




                                                                    H         K    atcA      ,



                 \A & J y C      j




l e        us<u                           b>    K/i€$Jr^jOu                    IctStr        vvj^JC


Cuvo*                       uoskr                                       h>                           ^vjour

^CNW-C         CtA^ol         Uel|> '          T>
<Ct>       toJC            fcrt J O u                                   V m       S w r e        I Scud,


       Kerb's                  Oa j                  €J5£           ^jo*v          boiOC                     ©y
                                                    %
0o<*e           <*jCft>$i >           rcAok+i^              h>      tte           r c s p o ^ e

 HJUfeortjivcjW , 1*4 We l\vos(r <y<\JrcJfO d?
                    \U c       (v\C     &Voim,


X          Cola 1           rCA\CAAJOGS \S^JjO ^i                             S *J ^     £J Owt

 f t t a v t ^                tie       ftM^viA^es              C(- U e                lrv*<P A-^e/\a|

GpJOwf              io ^ k                                CA.SC^^Ov\                   c^Oa 1 k ' >          I

 V\o4icslA ja K c <Wo*<r CZ-C^jJc toaAvcfres. tk«_*
 VKC-         G f O \t p       l/H ^>ll    0>ftwcl          Vip                        'tX.C'


                              Cl A / V » V € 5 S « v A j        ^
/fv^              ^ jCx X x^ -fr 4                   iO to aaj
*jkr 4. o o * * t          *Jc tv*e 'touvjA tW u, L^vcr^ooi,
0la^4 tkcre i*kju \?c a*. t+dp>ct**J^                                  IoacWccm
 CL^VCA^ar^V.              J                         cc^l    }> a^<r       ^ar+ic»p<uOi /

 M C i K b O S     wCtt        kd.   <voVf\c_JI        J bwJr          I    tVov^U-V


 I ’d    W oj*      ^Ov.                   tw     CCL^C       ^jovt c       *     o   A   L   w

 ( ^ O v J C      tlr *                                OA.C- (VO            ^T>                   ^ ^



 KftAtt        & a a -VU       6»vcc-    a a o u A    ^t»r       HOu_r       -fwwe

  covSr    k < J f .                    U h tr   K t s L e a .




 i v N CvtffoAA-
                                               0772 264275


                                               15th March,   1991
 Ms   M.GfikscTK
                                              Mr. W. Twist,
                                              Chair,
                                              Hillsborough Inter-Agency
                                               Group,
                                              Lancashire County Council,
                                              Eastcliffe County Offices,
                                              PRESTON.   PR1 3EA




Dear Colleague,

                     Hillsborough Inter Agency Group

     The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group proposes to hold
its final meeting at 11.00 a.m.  on Friday, 10th May, 1991,
in the Committee Room, Town Hall, Castle Street, Liverpool,
2. ~;,;y

     As this is to be the concluding meeting, it was thought
appropriate to make arrangements for existing and former
members of the Group to meet informally following the
business meeting.

     Accordingly, arrangements have been made for a buffet
lunch to be held immediately following the business meeting,
at approximately 12.30 p.m., in the Town Hall.

     As an existing or former member of the Group I am now
writing to invite you to the buffet lunch (and the final
meeting if you wish), and hope that you will be able to
accept.

     May I mention that the cost of the lunch is not
expected to exceed approximately £5 per head, and it would
be very helpful if you could let Garry Davey (Clerk to the
Group, telephone 051 225 2436) know your intentions.

                           Yours sincerely,




             r   y     f f ' W* Tw^ s t f C h a i r




         V
                                                          *o
                                                          tn
                         1.1        .j f7H *      .

                        IN     •/       iiM /   i«»       m
                                                      <




S& T


       l/\)t w w \oW.           J




                  KWHNi CH tfiTfc*?,
                             mk> O^H
                                                                  Ms




                                INTER AGENCY MEETING

                                     8TH MARCH, 1991


      PRESENT:      Mr. W. Twist                Social Services, Lancashire, Chair
                    Mr.                         Social Services, Knowsley
                    Ms.                         Social Services, Cheshire
                    Ms .                        Social Services, Liverpool
                    Mr. D. Whitham              Social Services, Nottinghamshire
                    Ms.                         First Line Managers Group
                    Ms .                        BASW - Staffline
                    Mr.                         City Solicitor's, Liverpool




                    Apologies for absence were submitted from
                    Mr-. I        I (St. Helens), and Mr. D. Mason
                    and Mr. P. Marley (Liverpool).




NO.                                    MINUTE                              ACTION



457.             Inquests

                 The Group was advised that it now appeared
                 likely that the Inquests would continue until
                 after Easter, probably around the date of the
                 second anniversary of the Disaster.    With the
                 assistance of some Local Authorities and
                 agencies, a staff rota has been compiled and
                 maintained by              \?hich has served to
                 ensure that start cover nas usually been
                 provided during the Inquest proceedings.

                 The Group believe that a further, formal
                 approach to Local Authorities for assistance
                 at this late stage would not be productive.
                 It is recognised that this will mean that
                 there will be days when cover cannot be
                 provided, and that experience has shown that
                 this is a source of some concern and criticism
                 from families in attendance.
                             MINUTE                        ACTION



458.   Hillsborough Centre

       The Group noted that there had been no further
       progress since the last meeting on proposals
       to transfer responsibility for the future
       management of the Hillsborough Centre to the
       Family Support Group.  Indeed, it is becoming
       clearer that the Support Group will be unable
       to assume this responsibility.

       Liverpool proposes to reduce the staff team
       operating at the Centre over coming months,
       during which time the emphasis and focus of
       work on the aftermath of the Hillsborough
       Disaster will be redefined.  The proposed
       reduction in the size of the staff team and the
       associated reduction in administrative support
       services, together with severe budgetary
       pressures on supplies and services, have clear
       implications on the continuing free use made
       of the Centre and its facilities by the Family
       Support Group.  The Inter-Agency Group has
       been advised that these implications have been
       explained clearly to Support Group
       representatives.




459.   Hillsborough Interlink

       The Group was advised of certain difficulties
       hampering the circulation arrangements of the
       most recently published issue of Interlink.
       The Group asked                to investigate
       these problems with            HI at the
       Hillsborough Centre and, if necessary, to
       authorise (in consultation with Paddy Marley)
       expenditure from within the resources
       available to the Group in order to resolve
       any difficulties (subject only to the content
       of the edition of Interlink referred to being
       not out of date).




460.   Inter-Agency Support

                    reported that the "termination"
       staff conference at Burton Manor is to go
       ahead as planned on 15th March, 1991 and that
       at present 35 staff (mostly local) have enrolled.
       The intention has been to issue invitations to
       all appropriate staff, but enquiries from
       Authorities or agencies about the possibility of
                               MINUTE                          ACTION



  460.     any other staff attending should be referred as
(Cont'd)   soon as possible to              direct. The
           Group proposes to be represented at the
           Seminar by            and_______________
           As previously agreed, the Group will underwrite
           the cost of the Seminar (approximately £10.00
           per staff member attending) from within its
           own resources.




 461.      Bid to Trust Fund

                            reported that a formal approach
           had been made by letter of 7th March, 1991,
           to the Trust Fund seeking, on the basis of a
           general submission of information collated
           from all agencies, an unspecified contribution
           from the Charitable Fund towards the cost of
           the disaster response co-ordinating role.
           There were difficulties associated with the
           application, not least the making of a grant
           from a charitable fund to a Local Authority,
           but the point has been lodged with the
           Trustees that the co-ordinating role has a
           cost implication.   A response is not expected
           for several weeks but the Group asked Paddy        Paddy Marley
           Marley to keep Authorities informed.




 462.      BASW - Staffline

           The Group received a second report from Jane
           Harper on the work of the Staffline Service
           for the period Summer 1990 - February 1991.
           A copy of the report is enclosed as Appendix
           A to these minutes.

           In noting the report, and thanking
           for its submission, the Group asked
           Authorities to ensure that Line Managers are
           aware and can offer appropriate support to
           any staff in need of continuing assistance
           following the termination of the Staffline
           Service in July 1991.

           In relation to the costs of Staffline, Carol
           Wilkinson reported a request from BASW that
           in addition to a sum of £9,000 previously
           agreed for the extension of the Staffline
           Service from 1st May to 31st July 1991,
           additional sums of £400, in respect of
           accommodation costs, and £600, in respect of
           inflation, be met by the Group.  On the basis
           that the Staffline Service continues to be
           used by Authorities primarily for Hillsborough
           related work, the total additional sum of
  wo.                           MINUTE                            ACTION



  462.     £10,000 was formally approved as the final
(Cont'd)   contribution of the Group in respect of the
           BASW Staffline Service, such sum to be met
           from within the existing resources available
           to the Gr o u p .




  463.     Resources of the Group

           Members were advised of the following current
           position in relation to the financial resources
           of the Group, viz:-

                                         Balance     21,617.64

           Less                            £

           (a) BASW Contribution         10,000
               (Min. No.462)

           (b) Burton Manor Staff              500 approx
               conference
               (Min. No.460)

           (c) Interlink                       200 approx
               contribution
               (Min. NO.459)             10,700


                                         Balance     11,917.64


           It was agreed that Paddy Marley be asked to submit    Paddy Marley
           a final account to the next meeting and that
           proposals for its use be determined at that
           time.




  464.     Inter-Agency Group

           The Group reviewed its role and considered
           whether a continuing need exists to meet
           monthly, as at present, in order to progress
           a co-ordinated response to Hillsborough
           related matters or whether an alternative,
           less formal method of consultation could now
           be. put in place for use as and when necessary,

           The view of the Group was that whilst
           alternative consultation arrangements could
           be put into effect shortly, it would be
           appropriate for one further meeting to be
           held after the conclusion of the Sheffield
                              MINUTE                           ACTION




   464.    Inquests and following the "termination"
(Cont’d)   staff conference at Burton Manor and the
           second anniversary of the disaster, to wind
           up the business of the Group.

           As it will be the last meeting, the Group
           asked          to write to the Directors of
           all those Authorities which have participated
           and contributed to the pan-Merseyside response
           to the disaster and invite a representative
           to attend so that all outstanding items of
           business may be concluded satisfactorily.

           In addition, the Group asked Wilf Twist to         Wilf Twist
           compile and submit to the next meeting a
           draft report on the work of the Group since
           its inception, including its aims and
           objectives, its achievements and failures and
           any issues arising.




  465.     Gulf War

           A discussion ensued on the planning arrangements
           put in place by the Ministry of Defence and
           the Department of Health for dealing with
           casualties from the Gulf War and whether those
           arrangements could be considered satisfactory.
           It was reported that this issue was currently
           being addressed by the ADSS and by NWASSA and
           that it was understood that there was a view
           that the planning arrangements had been totally
           inadequate.  This view was shared by the
           Group and it was agreed that Carol Wilkinson
           should make appropriate representations to
           the Authorities concerned, ensuring that such
           representations are supportive and in line with
           those already being made by the ADSS and
           NWASSA.




   466.    Date of Final Meeting

           It was agreed that:-

           (a)   the final meeting of the Group be held       All to note
                 at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, 10th May, 1991
                 in the Committee Room, Town Hall, Castle
                 Street, Liverpool, 2; and

           (b)   an informal luncheon be held in the Town
                 Hall, at the expense of those
                 participating, immediately at the
                 conclusion of the business meeting and
                 that          make the appropriate
                 arrangements in consultation with Wilf
                 T wist.
                                                                                APPENDIX


REPORT FOR INTER-AGENCY MANAGEMENT MEETING 8.3.91. ON THE WORK OF THE
STAFFLINE SERVICE BETWEEN SUMMER 1990 AND FEBRUARY 1991.



The S ta fflin e S e rvice has grow n in c re a s in g ly busy o v e r th e last few months.
S ta ff S u p p o rt w ork has co ntin ued in several d if f e r e n t form s.

1-     TEAM SUPPORT.

       a)     E xternal co n s u lta n c y f o r th e Knowsley H illsb o ro u g h
              S u p p o rt Team co ntin ued u n til th e team was disbanded
              at the end o f O ctober 1990. This was p a r t ic u la r ly
              useful in th e p o s t- a n n iv e rs a ry and 'm in i- in q u e s t ’
              p erio d and to help th e team plan f o r t h e ir new
              sociai s e rv ic e s posts.

       b)     I have co n tin u e d to o f f e r s u p p o r t to social w o rk e rs
              who were c a r r y in g H illsb o ro u g h work alongside t h e ir
              normal w o rkload; m ainly w o rk e rs from Lancashire and
              Cheshire. The C heshire w o rk e rs , in p a r tic u la r,
              requested a g ro u p session to evaluate t h e i r H illsb o ro u g h
              experience and I was able to p ro v id e some useful feedback
              to t h e ir D ire ctor.

       c)      Since th e autum n, I have been v is it in g th e Liverpool
               H ills b o ro u g h C entre at r e g u la r in te r v a ls , o f fe r in g s t a ff
               s u p p o r t on an a d -h o c basis. T his has worked well and
               several w o rk e rs have taken a d va nta ge o f th e o p p o r t u n ity
               to ta lk to me.
               The in q u e s t has been an a d d itio n a l p re s s u re d u r in g t h is
               time, to g e th e r w ith in cidences o f violence at th e Centre
               and issues connected w ith th e C e n tre ’s tra n s it io n to a
               d if f e r e n t ty p e o f s e rv ic e in A p ril. S ta ff have been
               preoccup ied w ith t h e i r own c a re e r decisions and have been
               r e fle c tin g th e tir e d n e s s common to w o rk e rs s u s ta in in g w o rk
               o v e r long p e rio d s w ith a tra u m a tise d c lie n t pop ulatio n.

2.     PSYCHOLOGICAL DE-BRIEFING.

       A f u r t h e r v is i t to Towyn has p ro v id e d a useful o p p o r t u n ity to help
       w o rk e rs look at a s im ila r t r a n s itio n process. In A p ril, th e y move
       to a n o th e r b u ild in g and th e team has changed from a 'd is a s te r ’ team
       to a com m unity social w o rk team. I n t e r e s t in g ly , most o f th e w ork
       done u n d e r t h is heading has been w ith in d iv id u a ls , fo llo w in g violence
       at w o rk o r some o th e r tra u m a tic in c id e n t.

3.     CONSULTATION ABOUT WORK WHICH IS GIVING                         CAUSE FORCONCERN.

       T his w o rk has lessened as th e p ro p o r tio n o f H ills b o ro u g h work has
       declined and p o s s ib ly as w o rk e rs have f e lt more c o n fid e n t in t h e ir
       own s k ills .

4.     LINKING WORKERS TOGETHER.

       A t h i r d B u rto n Manor Conference was held in O ctober, 1990, fo c u s in g
       on th e theme o f te rm in a tio n - te rm in a tio n o f w o rk w ith c lie n ts and
       te rm in a tio n o f H illsb o ro u g h teams. Again, t h is was well attended by
        o v e r 50 people and th e W irral team shared t h e i r 'e n d in g ’ process w ith us.
        A d m in is tra tiv e w o rk e rs were in v ite d to t h is conference and several
        a tte nded. I t was h e lp fu l f o r some o f them who had alre a d y fin is h e d
        th e w ork to u n d e rs ta n d t h a t th e process th e y were going t h r o u g h was
        u n d e rs ta n d a b le and known about. A fin a l B u rto n Manor Conference is
        scheduled f o r 15th March, 1991. T his is intended to be a p o s t-in q u e s t
        get to g e th e r, to share th o u g h ts and fe e lin g s about th e in q u e st and to
        help w o rk e rs who will be f in is h in g th e w ork, f in d a p e rs p e c tiv e f o r
        them selves on th e meaning o f H illsborough in t h e ir life.

5.      INDIVIDUAL COUNSELLING.

        This has increased co n s id e ra b ly o v e r th e autum n and w in te r. There
        has been an increased demand f o r H illsb o ro u g h w o rk e rs as the in q u e st
        and p re s s u re s abo ut te rm in a tio n have taken t h e ir to ll:

        W orkers who have not had th e question o f te rm ifia tio n decided f o r them
        (i.e. by th e clo s u re o f th e team) have had to g ra p p le w ith th e question
        o f how and when th e y disengage fro m work w ith people w ith whom th e y
        have shared g re a t personal pain.

        There has also been c o n s id e ra b ly increased demand from w o rk e rs in o th e r
        s e c to rs o f social s e rv ic e s e.g. a s t a f f team concerned about th e amount
        o f violence from c lie n ts , a s t a f f team who were e x p e rie n cin g considerable
        personal and professional te n sio n s and had become unable to fu n c tio n
        p r o p e r ly as a team, members o f s t a f f w ith u nresolved g r ie f fo llo w in g
        th e death o f a close re la tiv e , etc.

        I have had tw e lv e new r e fe r r a ls in th e past tw o m onths ( th is in clude s
        C hristm as and New Year which v ir t u a ll y means tw o n o n -op era tional weeks),
        as well as o n -g o in g r e g u la r app o in tm e n ts w ith c lie n ts and a v a ila b ility
        at th e H ills b o ro u g h Centre.

        I have now reached th e p o in t at which I cannot ta ke on any more work
        in th e tim e I have availab le p e r week.

CONCLUSIONS.

I t is v e r y useful to have had th e S ta ffiin e P ro je c t extended u n til J u ly , since I
can now o f f e r s u p p o r t to s t a f f beyond th e time when most o f them will be
f in is h in g w o rk w ith c lie n ts and s e ttlin g in to d if f e r e n t jQbs. A d i f f i c u l t issue
c o n tin u e s to be lack o f u n d e rs ta n d in g and s u p p o rt at th e p o in t o f a p p ly in g f o r
new jo b s , on th e p a r t o f m anagers in th e o rg a n is a tio n who are not aware o f the
d if f ic u ltie s o f te rm in a tin g d is a s te r work.

An e n c o u ra g in g note is t h a t all th e 'o u tr e a c h ’ work I have done has e v e n tu a lly
paid o f f and demand f o r s t a f f s u p p o rt is in cre a sin g weekly.

I t would be ideal to b u ild on th e c r e d ib ilit y and v a lid it y a lre a d y established by
S ta fflin e to extend t h is s e rv ic e to all social s e rv ic e s personnel on a f u ll time
basis, b u t t h a t would mean a u th o r itie s com m itting fin a n c e to t h is in an alrea dy
d i f f i c u l t fin a n c ia l climate.

JANE HARPER.
STAFFLINE CO-ORDINATOR.

F eb ru ary, 1991.
 CIRCULATION SLI15

 File Ref:      £ S S       °\ / I___

 Date Out:          ^   '   \       \

 Circulated by:         ±±JL

-Msf1--------
 M-P< &i.bs45>K'\

 IIX . A   ±
                1
"Misa-
 ttr
 Mr
“Fff
*




                                             Ref:    GSS 9/1
                                                                           (3
    To:   ACI                                From:
          Inspectors                                 SSI NW Region
          SSI NW Region
                                             Date: 8 January 1991


    INTER AGENCY ACTIVITY roUOWDTO TTTT,TKttnRQUGH DISASTER

    1.    Colleagues may be interested in the note of the latest meeting of the
          Merseyside authorities.

    2.    The local authorities have continued to meet every two months.

    3.    The research is ongoing and I know from contact with NISW that NISW will
          be interested in the outcome of the research and are planning to use it
          to underpin same continued development and training work.       The whole
          business of local authorities’response to tragedies such as Hillsborough
          has received more attention .. -following the publication by CRUSE of its
          recommendations. The CRUSE working party was funded by the Department
          to work on recommendations for a strategy following disasters. I think
                           is aware of this project and also the work which NWASSA
           is undertaking.

    4.    I have been fascinated to see the way in which the Merseyside
          authorities have worked so closely together in relation to Hillsborough
          but that it has also provided a model for other inter Merseyside
          authority activities. Examples of this are the work on the Children Act
          in the Mersey authorities and the Merseyside Training Partnership.




    Inspector
3 1 DEC 1890
                       INTER AGENCY MEETING
  RECEiVEO
 N W REGiO*             14TH DECEMBER 1990




PRESENT:       Mr.   B. Walker         Social Services, Knowsley
               Ms.   A.                Social Services, Cheshire
               Mr.   D. _______        Social Services, Nottinghamshire
               Mr.   P. Marley         Social Services, Liverpool
               Ms.                     BASW - Staffline
               Ms.                     First Line Manager's Group
               Mr.                     City Solicitor's, Liverpool




                   _____________
               Ms. |              ('Co-ordifiator - Hillsborough
               Helpline) and Mr.             (Adviser - Hillsborough
               Helpline) also attended.




               Apologies for absence were submitted from Mr. W.
               Twist (Lancashire) and Mr. D. Mason and Ms.
                         [Liverpool).




               In the absence of Mr. W. Twist, it was agreed that
               Mr. B. Walker be appointed Chair for this meeting.
NO.                                MINUTE                                    ACTION



441.   Hillsborough Helpline

       Ms.                and Mr.              presented the second,
       six monthly report reviewing activity on the Hillsborough
       Helpline for the period 1st April to 30th September 1990. A
       copy of the review is attached as Appendix A to these minutes.

       The Group noted that the Helpline is scheduled to continue
       until 31st May 1991 and that the Trust Fund has agreed to
       finance the service until that date.

       (a)   indicated that in due course, it was likely that a
             further approach would be made to the Group on how
             best to proceed with winding-down the Helpline
             Service; and

       (b)   requested the Group to consider what plans are being
             made for Hillsborough related calls with the reduction/
             cessation of Hillsborough staff terms, because Helpline
             staff need to be aware of contact points etc. for the
             re-direction of appropriate calls.  (This matter is
             dealt with further in the following Minute).

       A discussion also ensued on the perceived value of maintaining
       a Helpline service for future emergencies/disasters and it was
       recognised that further consideration would need to be given
       by Officers to a possible future role, rather than the service
       just being allowed to slip away.

       The Group noted the report presented and thanked the represen­
       tatives of Helpline for attending the meeting today.


442.   Referring Work to Authorities

       Following on from the request from              (referred to
       in the previous Minute), Paddy Marley indicated that as
       Hillsborough staff teams close down within the various
       authorities, staff at the Hillsborough Centre also tleed to
       be informed of the systems for referring back the work of other
       authorities as clearly, the work of other authorities cannot
       be taken on by the Hillsborough Centre.

       In this connection, and following further discussion, it was
       agreed that all authorities represented on the Inter Agency
       Group, including those authorities previously represented,
                                                                           All to note
       should be requested to provide or confirm details of their
       contact points, names and telephone numbers for Hillsborough
       related work within the various geographical boundaries. The
       Group asked           towrite to authorities seeking this
       information and requesting a response, direct to the Hillsborough
       Centre, by 10th January 1991 at the latest. The Hillsborough
       Centre will arrange for the information provided by authorities
       to be disseminated to the Hillsborough Helpline.
                                            - 3 -




                                   MINUTE                                     ACTION



443.   Inquests

        It was reported that following the last meeting of the Group,
        discussions with relevant local authority staff and staff from
        other agencies had taken place in preparation for the Inquests
        and that, with the assistance of staff from Sheffield, Liverpool,
       .Wirral, Cheshire and, in the New Year, Lancashire, a service was
        being provided. The Inquests, which will break for Christmas -
        shortly, are scheduled to re-convene on 7th January 1991 and are
        not expected to conclude until mid-March at the earliest. The
        Group asked that     include      in the letter to all local
        authorities (referred to in the previous Minute) a request that
        each authority - reflecting the pan-Merseyside approach - make
        contact with                 as soon as possible about any
        facilities they are able to offer for the remainder of the
        Inquests. Generally, the Group recognises that because of
        geographical problems and the lack of commitment and input from
        some authorities, formal structured support from senior management
        to staff involved in the Inquests had been insufficient and
        therefore unsatisfactory. The Group hopes that improvements can
        be made in time for the resumption of the Inquests in the New
        Year, relying on the participation of all authorities.

       A suggestion was made that financial help, in terms of travel and
       subsistence, should be considered by the Group, but the under­
       standing of the Group was that some limited financial support
       was being made by the Trust Fund.


444.   Research

                      reported that Tim Newburn's research was well
       underway and that it was proposed to organise in-depth interviews
       with survivors and complete a general questionnaire between
       January and April 1991.

       The Group noted that Mr. Newburn found the information retained
       on the Database to be of very limited use and the Group expressed
       the hope that the Research Project would conclude with some
       recommendations about how best authorities can establish and
       thereafter maintain a Database in the aftermath of a major disaster.

        In response to a question,    _____________ advised the Group that
        he understood that NISW were exploring the availability of funds
        for securing eventual dissemination of the findings of the Research
        Project and that the Group "would not, therefore, need to earmark
        funds for this purpose from within its own limited resources.
*

                                             - 4 -

    m
NO.                                 MINUTE                                  ACTION



445.    Family Support Group

         It was reported that the Family Support Group have been unable
         to give detailed consideration, because of the Inquests, to
         correspondence from Paddy Marley about the transfer of future
         responsibility for the Hillsborough Centre. It was further
        .reported that proposals to wind-up the Trust Fund and disburse
         remaining monies were presently being drawn-up and that in this
         connection, arrangements had been made for the Family Support
         Group to meet with representatives of the Trust Fund on 18th
         December to consider this particular matter further. It was
         understood that the Hillsborough Centre Inter Agency Advisory     P. Marley
         Group would meet on 17th December to also consider this issue,
         and Paddy Marley undertook to keep the Group appraised of
         further developments.


446.    Hillsborough Interlink

        The Group was informed that the Christmas edition of the
        Hillsborough Interlink was out and in the course of distri­
        bution and that funding for this and a further two issues
        in 1991 had been made available from the Trust Fund.


447.    Inter Agency Support and Training

        The Group noted that because of the Inquests, the First Line
        Managers' Group had been unable to report on the feasibility
        of organising an in-house Disaster Training Seminar (utilising
        the skills acquired as a result of Hillsborough) for the
        benefit of local authorities and other agencies nationally.
        However, a report on the matter will be forthcoming following
        the conclusion of the Inquests.

        Jane Harper sought the view of the Group on whether another
        Burton Manor Seminar should be held post-inquest and around
        the time of the second anniversary of the Disaster, to
        represent a more formal conclusion for staff and to Heal with
        bad and uncertain feelings about ending work amongst some
        staff. The Group endorsed the proposal for a Burton Manor
        Seminar and on the basis of a cost of approximately £10 per
        staff member attending, agreed to underwrite the costs arising
        from within resources available to the Group, and asked Jane
        Harper to proceed accordingly.

        The Group also asked             to produce   and submit to
        a future meeting a second progress report on the work of the
        Staffline service, for the period from Summer 1990 to the
        present date.
                                            - 5 -




NO.                                MINUTE                                 ACTION



448.   Inter Agency Group

       The Group -

       (a)   confirmed its belief, as evidenced by the Minutes today,
             that there is a continuing need and purpose for meetings
             of the Inter Agency Group; and

       (b)   requested the Chair (Mr. W. Twist) to compile and submit
             to the next meeting a report summarising the role of the   Mr. W. Twist
             Inter Agency Group and the work it has undertaken since
             the Disaster, together with an outline summary of a
             future programme of work it will need to address and
             undertake.


449.   Dates of Meetings

       It was agreed that meetings of this Group be held at 9.30 a.m.
       on -

             (a)   Friday,    1st February 1991; and
                                                                        All to note
             (b)   Friday,    8th March 1991,

       in Committee Room 'C', Ground Floor, Merseyside Passenger
       Transport Authority, 24 Hatton Garden, Liverpool 2.
Tel: (051) 225 3413/3414                                      c/o W ALTON HOSPITAL
                                                              Rice Lane
                                                              Liverpool
                                                              L9 1AE
                                             *
                                              v
                               H I L L S B O R O U G H   H E L P L I N E


     1.     INTRODUCTION
     1.1    This is the second six-monthly report, following the transfer of the
            Helpline service from a Local Authority Service in Johnson Street Day
            Centre, to one provided by L.C.V.S. in accommodation rented from South
            Sefton Area Health Authority at Walton Hospital.


    2.      THE HELPLINE
    2.1     The service is still being provided on a 24-hour, 7-days a week, telephone
            basis, staffed by volunteers.   The continued commitment of the original
            groups of people has meant that it has not been necessary to recruit
            additional workers to Helpline.

    2.2     The Helpline continues to play its part in the network of Hillsborough
            related services and it is clear that the role of Helpline becomes more
            significant as, one by one, the statutory services scale down the level
            of their responses.


 3.         USE OF HELPLINE
 3.1       During the period week commencing 1st April 1990 to week commencing
           30th September 1990 lj311 calls have been received at Helpline

            149    for help related to Hillsborough
              5       for help from people who had suffered personal tragedy
                     unrelated to Hillsborough
           342     for information related to the disaster
           536     of an administrative nature
           104     wrong numbers                                         •<
           150     callers rang off, or were silent, or did not wait for the
**                   diverter operation to connect with-the per-sc^n on duty
            26    British Telecom Engineers calls

3.2        There has been a 15% drop in the number of calls compared with the previous
            six-months, however 11.5% of calls received were for help compared with
            11.0% in the earlier report.   There has clearly been less demand for
           information, only 22% of calls to the period 30th September 1990, compared
           with 40% to 31st March 1990.    This could be reasonably expected, although
           it is still a significant proportion.    The highest number of calls are
           of an administrative nature - from agencies, voluntary organisations and
           volunteers.    The Helpline continues to receive quite a lot of wrong
           numbers, mainly calls for the original extension numbers in Liverpool
           Social Services Departments.    There is evidence to suggest that some
           callers do not wait for the slight time delay caused in the diverters
—          when routing calls to 6taff on night duty, and some callers have "hung
           up", or felt unable to speak, when calls have been connected.
.3    From the spread of calls across the period it can be seen that there was
      a considerable increase in the number of calls in the weeks before and
      following the anniversary, which also coincided with Easter.    There has
      been one other peak, week beginning 20th May, when the bulk of calls were
      of an information/administration nature.    Some callers reported
      difficulties in contacting Helpline during the period 14th August to"
      8th October, when the City Council telephonists were taking industrial
      action and some calls may have be>|n lost during this period.

.4  The majority of calls continue to be from the Merseyside area, although
    a number of calls still come from other parts of the country.     All
    appear to lack the support of local groups which could offer help and
    understanding and indicates the link with Liverpool, and the understanding
•   t'hat it provides is very important to them.   In some cases^ Helpline has
  • been instrumental in making contact with the. Hillsborough Centre on their
   behalf.

5     Between May and July the Helpline leaflet was re-issued to Social Service
      Departments, Health Authorities, Family Practitioner* Committees and
      Dental Practices.   The exercise was well received and in a number of
      cases additional copies were provided.

6     There has been a reduction in the number of calls from people affected
      by personal tragedy unrelated to Hillsborough.   We were, however, asked
      to give assistance to people affected by the crisis in the Arabian Gulf,
      by passing on a telephone number issued by the Foreign Office.

7    We look forward to contributing towards the N.I.’S.W. research project
     to be carried out by Tim Newburn.


     STAFFING

1    756 duties have been covered during the six months, by 25 volunteers from,
     the following (original) organisations.

     Catholic Social Services         '                      32
     Childrens Society                                       40
     Diocesan Board of Social Responsibility                117
     Family Link Line                                        20
     Individual Volunteers                                   24
     Walton Hospital Relative Support Group’                396

     The balance of the duties have been covered by the co-ordinator and the
     adviser.                                 ...    —

     Again the service has been maintained by volunteers who give freely of
     their time and we are very grateful to them and the agencies they
     represent.

    Links with voluntary and statutoi-y agencies have been maintained.
    Volunteers have assisted at the Hillsborough Centre and participated in
    joint training experiences.    Five Helpline staff also assisted at the
    memorial, others also attended the service, whilst extra cover was
    provided at Walton.
        CONCLUSIONS
 5.1    As one would expect there has been some reduction in the number of calls
         received at the Helpline, but it also can be seen that as has been ,£he_
        experience following earlier disasters, a number of new referrals have
        been received during the period.    It is also clear that a number of callers
        have found the availability of the Helpline reassuring and have-been able
        to make use of "an understanding ear".    The new cases that have come
        forward tend to be rather more complicated than earlier referrals.     Th'e'
        callers appear to have been trying to shrug off the affects of the tragedy,
        their life and problems becoming increasingly complex in the process.
        In many cases it has been the intervention of a relative, friend, or employer
        which has resulted in the caller making contact with us.   vSuch calls
        neeed a very careful response, for often the 'presenting problem1 masks
        the callers need, for help; experienced staff have been able to help the
        caller express their real needs.

5.’2   As the statutory services disband their specialist teams the role.of
       Helpline in the vacuum that may follow becomes increasingly important.
       If this vital role is to be properly fulfilled Helpline needs to know,
       at an early stage, the plans and contingencies agencies are making.

       The lines of communication need to be kept open and any changes or
       developments relayed to us, a recent incident involving industrial action
       demonstrated the vulnerability of the system without information.

5.3     The number of calls to Helpline demonstrate the continued need for the
       service, particularly, with the scaling down of the services provided by
       statutory agencies.    The experience of the last six months suggests that
       a further extension beyond Spring 1991 may be desirable to allow a service
       to be provided whilst the effects of the scaling down is evaluated.




                       (Co-ordinator)
       ______________Adviser)
       21st October 1990
