DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
         REGISTERED NUMBER                                                             SUBJECT


   C     6 Z .         S o /S f c s o


                                                            P o o t J t x x l L / HiUs i o c r c o g V n                  Inc*.
            RELATED PAPERS




                                                                C f lt f r s b s   .
          BEGINS                         ENDS


                                   iA i m
        Title of F S
                                                      TRANSIT                                RECORD MATTERS

                                                                                                      Use spare space
                                        Referred to                                                 for changes/notes

  BRING FORWARD
  MARKINGS ONLY
         To Whom




                                                                                            Branch Review Decision
                                                                                            (see HQ permanent
                                                                                               instructions)

                                                                                            -D E S T R O Y NOW

                                                                                              DESTROY IN " ^ ~ '        (year)
                                                                                            (any date 2 to|5 years after
                                                                                                action)

                                                                                            - R E T A IN FOR SECOND
                                                                                            REVIEW IN -.         (25 years
                                                                                            after first action)

                                                                                            Boldly delete inappro
                                                                                                  item s

                                                                                            Signed


        be n o tea after                                                                    Name
       settlem ent by


                       f o r m                                                              Branch'X^I.Sw^Vr'

                                                                                            Date2 _0 J..

                                                                                            Index noted (initials)


                                                                                           (5513IL D. 8931921 60m 10,85 P.I. Gp. 2213/1
 EF 491
                                                                      :   t.-:r




                                                   CUST.CEZ/50/5A/0
   s SKP EH800673561                                                              -'V:;
  ,R
   Ri
    tR EF1CEZi5«l
                {r
      Reference #
                 5C E
                  ,1;Z/b70i1/b1/V01
                    “,
■I,m Minor
    Rt ROSEf
     \R

           FAA 7 3 7 4 1 1




                          >i'ir'prnir'"'Tin'Tfli
C & Z -.




           U 6 LI c



            /
                                                                           ..                                             .J
                                                                                                                           .


                                                                                             IA
                                                                                2 MARSHAM STRHl-T U>NE#N SWff 3EB~4ra p g
                                                                                TELEX 2222! DIRECT LINE U N -276. £ V ?1
                  THE DEPARTMENT                                                «:\V!TrUUAAtM         Oli.HA
                                                                                                     trtl#-.
                                                                                SWITCHBOARD 073-276 3000.         * Aj.         -w
                                                                                                                                 WiS *.-'.r ^=7



           a      OFTRANSPORT
                                                                                OTN 276          v     ■



                                                                                M y Rtf:
          Dr Laurence Martin
                                                                                Your Ref;
          Emergency Planning Coordination Unii
          Department of Health
   ^      Richmond House
          79 Whitehall
          London SW1                                                                        21    D ecem ber   1993



                           «2,■v v ~                          ■s                                 RECEIVED
                                                                                             t t pecm
          FACULTY OP PUBLIC HEALTH MEDICO HE                             k m s^gbncy
                                                                    - .HANMlNfl UNIfJ
          You sent me last Friday a fax of               Letter-, of- :Craapluuliip w c roro                                       /m
          John Ashton, of the Faculty of                     Health Mfedicine^of the
          Royal Colleges of Physicians,, f t & A l n q & '-number ofNjuestiohe about
          responsibility for . 'public'-.&&£*{ " a n d hy^ieme'v and for . the
          cocrdinetion .oi      rgy ssrv is«'s S i \ a .lumber y offsettings,.'
          ipo3-uding pufeK«    sspbrfc & x m l         .
J5i.
K .:
          I am sprry 'yoy ,-di4 . ^ ^ ^ e t a proper, reply., to this earlier -> as:
          I indicated, w® - ^r e unable to find out what had happened to the
          original letter.

                                        ,
        I have, how^v&r now looked at Dr Ashton.' a itfctar, The questions
        he raises are <jyit.e. wide-ranging) -and                 er precision may be
        needed. But I think it is possib.La tc’gi'vo &\general picture now
        of the answers to the transport points he raises, ,
                                                                     H "V '■' ;          • " ^ •--
                                          f -     : - /-■/ - • '     f. ■'%' '          # ^
        .The essential point is that dxf >l*rent'6Sp:Sofec_oi^s^f^ty\ in. b o t h ^
        pub4.ic|'and - private transport & m dealt ni£n yfoy 'different r
        organisations, depending on           relevant legisRation.                So for
        example safety for the construction on road vehicles, .both in ;
        public and private transport, is the .rei'pOASlbility of this „
        Department to establish and en^oi'ce, aJffilt in                    cases- 6nx-they' ~                                 j' n
        basis of legislation agreed in tlMi'r  :Suropesn :CcminaMtys: Similarly \
        legislation about the yise off v^hi.cles^on the r o a ^ l a r g e l y the
        responsibility of this         art:i;e>nt              -&n up, b’    it enforced..
       vgenerally by the police.     Enfc •pssrvHsnc of U ’      .« «ov«.nent of large
       \umbers of pedestrians/ wha"&                 ,§Vije=s^ is 'Essentially a
        matter for the pollce *                                   i
         'In jtiif .caae ,• o f . railways, '^hsf ;£a<3£                  d         u             e       to the
       j. p r iv a t is a t io n       of B r it is h k a i l ,    we a$U £i\~the -course ]££v-$*ov-ing
       • frdra a regime under which SR r.^va lesn i%
         •_ L._•
               V,^J—*_J..._ -- ...                       i■
                                                          ;••'Jb                i            »tS-.«
                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                  •
                                                                                                  'f•
                                                                                                    fiS’S’
                                                                                                         lvea fdr—
        establishing      iarg$ rtumtfer ■'of                                                          concerned
        with, railways, albeit ,under                                                       tfte Railways ;.
         Inspectorate, whieh^.^-'.'par-t'-                                                et'y^Ejcecutive, ''
         to a.situation■whe^e':' t ^ ' e ^ f e .                                    '   o f    Regulation
       /enshrined' i.r legislative                                                              of. rules
        effecting                    w‘e-ie t^^ssa^v,,                                      will be the
                                       ;     :    ' ■"     ;V;'            f            ^                             ^
^responsibility of the British Transport Police.                                                             i
                                                                                                             «
                                                                                                         r
 In the case of aviation, aafafcy regulation is mainly the
 responsibility of the Civil Aviation Authority* albeit often
 acting on the basis of international agreement as far as
 standards are concerned.                                   _ /

 This is obviously just an outline.    I would really n e e d m o r e
 detail about the import behind these questions to be clearer
 whether this is the kind of thing that is needed.

 Once again, I am sorry about the delay in answering this.




 D R INSTONE
 Head of Transport Policy Unit




                                                     /Ll


                            2\   D a c » i l i S l   Ct M W A N u S feft^ M O fC W B E ft, 93\LETT£«S'
                                                                             ft* 2 0 '

                                                                                Of


                                                   0

                                      Eft?EaG. ®93
                                              :NCV
                                   [PLANNtNr.
                                               unit !
To:    Dr            HP(M)3                          From: Mrs               PMD ASPU5

                                                       Date: ^N ovem ber 1993




    RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE DURING LARGE
                       GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE


1      Further to Mr       ’s minute of 21 September about the above, please find
       attached a reply from Mr           , a member of the Ambulance Policy
       Advisory Group who also specialises in emergency planning.

       I am sorry that we could not reply sooner.




Ext: 22931
503 EH
                                            ri



                                                                                     *t/lL
                                                             3
                     b rr

                                            cjvA   Uu^A~~~                                   a




                                                                      '(fa



             hhzlc            hyL'iv*
                                   tA v .
                                  *J    rrUtl                                   I           06b^ 741,^ 7 ' 4 - P - 0—1

                                                OXFORDSHIRE HEALTH AUTHORITY

                                                                                    Ambulance Service Headquarters
                                                                                                     Churchill Drive
                                                                                                          Old R oad
                                                                                                        H eadington
                                                                                                          0X 3 7LH
F T ho rn ley,   fa Si   LHSM MfiSrt.
Chief Ambulance Officer                                                                        Admin: Oxford 2 25577
                                                                                           Operational: Oxford 741200
Our ref:    FT /
Your ref:
                                                                                                   Fax: (0865) 741974

                                                                                           3rd November, 1993.
            M r.__________ 1
            NHS Management Executive,
            Room 503,
            Eileen House,
            80 - 94 Newington Causeway,
            London SEl 6EF.

            For the attention of


            Dear

                         ^          RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE
                                        DURING LARGE GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE.

                    Further to your FAX to me of the 21st September relative to the above mentioned
            subject, I would seek to advise as follows:

            1.In response to Dr. Ashton's enquiry as to who is responsible for Public Safety
                    Hygiene and the co-ordination of Emergency Services in the various settings, the
                    answer to this is:

                         a.        Public Safety - the Local Authority Licensing Committees have a duty to
                                   ensure that the concert organisers/football clubs, etc., are complying with
                                   the various statutory pieces of legislation which cover public entertainment,
                                   e.g. Pop Concert or any gathering where there is a large crowd likely to be
                                   in attendance at any venue requiring a licence from the Local Authority.

                                   Ill reaching their conclusions on whether to grant a licence for such an
                                   event, in addition to the organisers, they would consult a wide variety of
                                   people, not least of all the three statutory Emergency Services who would
                                   give them advice on such issues as crowd safety, fire precautions,
                                   medical/paramedical/first aid cover. The Emergency Services would of
                                   course in giving such advice, take account of the laid down Major Incident
                                   Procedures both national and local as well as the advice available from the
                                   Health and Safety at Work Executive.

                                   In the case of Sports Grounds and Stadiums, the Lord Justice Taylor Report
                                   provides eminently sensible guidance which, in the case of soccer grounds,
                                   is overseen by the Football Licensing Authority, as well as a Local
                                   Authority Licensing Body, responsible for Issuing a Safety Certificate and
                                   ensuring that the said recommendations are enforced in respect of seating
                                   capacities, fire precautions, crowd control and medical facilities.
                                 J-4- 41        Fr-'UIO                                 r           Ui&?~ 741974^-13      P. 03



     *
                                                                      Sheet 2.



                            b.         Hygiene - This aspect which covers such basic things as toilet facilities at
                                       large venues, provisions for food sale and storage, this is overseen by
                                       Environmental Health Officers and Trading Standards Officers who have
                                       the authority in Law to enforce proper standards of hygiene, general
                                       cleanliness and proper arrangements for storing, distribution and selling of
                                       food. They can, if necessary, prevent the issuing of a licence or dose down
                                       a site which is not complying with proper hygiene requirements as set
                                       down in a licence and issued by a Licensing Authority.

                            c.         Co-ordination of Emergency Services - The co-ordination of Emergency
                                       Services on site, in the event of a serious emergency, i.e. a major incident
                                       occurring, is the responsibility of the Police. Very large crowd gatherings,
                                       such as Pop Concerts, Football Grounds, Rugby Grounds, Cricket Grounds,
                                       etc., have a Police Control Point which all the other Emergency Services on
                                       site have communications with it and, as a consequence, are integral to the
                                       overall Emergency Services Command Structure.

                                           Whilst the Police co-ordinate the efforts of the Emergency Services on site,
                                           each Emergency Service under its established Command Structure would
                                           be responsible for ensuring that its own role was properly discharged in
                                           the event of a serious major incident or crowd disturbance.

                                           As an example of this, the NHS Ambulance Service would be responsible
                                           for the provision of:

                                           i.    All medical communications on site

                                       ii.       Medical/Paramedic/First Aid teams.

                                       iii.      Effective triage

                                       iv.       Treatment, care, and evacuation of casualties to the appropriate
                                                 receiving hospitals.

                                       v.        effective liaison with the other EmergencyServices and the
                                                 organisers/managers of the stadium or venue.

                            It may well be advisable for Dr. Ashton and colleagues to gain further information
                     from the following documents:

                     a.    “The Lord Justice Taylor Report on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster", published
                            by HMSO in 1990.

    /t               b     "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds"published by HMSO on behalf of the Home
                            Office/Scottish Office 1990.
                «.
         j Jd        c-    New HSE Guidance on Safety at Pop Concerts - shortly to be published by the
         I                 Health and Safety at Work Executive and will probably be a substantial expansion
1                          on the "Green Guide” referred to at (b) above.
U_>11-1-^-' 14:41      FHjM                                    1            0St.S''741§74'^-*3   K u -4




                                             Sheet 3.

   d.    "Emergency Planning in the NHS" - "Health Services arrangements for dealing
         with Major Incidents" HC(90)25/HSG(93)24.

   e.    "NHS Ambulance Service Operational Arrangements - Civil Emergencies"
         published by Regional Ambulance Officers' Group 1990.

   f.    "Dealing with Disaster/' produced by the Home Office and published by HMSO
          1992 - this document contains substantial information in its Annexes which may
         prove helpful to the Committee on Health promotion.

          I trust all the foregoing information will prove helpful to Dr.         and
   Dr. Ashton in pursuing their Public Health initiatives.


                                               Yours sincerely,



                                ^ /            F. Thomley,
                                 Chief Executive (Designate) Oxfordshire
                                 Civil Emergencies Adviser to the PMDU5/NHSME
             /

Dr L J Margin                           F r o m : Dr J Rees HCD-PH
EmergencV Planning
Coordination Unit                       Date:   22 October 1993

                                        Copy:

RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE DURING LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

1.   Thank you for your letter of 14 October.

2.       In his letter of 6 September Professor John As h t o n as
Chair of the committee on health promotion of the Faculty of
Public He a l t h Medicine asks several questions which I have
p r e s u m e d are to feed into this committee. The questions are
centred on public transport especially train travel, railway
stations, public entertainment at fixed venues and at
t e mporary venues and road safety especially for pedestrians.

3.   You have now requested obtained and collated expert
opinion from several government sources w hich answer each of
these questions.

4.      Public health medicine has not recently had a prominent
active role in these types of events as far as I know.            If
individual public physicians have been active, then I think it
is v e r y m u c h on an adhoc basis.      I could see that the
consultant in communicable disease control, as a proper
officer to the local authority could well be involved in an
advisory capacity as could the Director of public health.            I
have been asked in the past as a DPH to comment to an EHO
about whether a "rave" should go ahead because of the health
risks relating to illegal drugs.            There is also the issue of
major incident planningVw hich the District Director of public
h ealth should already have had an input and a role and
function defined, and this well might be an issue.            Certainly
there w ould be involvement of the CCDC and the local
environment health department should an outbreak of food
poi s o n i n g occur subsequently, even though the afflicted might
be from various other d i s t r i c t s . ) I cannot think of a further
public health gloss to put on C E i s . An d hopefully the health
p r o motion committee as indicated will, be able to define
b etter public health physicians role for such events.           I hope
this is of some help to you.




DR J REES
3W60 QH
X 45933
                                                                            RECEWEl


    OCT 12
                                                                           1 8 i)CT
    {Dr Martin                       From:     Dr               ]HP (M) 3? l m m m u w n r j i

                                              15 October 1993
                                     Copy:    Dr
                                              Dr
                                              Mr
                                              Mr
                                              Dr
                                              Mr
                                              Mrs

                RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE
                      DURING LARGE GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE


             In her minute of 16 September, D r k i n d l y invited
             my comments on your minute of 8 September about the
             letter from the FPHM.  I am sorry for my delay in
             replying due to my annual leave.

                  I agree with Dr    s comments, particularly about the
             range of OGDs involved.

F            I am sure that the HA would be responsible for providing
             medical advice on safety and hygiene to the local
             authority, police and other enforcement agencies who
             would have prime responsibility for these matters in the
             place where the event is held and on roads leading to it,
             provided that these agencies want advice.  If they do
             not, I suspect the HA's responsibilities are probably met
             once they have offered it. Clearly they would also have
             direct responsibility for ensuring that appropriate
             arrangements are in place to deal with the health care
             aspects of any accident, or, for instance, to investigate
             any outbreak of disease (the latter in collaboration with
             the LA ). f

             The situation with regard to trains may be less clear -
             it is to me, at any rate - but will be no different from
             normal traffic, just because the passengers are all
             travelling to the same event.

             I hope these comments are useful.  I would be very
             grateful if you could copy me in to further
             correspondence on this issue.




                                             Dr E   M Tebbs
                                             SMO,   HP(M) 1
                                             Room   606A SKH
                                             Extn   250-30/31
                                                                                 cew #5

                                        ^ a l h^>
                                   2-4 Cockspur Street
                                  London SW1Y 5DH
                                Telephone: 071-211 6078
                                 Facsimile: 071-211 6149



D r L Martin
Senior Medical Officer
Emergency Planning Co-ordination U nit
Departm ent o f Health
R ichm ond House                                                   Y our Ref:     15E0X5
79 Whitehall
London SW1A 2NS                                                    12 O ctober 1993




Dear D r Martin,


RESPONSIBILITY FO R PUBLIC SAFETY A N D HYGIENE D U R IN G LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE


Miss         has asked me to reply to you letter o f 13 September, in which you asked
for comments on a letter from John Ashton o f the Faculty o f Public Health Medicine
about the co-ordination of emergency services in a num ber o f settings.

I w ould offer the following:


SAFETY AT SPORTS GRO UNDS: D N H AREAS OF RESPONSIBILITY

Following its creation in April 1992, responsibility for three pieces o f legislation governing
the safety o f spectators at sporting events was transferred from the H om e Office to the
Departm ent o f National Heritage. These are the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975;
T he Fire Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987; and those Sections o f the Football
Spectators Act 1989 concerning the Football Licensing Authority. At the same time,
D N H also assumed responsibility for the Government's 'Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds'.


The Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975

This Act applies to all sports grounds w ith accommodation for spectators. Safety controls
are imposed primarily by safety certificates issued by local authorities for grounds
designated under the Act by the Secretary o f State. Any sports ground which has
accommodation for over 10,000 spectators and at which football, rugby union, rugby
league or cricket are played may require designation.


T he Fire Safety and Safety o f Places O f Sport Act 1987

Part III o f the 1987 Act bjought into effect a system o f safety certification and subsequent
inspection o f stands able to accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators ('regulated
stands') at sports grounds not designated under the Safety o f Sports G round Act 1975.
As w ith the 1975 Act, the safety certificate is issued by the local authority.


Safety Certification and Responsibility for Spectator Safety

The aim o f safety certification under both Acts is to ensure the reasonable safety of
spectators at sports grounds used for sporting events. The safety certificate establishes the
maximum num ber o f spectators that may be admitted, and its terms and conditions are
determined by the local authority, in conjunction w ith the police, fire and building
authorities. In doing so, the local authority is expected to comply w ith the advice
contained in the Department's 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds'. The Guide has no
statutory force, but its recommendations may be made statutory by their inclusion in
safety certificates.

Chapter 2 o f the Guide makes it clear that the responsibility for the safety o f spectators
lies at all times with the ground management, ie those who stage the event and/or
administer the ground. The Guide recommends that each club appoints a safety officer
whose sole duty is safety during an event. The Guide also highlights the need for the
preparation, in consultation w ith the police, fire and ambulance services o f contingency
plans, including arrangements for stopping or delaying an event, for:

        (a)    various emergency situations, including fire;

        (b)    possible crowd disturbance;

        (c)     coping w ith an exceptionally large number o f spectators arriving at the
                ground;

        (d)    the failure o f any detection, warning, lighting or communications systems
               or other equipment.

Although the num ber and disposition o f police is at the discretion o f the C hief Police
Officer in whose area the ground is situated, the Guide also stresses the importance o f a
w ritten 'statement o f intent' between the police and ground management, setting out the
tasks, duties and responsibilities o f each as to crowd safety. Dealing w ith disorder (as
distinct from normal ground operations and crowd management on the premises) will,
as in any other circumstances, fall to the police.

This advice is also reflected in paragraphs 3.1 and 6.1 of the Football Licensing Authority's
Guidance on Safety Certification, which was issued in May 1992 to local authorities w ith
safety certification responsibilities for football grounds designated under the 1975 Act.


T he Football Licensing Authority and the Football Spectators Act 1989

The Football Licensing Authority was created under the Football Spectators Act 1989, and
the Authority has been given the task o f ensuring the implementation o f Government
policy concerning safety at football grounds. In particular by:-

        (a)     operating a licensing scheme for grounds at which designated football
                matches are played;

        (b)     advising the Government on the introduction o f all-seated accommodation
                at Football League grounds and the national stadia; and,

        (c)     keeping under review the discharge by local authorities o f their functions
                under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975.
       (d)     ensuring that any terracing which is retained at 2nd and 3rd Division clubs
               o f the Football League meets the necessary safety standards.

U nder Section 13 o f the 1989 Act, the FLA is empowered to require a certifying
authority to include in any safety certificate such terms and conditions as the FLA may
specify in writing. The aim is to ensure consistency o f practice between certificating
authorities.

The FLA does not have any powers relating to safety certificates issued under the Fire
Safety and Safety o f Places o f Sport Act 1987, nor does its remit extend to Scotland.


Trafalgar Square - N ew Year's Eve Celebrations

D N H is also responsible for pulbic safety in Trafalgar Square, and the Departm ent is
currendy reviewing the handling of crowds there w ith a view to ensuring better safety
measures there in the future.


Non-Sporting: Events at Sports Grounds

Spectator safety at non-sporting events held at sports grounds is regulated by means o f the
Health and Safety at W ork Act 1974, and the Local Government (Miscellaneous
Provisions) Act 1982 or (in Greater London) the London Government Act 1963. I
understand that the 1974 Act is the responsibility o f the Health and Safety Executive, and
that the H om e Office deals w ith entertainment licensing law.


Lead Department for Accidents in Sports Grounds
                        E>ftJ l-f
In N ovem ber 1992, Miss-Stewart agreed w ith Brigadier Budd o f the Cabinet Office that,
notwithstanding the transfer to D N H , it continued to make sense if the H om e Office (or
appropriate territorial department) took the lead in the event o f a disaster, since action
following any accident w ould rest w ith the emergency services which remain under the
control o f the H om e Office. However, tfe»-depasrtHient would, o f course, be kept closely
involved.                                     hN



                                                              Yours sincerely,




                                                               Sport and Recreation Division
                                     mom
                                     12 QCTnil
                                      EMIRQBNCY
                                     PLANNING Ur   3m: Mrs           HEF(M)1
      Dr K Binysh
                                                       12 October 1993

                                               cc:    Dr L J Martin
                                                      Mrs           HEF (A)

      RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE DURING LARGE
      GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

      The letter from John Asht on from the Faculty of Public Health
      Medicine regarding public safety and hygiene, has been passed
      to me for c o m m e n t .

     f* In general terms where public safety is an issue the police
        will be responsible for public order and the fire brigade
        responsible for fire safety.  Where the Health and Safety at
        W ork    Act 1974 applies the Health and Safety Executive and
|       Local Authorities have enforcement powers.   In respect of
KCle^' hygiene, food authorities are responsible for enforcement
        except where Crown exemptions may apply.   In respect of
        licensing for large public events there are wide ranging
        requirements under different legislation, but generally
        enforced by the Local Authority.

      Safety on public transport is the responsibility of the Health
      and Safety Executive.  Hygiene on public transport is the
      responsibility of the local authority in whose area^the depot
      where trains or vehicles are kept.  The local authority will
      also be responsible for hygiene at stations and termini.

      Public entertainments at fixed venues such as football grounds
      or concert halls will be subject to licensing requirements
      either b y the County or the Local Authority.             There is
      extensive legislation to cover number of persons attending the
      event, seating and gangways, crowd control, fire safety,
      sanitary conveniences etc.              At these events the Local
      A u t h o r i t y w o u l d also be responsible for food hygiene standards
      inspections.

      Public entertainments at temporary venues such as pop
      festivals and street carnivals will be subject to requirements
      u nder licensing legislation, usually enforced by the Local
      Authority.   The Local Authority would also be responsible for
      food hygiene enforcement.   Local Authorities have health and
      safety and hygiene enforcement responsibility for circuses,
      except where there is agreement for the Health and Safety
      Executive to be responsible for health and safety matters.

      In situations where illegal activities are taking place such
      as raves and gatherings of New A£je travellers, the police will
      norma l l y act in order to maintain public order.      The Local
      Au t h o r i t y are also likely to be involved in enforcement of a
      wide v a r i e t y of legislation to prevent nuisance (eg noise,
      public health e t c ) .
Where people are gathered in large numbers in restricted areas
the police again will be responsible for maintenance of public
order.   Often these types of areas may be dealt w i t h in
aspects of the licence for the event and will be enforced by
the Local Authority.   For example, the licence might require a
set number of stewards to ensure safe access and egress to the
event a r e a .

The issue of licensing is v ery complex as there is a ver y wide
range of legislation involved.           In cases such as these the
Local A u t h o r i t y usually liaise v ery closely w ith other
agencies such as the Health and Safety Executive, the police
and fire brigade.

I hope this information is helpful.   Should you require
further information or wis h to discuss the matter I will be
plea s e d to be of assistance.




                               PEHO Rm 544B SKH
                               Ext 25345
                                                                                  j/ i
                                                                                 H O'CrT /


                                                             LEQ 4/4/1


OSD 6

RESPONS I B I L I T Y   FO R   PUBLIC   SAFETY A N D   HYGI E N E   AT   LARGE   PUBLIC
GATHERINGS

1 . Thank you for copying to Mr          the correspondence from
the Department of Health about|responsibility for public safety,
hygiene and co-ordination of emergency services at large public
gatherings.

2.   It seems to us that responsibility for the situations listed
in   the Faculty of P u b l i c / M e d i c i n e 's letter lies w ith a variety
of   organisations, although local authorities do have a major role
in   relation to public entertainments in particular. Taking each
of   the situations in order, our comments are as follows.

Public transport

3. The Department of Transport will offer detailed advice on most
responsibilities. Presumably, public transport operators have
primary responsibility, both at termini and while trains/buses                               0 fT
etc are in motion. There are special arrangements for safety and
other matters relating to the Channel T u n n e l . Under Section 89
of the Environmental Protection Act 1990, statutory undertakers
eg BRB, LRT are under a duty to keep their relevant land clear
of   litter  and  refuse.  The   Litter  (Stautory      Undertakers)
(Designation and Relevant Land) Order 1991 "and Amendment Order
1992, describes the land to be treated as relevant land in this
context.

Public entertainments at fixed and temporary venues

4. Local planning authorities may attach appropriate conditions
to any grant of planning permission for the development of
football stadia, concert halls etc, which are likely to cover
matters such as the provision of safe access, fire escapes and
so on. The fire services will be responsible for ensuring fire
escapes and equipment are maintained.

5. Local authorities are also responsible for licensing both
public   and   private entertainments   held  for   gain.   Public
entertainments     are  controlled   by   the   Local    Authority
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 or, in Greater London, the
Local Government Act 1963. These Acts give local authorites
powers to licence both indoor and outdoor events within Greater
London, but only indoor events elsewhere. Local authorities
outside Greater London can, however, adopt licensing control
provisions under the 1982 Act to control outdoor events in their
area. Private parties for gain are controlled by the Private
Places of Entertainment (Licensing) Act 1967 which has to be
adopted by individual authorities. Licences will contain a number
of terms, conditions or restrictions relating to matters such as
safety, adequate access for emergency vehicles,the provision of
adequate    sanitation  and   the  prevention   of    unreasonable
disturbance to people in the neighbourhood. Further details are
                                                                            X
     «           ft
ft           «




                 set out in paragraphs 42-57    of   the   enclosed   guidance   on   the
                 control of noisy parties.

                 6. The police have particular responsibility for crowd control
                 at football matches, carnivals etc and criminal behaviour at any
                 of the entertainments listed by the Faculty. The Government
                 propose to give local authorities and the police enhanced powers
                 to protect local communities from new age travellers and illegal
                 raves. The enclosed press notice issued by the Home Office
                 describes the proposals, which will be taken forward as soon as
                 Parliamentary time allows.

                 7. The Health and Safety Executive are responsible for drawing
                 up and, with local authorities, enforcing health and safety
                 legislation. HSE have produced draft guidance on health, safety
                 and welfare at pop concerts and similar events. The Noise Council
                 have drafted a code of practice to help control noise at pop
                 concerts. The HSE hope to issue their guidance shortly. In brief,
                 local authorities are responsible for enforcing health and safety
                 legislation at indoor leisure events, except where the local
                 authority is the "occupier" of the premises, in which case the
                 HSE are responsible for enforcement.      Outdoors,  HSE may be
                 r esponsible until the promoter assumes responsibility for the
                 site,   when  the   local  authority   becomes  responsible   for
                 enforcement of health and safety legislation.

                 Roads

                 8. The police are responsible for controlling the public in roads
                 surrounding public entertainment venues.

         \       9 . 1 hope this information is helpful. Please let me know if you
                 need anything else.

                 10. It would be interesting to know in due course what has
                 stimulated this enquiry and the depth of the Faculty's existing
                 knowledge. I suspect that they have only a basic knowledge of the
                 subject, but if they have more in-depth ideas in mind please keep
                 us informed.




                 Mrs
                 LEQ 3
                 A222   RH
                 Ext   8482
                 4 October 1993
               HOME OFFICE                                                           RECEIVED
               Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                            D irect line 071-273
                                                                                 2 1 SEP 1993
                                           Switchboard 071-273 3000                  EMERGENCY
                                                                                P!
                                                                                 LANNiNG UNiTl

           Dr L Martin                                         Your reference
           Emergency Planning Unit
           Department of Health                                O ur reference
           Room 603
           Richmond House                                      Date

           79 Whitehall                                                20 September 1993
           London SW1A 2NS




            Dear


            RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC      SAFETY        AND      HYGIENE            DURING   LARGE
            GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE


           Thank you for your letter of 8 September enclosing one from John
           Ashton of the Faculty of Public Health Medicine dated 6
           September.

           As you will know the responsibility for the aspects raised in Mr
           Ashton's letter lie with the police in conjunction w i t h the
           relevant local authority. It is also the responsibility of the
           organiser of the event to liaise with these authorities in order
           to ensure that contingency plans are considered.
                          j)ir
            In his letter M t Ashton makes reference to public entertainments
            at temporary venues etc. It is hoped that in October the Health
            and Safety Executive, Scottish and Home Office will publish a
            guide entitled 'Guide to Health, Safety and Welfare at Pop
            Concerts and similar events.' The guide is designed to give
            advice to organisers of concerts on the safe running of such
            events and to assist local authority inspectors,         licensing
            officers and fire officers. It should also help to improve
            consistency of enforcement at these events. The Guide will help
Olf3i{i6   'all those involved in organising pop concerts and other similar
            events such as 'rav e s ' . It deals with the many types of venues
            at which pop concerts can take place, such as purpose-built
            halls, buildings not designed for public entertainment, open air
            sports stadia and green field sites. It ma y also be appropriate,
            in part, to other events such as classical m usic concerts,
            particularly if they are held outdoors.

            In November a seminar is being run at the Emergency Planning
            College at Easingwold, Yorkshire to consider the pop concert
            guide and its implementation. As you rightly said a seminar was
            h eld at the College looking at crowd safety and man y of the
            concerns raised by Jkf A shton were discussed there.
                                 2^



 S 363
Two other guidance documents    are     available   from   HMSO   on   the
question of safety are:

 -  Guide to Fire Precautions in existing places of entertainment
and like premises. ISBN number 0013409079   (£8.50) and



-   Guide to Safety at Sports Ground.    ISBN 0113410018    (£4.95)
                                                    Sr
I hope that this helps you with your reply to      Ashton. If you
w ould like to use any of this materiel in your letter to him then
please do.


                                   Yours sincerely
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Reference          15E50X5
                                                                                      * E \ V
Dr John Ashton
Chair, Committee on Health Promotion
Faculty of Public Health Medicine                                            Richmond House
4 St Andrew's Place
                                                                                79 Whitehall
London NW1 4LB
                                                                           London SW 1A 2NS

                                                                      Telephone 071 210 3000
                                                  Direct Line 071 210 57 69
                                                  Fax Number 071 925 2 670

                                                  10 January 1994

RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC                SAFETY   AND       HYGIENE     DURING       LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

Your letter of 8 September indicated the Faculty's concern to
establish who is responsible for public safety and hygiene and
for the co-ordination of emergency services in a number of
settings.

In view of the amount of material received from numerous sources,
I thought it best to collate a series of annexes to this letter,
each dealing with one of the five areas of your interest, namely:

              public transport A
              stations and termini B
              public entertainments (fixed venues) C
              public entertainments (temporary venues) D
              large gatherings on roads E

To those I have added a number of general and other points under
assorted headings (F) ; and a short bibliography (G) compiled from
suggestions by various of my correspondents.    I make no apology
for including items with which you may be familiar.

You did not indicate what had stimulated this enquiry; but if
there are particular issues you wish to address in greater depth
I would be happy to pass them to the Department(s ) concerned.

I hope this is helpful.          I am sorry it has taken so long to draw
together.



                                                      \\J
                                                  DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                                  Senior Medical Officer
                                                  Emergency Planning
                                                   Co-ordination Unit



  C   A   R    I   N    G        F   O   R        T     H   E          1    9    9    0    s
                                                          ANNEX A



PUBLIC AND PRIVATE TRANSPORT


The essential point is that different aspects of safety in both
public and private transport are dealt with by different
organisations depending on the relevant legislation.       So for
example safety for the construction of road vehicles, both in
public and private transport, is the responsibility of the
Department of Transport to establish and enforce, albeit in many
cases on the basis of legislation agreed in the European
Community.   Similarly legislation about the use of vehicles on
the road is largely the responsibility of that Department to draw
up, but enforced generally by the police.

In the case of railways, the position is changing due to the
privatisation of British Rail.    We are in the course of moving
from a regime under which BR have been responsible themselves for
establishing a large number of operational standards concerned
with railways, albeit under the supervision of the Railways
Inspectorate, which is part of the Health and Safety Executive,
to a situation where there will be a greater amount of regulation
enshrined in legislative provision.        Enforcement of rules
affecting passengers, where necessary, is and will be the
responsibility of the British Transport Police.

In general, safety on public transport is the responsibility of
the Health and Safety Executive.

Hygiene on public transport is the responsibility of the local
authority in whose area is located the depot where trains or
vehicles are kept (see also Annex B).

Under Section 89 of the Environmental Protection Act 1990,
statutory undertakers eg BRB, LRT are under a duty to keep their
relevant land clear of litter and refuse. The Litter (Statutory
Undertakers)  (Designation and Relevant Land) Order 1991 and
Amendment Order 1992, describes the land to be treated as
relevant land in this context.

In the case of aviation, safety regulation is mainly the
responsibility of the Civil Aviation Authority, albeit often
acting on the basis of international agreement as far as
standards are concerned.

There are special arrangements    for safety   and   other matters
relating to the Channel Tunnel.
                                                    ANNEX B



STATIONS AND TERMINI


[Compare with Annex A]

The appropriate local authority will also be responsible   for
hygiene at stations and termini.
                                                               ANNEX C



PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS; FIXED VENUES


Local authorities have a major     role   in   relation   to    public
entertainments in particular.

Public entertainments at fixed and temporary venues

Local planning authorities may attach appropriate conditions to
any grant of planning permission for the development of football
stadia, concert halls etc, which are likely to cover matters such
as the provision of safe access, fire escapes and so on.      The
fire services will be responsible for ensuring fire escapes and
equipment are maintained.

Local authorities are also responsible for licensing both public
and private entertainments held for gain. Public entertainments
are controlled by the Local Authority (Miscellaneous Provisions)
Act 1982 or, in Greater London, the Local Government Act 1963.

These Acts give local authorities powers to licence both indoor
and outdoor events within Greater London, but only indoor events
elsewhere.    Local authorities outside Greater London can,
however, adopt licensing control provisions under the 1982 Act
to control outdoor events in their area.

Private parties for gain are controlled by the Private Places of
Entertainment (Licensing) Act 1967 which has to be adopted by
individual authorities. Licences will contain a number of terms,
conditions or restrictions relating to matters such as safety,
adequate access for emergency vehicles, the provision of adequate
sanitation and the prevention of unreasonable disturbance to
people in the neighbourhood.     Further details are set out in
paragraphs 42-57 of the guidance on the control of noisy parties
(see bibliography).

Public entertainments at fixed venues such as football grounds
or concert halls will be subject to licensing requirements either
by the County or the Local Authority.    LA Licensing Committees
have a duty to ensure organisers and clubs comply with statutory
legislation.

In reaching a decision whether to grant a licence the LA should
consult widely with, inter alia, the emergency services who would
give advice about eg crowd safety, fire precautions and medical
cover.   There is extensive legislation to cover the number of
persons attending the event, seating and gangways, crowd control,
fire safety, sanitary conveniences etc.

At such events the LA would also be responsible for food hygiene
standards inspections. Environmental Health Officers and Trading
Standards Officers have authority in law to enforce proper
standards of hygiene, general cleanliness and arrangements for
storage, distribution and and sale of food.
!


'   •                                  C-2



        safety at Sports Grounds; DNH Areas of Responsibility

        Following its creation in April 1992, responsibility for three
        pieces of legislation governing the safety of spectators at
        sporting events was transferred from the Home Office to the
        Department of National Heritage (DNH). These are the Safety of
        Sports Grounds Act 1975; The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of
        Sport Act 1987; and those Sections of the Football Spectators Act
        1989 concerning the Football Licensing Authority.     At the same
        time, DNH also assumed responsibility for the Government's 'Guide
        to Safety at Sports Grounds'.

        The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

        This Act applies to all sports grounds with accommodation for
        spectators.   Safety controls are imposed primarily by safety
        certificates issued by local authorities for grounds designated
        under the Act by the Secretary of State. Any sports ground which
        has accommodation for over 10,000 spectators and at which
        football, ruby union, rugby league or cricket are played may
        require designation.

        The Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Snorts Act 1987

        Part III of the 1987 Act brought into effect a system of safety
        certification and subsequent inspection of stands able to
        accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators ('regulated
        stands') at sport grounds not designated under the Safety of
        Sports Ground Act 1975.     As with the 1975 Act, the safety
        certificate is issued by local authority.

        Safety Certification and Responsibility for Spectator Safety

        The aim of safety certification under both Acts is to ensure the
        reasonable safety of spectators at sports grounds used for
        sporting events. The safety certificate establishes the maximum
        number of spectators that may be admitted, and its term and
        conditions are determined by the local authority, in conjunction
        with the police, fire and building authorities. In doing so, the
        local authority, is expected to comply with the advice contained
        in the Department's 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds' (see
        bibliography).    The Guide has no statutory force, but its
        recommendations may be made statutory by their inclusion in
        safety certificates.

        Chapter 2 of the Guide makes it clear that the responsibility for
        the safety of spectators lies at all times with the ground
        management, ie those who stage the event and/or administer the
        ground.  The Guide recommends that each club appoints a safety
        officer whose sole duty is safety during an event.      The Guide
        also highlights the need for the preparation, in consultation
        with the police, fire and ambulance services of contingency

                                                       \...plans
1


'•
                                    C-3



     plans, including arrangements for stopping or delaying an event,
     for:

          (a)   various emergency situations, including fire;

          (b)   possible crowd disturbance;

          (c)  coping   with  an   exceptionally   large number      -of
          spectators arriving at the ground;

          (d)  the failure of any detection, warning,    lighting or
          communications systems or other equipment.

     Although   the number and disposition of police is at        the
     discretion of the Chief Police Officer in whose area the ground
     is situated, the Guide also stresses the importance of a written
     'statement of intent7 between the police and ground management,
     setting out the tasks, duties and responsibilities of each as to
     crowd safety.   Dealing with disorder (as distinct from normal
     ground operations and crowd management on the premises) will, as
     in another other circumstances, fall to the police.

     This advice is also reflected in paragraphs 3.1 and 6.1 of the
     Football Licensing Authority's Guidance on Safety Certification,
     which was issued in May 1992 to local authorities with safety
     certification responsibilities for football grounds designated
     under the 1975 Act.

     The Football Licensing Authority and the Football Spectators Act
     1989

     The Football Licensing Authority was created under the Football
     Spectators Act 1989, and the Authority has been given the task
     of ensuring the implementation of Government policy concerning
     safety at football grounds.  In particular by:-

          (a) operating a licensing scheme for grounds      at    which
          designated football matches are played;

         (b) advising the Government on the introduction of all­
         seated accommodation at Football League grounds and the
         national stadia; and,

         (c) keeping    under  review   the  discharge   by  local
         authorities of their functions under the Safety of Sports
         Grounds Act 1975.

         (d) ensuring that any terracing which is retained at 2nd
         and 3rd Division clubs of the Football League meets the
         necessary safety standards.

    Under Section 13 of the 1989 Act, the FLA is empowered to require

                                                   \. . a certifying
I


:   •
                                      C-4



        a certifying authority to include in any safety certificate such
        terms and conditions as the FLA may specify in writing. The aim
         is to ensure consistency of practice between certificating
        authorities.

        The FLA does not have any powers relating to safety certificates
        issued under the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
        1987, nor does its remit extend to Scotland.

        Lead Department for Accidents in Sports Grounds

        In November 1992, DNH agreed with the Cabinet Office that,
        notwithstanding the transfer to DNH, it continued to make sense
        if the Home office (or appropriate territorial department) took
        the lead in the event of a disaster, since action following any
        accident would rest with the emergency services which remain
        under the control of the Home Office. DNH would, of course, be
        kept closely involved.
                                                         ANNEX D



TEMPORARY VENUES


Public entertainments at temporary venues such as pop festivals
and street carnivals will be subject to requirements under
licensing legislation, usually enforced by the Local Authority.
The Local Authority would also be responsible for food hygiene
enforcement.   Local Authorities have health and safety and
hygiene enforcement responsibility for circuses, except where
there is agreement for the Health and Safety Executive to be
responsible for health and safety matters.


Trafalgar Square - New Year's Eve Celebrations

DNH is also responsible for public safety in Trafalgar Square,
and the Department is currently reviewing the handling of crowds
there with a view to ensuring better safety measures there in the
future.


Non-Sporting Events at Sports Grounds

Spectator safety at non-sporting events held at sports grounds
is regulated by means of the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974,
and the Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 or
(in Greater London) the London Government Act 1963. The 1974 Act
is the responsibility of the Health and Safety Executive; the
Home Office deals with entertainment licensing law.
                                                        ANNEX E



ROADS. PEDESTRIANS AND RESRICTED SITES


Enforcement of the movement of large numbers of pedestrians,
where this arises, is essentially a matter for the police.

See also Annex D, paragraph 1

Where people are gathered in large numbers in restricted areas
the police again will be responsible for maintenance of public
order.  Often the type of area may be dealt with in aspects of
the licence for the event and will be enforced by the Local
Authority.  For example, the licence might require a set number
of stewards to ensure safe access and egress for the event area.

In situations where illegal activities are taking place such as
raves and gatherings of New Age travellers, the police will
normally act to maintain public order. The Local Authority are
also likely to be involved in enforcement of a wide variety of
legislation to prevent nuisance (eg noise, public health etc).
                                                          ANNEX F



GENERAL POINTS


The Health and Safety Executive (HSE)

HSE are responsible for drawing up and, with local authorities,
enforcing health and safety legislation.      They have produced
guidance on health, safety and welfare at pop concerts $nd
similar events (see bibliography).       The Noise Council have
drafted a code of practice to help control noise at pop concerts.

In brief, local authorities are responsible for enforcing health
and safety legislation at indoor leisure events, except where the
local authority is the "occupier" of the premises, in which case
the HSE are responsible for enforcement.    Outdoors, HSE may be
responsible until the promoter assumes responsibility for the
site,   when  the  local authority    becomes   responsible   for
enforcement of health and safety legislation.


The Police

In general terms where public safety is an issue the police will
be responsible for public order and the fire brigade responsible
for fire safety.   Where the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974
applies the Health and Safety Executive and Local Authorities
have enforcement powers.

The police have particular responsibility for crowd control at
football matches, carnivals etc and for criminal behaviour at any
of the entertainments listed by the Faculty of Public Health
Medicine. The Government propose to give local authorities and
the police enhanced powers to protect local communities from new
age travellers and illegal raves.     The Home Office Minister's
statement attached to Annex G describes the proposals, which will
be taken forward as soon as Parliamentary time allows.


Food Hygiene

In regard to food hygiene, food authorities (ie for this
statutory purpose, Local Authorities at District Council level)
are responsible for enforcement except where Crown exemptions may
apply.


The NHS

Health Authorities would be responsible for providing medical
advice on safety and hygiene to the local authority, police and
other enforcement agencies who would have prime responsibility
for these matters in the place where the event is held and on

                                               \...roads leading
                               F-2



roads leading to it, provided that these agencies want advice.
If they do not, it is thought the HA's responsibilities are
probably met once they have offered it.

HAs would also have direct responsibility for ensuring that
appropriate arrangements are in place to deal with the health
care aspects of any accident, or to investigate any outbreak of
disease (the latter in collaboration with the LA).

Other possible NHS roles include involvement of public health
physicians, CCDCs, and EHOs as appopriate in connection with
provision of a variety of professional advice, "proper officer"
functions, emergency planning and serious outbreaks of infection,
including those where victims come from outside districts.

Major Incidents

Finally, co-ordination of emergency services on site of a major
incident usually lies with the police, who are responsible also
for security and criminal evidence at the location.   [The term
"police primacy", once popular, has fallen into desuetude/}

An exception to this arrangement is that where the over-riding
consideration is a fire, chemical or radiation hazard, the fire
service takes overall charge until the site is declared safe.
                                                           ANNEX 6



BIBLIOGRAPHY


Guide to Fire Precautions in existing places of entertainment and
like premises.   ISBN number 0013409079 (£8.50)

Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.   ISBN 0113410018 (£4.95)

The Lord Justice Taylor Report on     the   Hillsborough   Stadium
Disaster, published by HMSO, 1990.

Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, published by HMSO on behalf
of the Home Office/Scottish Office, 1990.

Emergency Planning in the NHS - Health Services Arrangements for
dealing with Major Incidents: Department of Health circular
H C (90)25, since replaced by HSG(93)24, covering the Handbook of
Guidance (loose leaf binder).

NHS   Ambulance  Service   Operational   Arrangements    -  Civil
Emergencies, published by the Regional Ambulance Officers' Group,
1990.

Dealing with Disaster, produced by the Home Office and published
by HMSO, 1992.   This document contains substantial information
in its annexes which may prove helpful to the Committee on Health
Promotion.

Control of Noisy Parties - A joint guidance note produced by the
Department of the Environment and the Home Office, Sept 1992.

Government Action on new age travellers and ravers - statement
by Home Office Minister Lord Ferrers, 31 March 1993 (copy
attached).

Guide to Health, Safety and Welfare at Pop Concerts and Similar
Events: produced jointly by the Health and Safety Executive, Home
Office and Scottish Office, and published by HMSO, October 1993.
ISBN 0113410727.
                        68/93
N E W S RELEASE                         50 Queen Anne's Gate London SW1 H 9AT
                                        (N ig h t line 0 7 1 -2 7 3 45 95 )
  31 March 1993                                                      071 273 4610
                                        Contact Number:


         GOVERNMENT ACTION ON NEW AGE TRAVELLERS AND RAVERS -

                STATEMENT BY HOME OFFICE MINISTER LORD FERRERS



 Home   Office  Minister   Lord Ferrers    today  emphasised   the
 Government's commitment to tackling the problem of the terrible
 damage and disruption which has been caused by New Age Travellers
 and ravers.


 He said:


    "The Government is acutely conscious of the immense distress
     caused by travellers and ravers.

    "Today's proposals for reform will offer swifter action to deal
     with illegal campers who persist in flouting the law and they
     will toughen police powers to tackle large scale illegal
     camping where there is a threat to public order.

    "These measures are justified in the light of the serious
     mischief which they are seeking to prevent, and they will be
     welcomed by law-abiding citizens throughout the country.

    "The proposals will give the police additional powers which we
     think they will need in order to protect the communities which
     suffer so badly from these appalling invasions."


 The proposed Home       Office measures will:

            *     strengthen section 39 of the Public Order                Act   so as:

                            to apply the section to green lanes, byways
                            open to all traffic and other minor highways;

                        -   to reduce the number of vehicles required to
                            trigger the section from 12 to 6.

            *     give   the police enhanced powers              to protect local
                   communities from illegal raves.


 These powers will enable the police:

    •       to turn back anyone they believe is going to a rave site
            within a radius of five miles.
  •    to seize amplification equipment being used for the rave.

  •    to direct ravers to leave a site where they believe ten
        or more are gathered and that a rave will take place and
        the local community will suffer serious distress.

  •    failure to leave a site will be a criminal offence and
        vehicles or equipment needed to continue the rave may be
        impounded.



The Government intends to    take   these   proposals   forward   when
Parliamentary time allows.




NOTES TO EDITORS


1 . Home Office and Department of Environment proposals to tackle
illegal camping by New Age travellers, ravers and gypsies were
announced in written replies to two Parliamentary Questions from
the Rt Hon Sir Cranley Onslow MP.

2. The Home Office consulted with the Association of Chief Police
Officers, other Government Departments and also took the views of
the National Farmers Union, the Country Landowners Association,
and local authorities who suffered as a result of illegal
invasions of travellers and ravers last summer.
    CONTROL OF NOISY PARTIES




A Joint Guidance note produced by the Department
     of the Environment and the Home Office




                                       September 1992
                                         CONTENTS

Part I :       INTRODUCTION

Types of party                                             3
Purpose of guidance                                        8

Part II:       LOCAL AUTHORITY ROLE AND STATUTORY POWERS

Introduction                                               10
General police powers                                      12

A -   STATUTORY     N O ISE   NUISANCE

Noise as a statutory nuisance                              13
Noise abatement notice                                     14
Non-compliance with notice                                 15
Service of notice                                          16
Right of appeal                                            18
Penalties on conviction                                    19
Injunctions                                                20
Powers of entry                                            21
Entry into residential premises                            22
Powers of "confiscation"                                   25
Anticipatory notice                                        30
Return of seized equipment to owner                        32
Interpleader proceedings                                   38
Consequences of claiming seized property                   39
Deprivation orders                                         41

B -   PUBLIC     ENTERTAINMENTS

Public entertainment licensing                             42
A doption of additional powers                             44
Purpose of licensing                                       45
Consideration of licence applications                      46
Licence conditions                                         47
Definition of "public entertainment" - Caselaw             50
Offences and penalties                                     55
Confiscation of Proceeds                                   57

C -   PR IVATE    PA RT IES   F OR G A I N

Licensing of private entertainments                        58
Definition of "private gain"                               61
Offences and penalties                                     62

D -   PR IVATE    PA RT IES   NOT F O R G A I N

Local authority powers                                     63
E - HIGH COURT INJUNCTIONS

Reasons for seeking an injunction                      64
Injunctions in anticipation of nuisance                65
Injunctions under Environmental Protection Act 1990    66
Anticipatory notice                                    67
Procedure for seeking an injunction                    68
Cases of urgency                                       69
Service of Order                                       71
Breach of Terms                                        72
Undertaking as to damages                              73
Contingency plans                                      74

PART III: POLICE ROLE AND COOPERATION WITH LOCAL AUTHORITY

Providing assistance to local authorities              75
Cooperation and coordination                           78
Associated criminal offences                           82
Breach of the peace                                    83
Public Order Powers                                    86
Public nuisance                                        87
Powers of entry                                        88
Power of arrest                                        89
Power to seize equipment                               90
                                         1




                        CONTROL OF NOISY PARTIES




                                    Part I




                                 INTRODUCTION


1.   There has been increasing concern about the problems caused
by "noisy parties". Such parties are not a new phenomenon: for
some time past they have existed in various forms in the inner
city    areas.    In    response   to   this,   some    local   authorities     in
conjunction with the police have set up "Noisy Party Patrols" in
an effort to combat the problems which, in addition to noise, can
include illegal drinking, drugs, highway obstruction and other
criminal activities.


2.     In recent years the potential            for monetary gain and the
development of more sophisticated and powerful sound and lighting
systems has been such that the problems have become increasingly
severe.    This    has    been   highlighted    by     the   advent   of   parties
organised on a much larger scale.


Types of Party

3.     Many noisy parties are private, domestic ones held in the
home among known friends and for no private gain.                      Statutory
nuisance legislation is the only means of controlling noise from
these parties.         All other types of party share the common feature
                                          2

of being essentially a music and dancing entertainment to which
the general licensing legislation applies.                    "Pay Parties" was,
and remains, the most commonly used generic name given to them
and is used throughout this guidance.                   The different names given
to the various types of pay party reflect both their scale and
venue;     although some names are synonymous, others have changed
with fashion.


4.    Two or three years ago "Acid House Party" was the most common
term     used to describe a large scale pay party which utilised
rural venues and attracted numbers ranging from 4,000 to 7,000.
These events were also known as "Dance Parties" by the partygoers
themselves.       The most recent terminology to describe these large
scale events is "Raves".


5.     "Warehouse Parties" are lower down the scale of size with
attendances ranging between 200 - 2,000.                  They are generally held
in warehouses or some other permanent structure.


6.     The smallest scale of pay party is usually held in domestic
premises and is particularly associated with inner city venues.
Numbers attending may range up to about 100.                   These parties are
sometimes      referred     to   simply       by   the    generic    term   of     "pay
parties".        This is particularly the case in the West Midlands;
although here the expression "Blues Party" or "Shebeen" is often
used.


7.      Any of    these types of pay party can sometimes                    last    for
several days and nights.            The large scale parties held in 1989
and     1990   raised   a   whole   variety        of    practical   problems       and
difficulties for local authority environmental health officers
and police officers who were called upon to control them.                          This
led Parliament to enact the Entertainments (Increased Penalties)
Act 1990.
                                             3


Purpose    nf Guidance

8.    Some of the problems caused by pay parties involve civil and
public    health      law    which       environmental          health   officers         are
responsible for enforcing. Other problems involve the criminal
law which       the police         are   responsible       for enforcing.            It    is
therefore important that each agency is clear not only about its
own role and the statutory powers available to it, but is also
conversant with the other's responsibilities and powers.


9.     The Noise Review Working Party in their report of October
19 901 recommended          that    guidance      on     these    matters      should      be
provided jointly by the Home Office and the Department of the
Environment.      The guidance that follows fulfils the Government's
commitment to issue such guidance.                      It is primarily concerned
with    organised     pay    parties,       but    is    applicable      to    all    noisy
parties be they pay parties, private domestic, or other types of
party;     and is applicable to England and Wales but not Scotland
where separate legislation is in force.


                                         Part II


         LOCAL AUTHORITY ROLE AND STATUTORY POWERS

Introduction

10.     The primary role in preventing or abating noise nuisance
rests    with    local      authorities.         There    are    various      powers,      or
combinations of powers, which they may use to deal with differing
situations      and   types        of    event.    They    have     statutory        powers
relating to entertainment licensing; they can also take action
under noise nuisance abatement legislation, which includes the
power to apply to the High Court for an injunction; alternatively


        1 "Report of the Noise Review Working Party 1990" (HMSO 1990
         ISBN 0 11 752343 7)
                                                 4

they can seek an injunction using the powers available to them
under section 222 of the Local Government Act 1972. Environmental
health officers have expert knowledge on the subject of noise
pollution.       Local authorities are therefore best equipped to deal
with nuisance from noise, in terms of both technical knowledge
and statutory powers, although they may need police assistance
in certain circumstances.


11.   The following Sections A to E                     set out the powers available
to local     authorities           to deal with noise nuisance                      from noisy
parties.     Section         A    deals       with     the     general       noise    nuisance
abatement powers; these powers can be employed on their own, or
in combination with other specific powers,                             in respect of all
types of noisy parties.                     However other powers,             dealt with      in
Sections     B    to    E,       may    be    better     adjusted        to    dealing      with
particular circumstances and types of event.


Genera7 police powers

12.    Certain         problems         can    be     common    to     all    the    following
procedures, particularly the obtaining of the names and addresses
of the perpetrators of a noise nuisance where this is necessary
for the purpose of the service of a notice or the institution of
legal proceedings.           Because of the secrecy surrounding events it
may be difficult, if not impossible, to trace the organisers of
a party. EHOs or the police may become aware of a party only when
it is under way by which time notices can be difficult to serve.
Neither EHOs nor the police have any absolute power to demand a
name and address to be given to them. The powers of the police
are greater to the extent that they can request the name and
address    of     a    person          if    they     have   reasonable         grounds      for
suspecting that an offence has been committed.                               The police have
powers of arrest under section 25 of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984 if the name of the person suspected of having
committed or committing an                    offence is unknown to, and cannot
readily    be    ascertained            by,     the    police     or     where       they   have
reasonable cause to doubt the name given to them.
                                        5


A - STATUTORY NOISE NUISANCE
Controlled by: Part III of the Environmental Protection Act 1990


Noise as a statutory nuisance

13.     The noise nuisance abatement provisions formerly contained
in sections 57(a), 58, 59 and 69(a) of the Control of Pollution
Act 1974 were re-enacted with some amendments in Part III of the
Environmental Protection Act 1990 which came into force on 1
January 1991. Section 79(l)(g) of the 1990 Act includes within
the    definition   of    a    statutory    nuisance    "Noise    emitted   from
premises so as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance".


Noise abatement notice

14.     Where a statutory noise nuisance exists or is likely to
occur or recur, Section 80 requires a local authority to serve
an abatement notice.          This may be served in anticipation of a
noise nuisance occurring to seek to prevent it; or during the
course of a noise nuisance to seek to abate it; or it may be
served after the event to seek to prevent a recurrence of the
nuisance. A notice may require the execution of                  such works, and
the taking of       such steps,       as may be necessary        for any of the
foregoing purposes.


Non-compliance with notice

15.     If a person fails without reasonable excuse to comply with
any of the requirements of an abatement notice he commits an
offence and can be prosecuted.              In addition sections 81(3) and
81(4)     empower   the       local   authority    to   abate     the   nuisance
themselves and      to do whatever may be necessary in execution of
the notice and      to recover thecost from the person by whose              act
or default the nuisance was caused.               Paragraph 2 of Schedule 3
provides powers of entry and specifies the purposes for their
use.
                                  6


Service of notice

16.   Under section 80(2) the notice is to be served on the person
responsible for the nuisance, or, if that person cannot be found,
on the owner or occupier of the premises from which the noise
nuisance is emitted.    The person responsible for the nuisance
could include all or any of those involved in the organisation
of a noisy party i.e the organiser of the event, sound engineers,
DJs etc.   Where the EHO is able to identify the occupier      (or
host/organiser) or noise maker (disc jockey) the service of a
notice directly on that person may be possible, although it may
be unsafe to attempt to do so where a party is well established,
particularly if it is a large function. If it is not possible to
identify anybody by name it may be sufficient to address the
notice to "the occupier" of the premises.    If in addition it is
not possible to identify anybody as the occupier on whom to serve
a notice so addressed, then service of the notice can be effected
by affixing it to the premises.


17.   If the nuisance has not yet occurred, the notice is to be
served on the owner or occupier of the premises from which the
nuisance would be emitted.


Right of appeal

18.   An appeal may be lodged within 21 days of the service of the
notice. So far as noise nuisances are concerned, Regulation 3(1)
of the Statutory Nuisance (Appeals) Regulations 1990 provides for
notices to be suspended pending the hearing of an appeal only if
the noise to which the abatement notice relates is noise caused
in the course of some duty imposed by law. The     Regulations do
not provide for noise nuisance abatement notices to be suspended
purely by reason of the bringing of an appeal to the magistrates'
court, except in this one special case.
                                        7


Penalties      on   conviction

19.     From    1st    October   1992   the   maximum   penalty   on   summary
conviction for contravening an abatement notice will be £5000
plus    £500    for every day     the   offence    continues.2     Where   the
offence arises on industrial,           trade,    or business premises the
penalty is currently a maximum fine of £20,000 and there are no
plans at present to increase this.


Injunctions

20.    If the authority consider that summary proceedings would not
afford an adequate remedy, section 81(5) empowers them to seek
an injunction. The seeking by a local authority of an injunction
using the powers available to them in section 222 of the Local
Government Act 1972 is dealt with in Section E of this guidance.
The procedure         for seeking an injunction using        the powers of
section 81(5) would be similar, except that it would, of course,
first be necessary to have served an abatement                notice under
section 80.


Powers of entry

21. Section 81(7), in conjunction with paragraph 2 of Schedule
3, provides environmental health officers with powers of entry
into premises. The exercise by the authority of its powers of
entry to abate a statutory nuisance depend on an abatement notice
having previously been served (see paragraphs 16 and 17 above
relating to service of notices).




       2 As at the date of publication of this guidance the maximum
        penalties are £2,000 and £200 respectively
                                       8


Entry into residential premises

22.   Under paragraph 2(1) of Schedule 3 any person authorised by
a local authority may,       on production of his authority,           enter
premises at any reasonable time in order to establish whether a
statutory     nuisance   exists   or   for   the   purpose   of   taking   any
action, or executing any work, authorised or required by Part III
of the Act. However entry into premises under the powers of entry
provided by paragraph 2(1) cannot be demanded as of right in the
case of premises used wholly or mainly for residential purposes,
unless 24 hours notice of the intended entry has been given to
the occupier.


23.   The 24 hour notice requirement can present difficulties
where an EHO needs to enter residential premises quickly. In such
a case a warrant to enter the premises would need to be obtained
from a justice of the peace under paragraph 2(3) of Schedule 3.
It would have to be shown to the satisfaction of a justice of the
peace on sworn information in writing that reasonable ground
existed for entry into the premises for the purpose required.
In addition one or more of the following grounds for granting a
warrant would have to be established, viz:


      (i)      that admission to the premises has been refused;
      (ii)     that refusal of admission is apprehended;
      (iii)    that the premises are unoccupied or the occupier is
               temporarily absent;
      (iv)     that the case is one of emergency; and/or
      (v)      that an application for admission would defeat the
               object of the entry.


Paragraph 2(7) of Schedule 3 defines "emergency" as where there
are reasonable grounds to believe that circumstances exist which
are likely to endanger life or health and that immediate entry
is necessary to verify the existence of those circumstances, or
to ascertain their cause and to effect a remedy.             In the case of
(iv) above it will be for the EHO to justify the case in each
circumstance,    but in the instance of noise nuisance it should
be possible to support the ground for an "emergency" where the
noise nuisance is widespread and/or          people's   health is being
prejudiced through sleep disturbance.


24.     The issuing of warrants for the purpose of abating a noisy
party will invariably involve requesting access to a justice of
the peace in the late evening or during the early hours of the
morning.    Some areas have "duty" justices who take it in turn to
be available on the telephone at such times.       However, where this
is not the practice EHOs may wish to approach the magistrates'
clerk and ask for a list of justices in the area        who are prepared
to be contacted out of hours.       The      EHO should have   warrants
already drafted for such emergencies so that all that is required
is    for the justice of   the peace,   if    satisfied,   to sign the
warrant.


Powers of "confiscation"

25.    It is an offence under section 80(4) of the Environmental
Protection Act 1990 for a person on whom an abatement notice has
been served to breach its requirements.         However it is not an
arrestable offence as defined in section 24 of the Police and
Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and consequently the police have no
power to arrest a person simply for the breach of an abatement
notice. Moreover,    it has to be recognised that the threat of
prosecution may not always be enough to bring the disturbance of
a noisy party to a speedy end. The following            paragraphs deal
with the question of the powers of local authority environmental
health officers under the Environmental Protection Act 1990 to
enter property where a noise nuisance is being committed (after
obtaining a warrant if necessary as mentioned above) in order to
remove the offending equipment and thereby stop the nuisance
immediately.
                                        10


26.    It is necessary to be clear about precisely what is meant
by    "confiscation".    A   clear   legal      distinction      must    be   drawn
between temporary removal of property, as opposed to permanently
depriving an individual of property.


27.    Section 81(3)     gives a local authority power to abate a
nuisance and do whatever may be necessary in execution of an
abatement notice. The Government cannot give definitive guidance
on the interpretation of legislation. However, it believes that
section 81(3), coupled with paragraph 2 of Schedule 3 of the 1990
Act could be used by environmental health officers to remove
temporarily articles, such as audio equipment, in those instances
where abatement notices had not been complied with.                     Liverpool
City Council's recent and well publicised use of the powers in
section   81(3)   to    remove   audio       equipment   for    the   purpose    of
abating    a   noise     nuisance     supports       the       view   that     this
understanding of the legislation is correct.                   That action was,
however, taken with the authority of a warrant both to enter the
residential premises and to remove audio equipment.


28.     Because   of   the   specific    sanctions       for    compliance    with
abatement notices provided in the 1990 Act,                local authorities
should regard the seizure of equipment as a course of action to
be used sparingly and only in those circumstances where the noise
nuisance is very severe and persistent.             If an authority decides
to go ahead it will have to demonstrate in any particular case
that its use of the powers in section 81 (3) was reasonable, and
this would have to be judged as a question of fact in each case.
Although not strictly essential, local authorities would be well
advised to obtain a warrant before seizing equipment;                   and in any
event it may well be that a warrant will have to be sought to
enter the premises and the issue of seizure can be considered by
the justice concurrently.
                                          11


29.   The decision to plan to remove equipment may need to be
taken in conjunction with the police.               However, where a party is
already in progress EHOs will need to evaluate the consequences
of proceeding.      Entering the premises to remove the equipment may
trigger     a   hostile     situation     and    endanger    the   EHO.        It    is
therefore       essential    that   the    police    are    consulted     in   these
circumstances,      particularly if the party is a large one.                        If
considered appropriate the EHO may be accompanied by the police
whose presence may have the added benefit of pre-empting a breach
of the peace.


Anticipatory notice

30.   As noted in paragraph 14, Section 80 includes the power for
a local authority to serve an abatement notice in anticipation
of a noise nuisance in order to seek to prevent one occurring.
An anticipatory notice may require the execution of such works,
and the taking of such steps, as may be necessary to prevent the
nuisance occurring.          This power could prove useful if used in
conjunction with the powers in section 81(3). If the venue for
a party can be identified early enough, an anticipatory notice
might be served prohibiting, for example, the delivery of sound
amplification equipment to the site. If matters have reached the
stage where the venue is being set up, the notice could require
the equipment to be removed from the site. If the notice was not
complied with, the powers of section 81(3) enabling the EHO to
remove the equipment temporarily would be available.


31.   However, if matters have reached the stage where the party
has   got   under    way,     the   same       considerations      regarding        the
advisability of proceeding to seize the equipment, and the need
to consult the police, will apply as in paragraph 29.
                                            12


Return of seir.tx! tnpiipmemt to owner

32.    Although the Government believes that section 81(3) of the
Environmental Protection Act 1990 provides the necessary powers
to temporarily remove equipment, the Act provides no mechanism
to ensure its return to the rightful owners.


33.   This situation contrasts with the statutory provisions which
exist to deal with property which has come into the possession
of    the    police       in   connection   with    their     investigation     of    a
suspected of,fence, or which has been seized or come into their
possession by virtue of other enactments such as section 43 of
the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973.                  In these instances the
Police (Property) Act 1897 applies and if necessary provides for
any disputed question as to the return of seized equipment to the
rightful owner, to be placed before a court for a direction.


34.    The number of occasions where the return of equipment which
has been temporarily removed/seized by a local authority presents
difficulties - either because the identity of the owner is in
dispute or is unknown - are likely to be few.                    Nevertheless, it
is important that local authorities should be familiar with the
provisions and procedures which may be used to deal with such a
situation.


35.         When   the     authority   temporarily       removes    equipment        to
facilitate the prohibition or to restrict the occurrence or re­
occurrence of the nuisance where this has been required by an
abatement notice, the Government's view is that section 111 of
the Local Government Act 1972 authorises the holding of this
property.          Once    the   property    is    in   the   possession   of    the
authority it will owe a duty of care to the proper owner not to
release it to some other claimant.                  It is therefore important
that at the time of seizure a notice should be handed out to
those present detailing how and when the owner of the equipment
may claim it back.
                                  13


36.   The authority should specify the need for the owner to be
able to prove his or her ownership of the equipment.             It may also
be advisable to specify a specific period within which the owner
of the equipment must come forward.          The period should be several
weeks, as too short a period could conceivably result in the true
owner appearing after the equipment has been claimed and taken
away by somebody not entitled to do so.


37.   On the other hand, there may be instances where nobody comes
forward to claim the equipment and as a result it remains in the
custodianship of the authority.            There are no legal provisions
to deal with this situation.          Therefore,      once an authority is
satisfied that all reasonable opportunity has been provided for
an owner to come forward it should seek the assistance of its
legal advisers on how to dispose appropriately of the property.


Interpleader proceedings

38.   In the event of adverse claims by two or more persons, the
local authority may be able to avail itself of a process known
as interpleader to obtain the direction of the county court (see
County Court   Rules   1981.   0.33    r.6).     This      process would    be
available only where the local authority could show that it was,
or expected to be, sued in respect of the goods by two or more
persons making adverse claims thereto.


Consequences nf cl aiming seized property

39.   There are, at least in theory, potential implications for
possible self-incrimination, and therefore civil liberties, when
an owner claims back seized property but these should not be
over-estimated.    The offence        of    failing   to    comply with    the
requirements of an abatement notice can only be committed by
someone on whom the notice has been served.                If at the time of
service and equipment seizure the authority was not aware of the
identity of the person(s) on whom the notice was served, then a
                                          14

subsequent     prosecution        after    an    owner's    identity      had      been
volunteered would face the difficulty of proving that the owner
had in fact been served.           Proving ownership of the equipment is
also a long way from proving that the owner was the                           "person
responsible" for the nuisance or the "occupier of the premises".


40.   It would therefore be unlikely that an authority would wish
to prosecute       in a case where equipment               has   been    seized     and
initially no persons identified.               However, to help allay any fear
on the part of an owner about self-incrimination,                        the notice
handed out specifying how the equipment may be re-claimed should
also contain a clear introductory statement to the effect that
the equipment has been removed for the sole purpose of abating
the nuisance and not for evidential purposes or in connection
with any possible prosecution for breach of the abatement notice.


Deprivation orders

41.   Where a conviction for an offence under Part III of the 1990
Act has been obtained,            section 43 of the Powers of Criminal
Courts   Act      1973    might   be   relevant     to    the    question     of   the
confiscation of property. It empowers the court to make an order
("a deprivation order") that the offender is lawfully deprived
of his rights in property which:


      (a)   has     been    lawfully    seized     from    him    or    was   in   his
      possession or control at the time when he was arrested for
      an offence or         at the time a summons            in respect       of the
      offence was issued, and


      (b)   has    been    used   by   the     offender    for    the   purpose     of
      committing or facilitating the commission of an offence or
      was intended by the offender to be used for that purpose.
                                         15


B - PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENTS

Controlled by: Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act
1982; the London Government Act 1963

Pnhlic entertainment licensing

42.      Local    authorities have powers relating            to licensing of
places used for public music, dancing or similar entertainments.
These powers are likely to prove the most effective form of
control         over     noisy      parties      which    constitute        public
entertainments. Although circumstances may sometimes make the use
of these powers difficult - for example when no prior warning of
the date or venue of such a public entertainment has been given
to the local authority - generally they provide a strong weapon
which,    with     the     recent   increases     in   penalties    for    certain
offences under the relevant legislation, should prove a powerful
deterrent        against    potential    organisers      of   unlawful      public
entertainments of this sort.


43.     The public entertainment licensing law is contained in the
Local    Government        (Miscellaneous     Provisions)     Act   1982    or   in
Greater London the London Government Act 1963. Under these Acts
responsibility for controlling places which are used for public
music and dancing, and similar entertainments, is vested in the
local     authority.        These    licensing     controls   have     automatic
application:
        (a) outside Greater London - only to relevant indoor events;
        and


        (b)     in Greater London - to events held both in or out of
        doors


Adoption of additional powers

44.      Outdoor events held outside Greater London can also be
controlled by the licensing provisions in the 1982 Act but the
type of event is restricted to public musical events held wholly
                                     16

or mainly in the open air on private land.               It is important for
local authorities to recognise that these provisions MUST FIRST
BE ADOPTED by the local authority before they can have effect.
The procedure for adoption is set out in section 1 of the 1982
Act.


Purpose of licensing

45.    The purpose of the public entertainment licensing regime is
to ensure that events can be adequately controlled; that premises
used for public entertainments have adequate standards of safety
and hygiene;    and that any nuisance which may be caused to the
immediate neighbourhood is minimised.


Consideration of licence applications

46.     In considering     applications        for the grant,    transfer or
renewal of a licence , local authorities outside Greater London
must, and those within Greater London may, have regard to any
observations submitted by the police and the fire authority, to
both of whom applicants must give 28 days notice                  (21 days in
Greater London) of their intention to               make an application. The
fire authority is likely, when submitting its advice to the local
authority,    to have regard to such questions as the means of
escape from the premises, distance to exits, and the number of
people attending the event.


Licence Conditions

47.    The local authority has a very wide discretion over whether
or not to grant a public entertainment licence.                  It can,     for
example, take account of such things as the suitability of the
applicant and the needs and requirements of the public, including
the question of public order and the likely behaviour of people
at, and when leaving, the premises. It is also empowered by the
legislation    to   make   the   grant    of    a   licence   subject   to   any
reasonable terms, conditions or restrictions it may specify.
                                    17


48.      However,   when granting   a licence          for    a public musical
entertainment on private land outside Greater London a local
authority may only impose terms, conditions and restrictions for
certain purposes specified in the legislation. These are, broadly
speaking, to ensure the safety of performers and those otherwise
present at the event; to secure adequate access for emergency
vehicles; to ensure the provision of adequate sanitation; and to
prevent     unreasonable    noise   disturbance          to    people   in     the
neighbourhood.


49.   No such restriction applies to licences granted for indoor
public entertainments or those held out of doors                    in Greater
London. In those cases the local authority is empowered to attach
any reasonable terms, conditions and restrictions it considers
fit to the grant of a licence. While the exercise of this general
power in individual cases is a matter for each local authority
itself     to   decide,    the   prevention       of     unreasonable        noise
disturbance to people in the neighbourhood is clearly a matter
all will wish to take very seriously in this context.


Definition of "public entertainment"          -   Caselaw

50.   The legislation contains no definition of what constitutes
a public entertainment. It is therefore a matter of case law.
Some guidance on what is or is not a public entertainment was
issued in Home Office Circular No.95/84.


51.   The accepted test is not whether one, two or three, or any
particular number of members of the public could come into and
take part in the entertainment, but whether on the evidence any
reputable member of the public could do so.                   Gaining entrance
may, or may not, involve the payment of a specified admission fee
but it has been held that this is immaterial to the question of
whether or not the entertainment is public (see Gardner-v-Morris
(1961) 59 LGR 1987, and Frailing-v-Messenger (1867) 31 JP 423).
                                         18

52.    In the case of Severn View Social Club and Institute Ltd.-v-
Chepstow Licensing JJ [1968] 1 WLR 1512 it was held that guests
and members of a bona fide club are not members of the public,
but the device of becoming a member of a "club" merely on the
immediate payment of a fee and completion of an application form
has    been discredited          (see Panama    (Picadilly'i   Ltd.-v-Newberry
[1962] 1 WLR 610).


53.    The Government's view is that it is likely that events will
require     to   be    licensed    by   the   local   authority   as    a   public
entertainment         if large numbers of people are able to secure
admission simply upon payment of the required fee. This view was
upheld in the High Court in the case of Lunn v Colston-Hayter
(Times Law reports 28 February 1991). In that case the court held
that a requirement by an organiser of a so-called acid house
party for those attending to join a club by purchasing their
tickets not less than 24 hours in advance was merely a device
designed to avoid the necessity of obtaining the requisite public
entertainment         licence.    It was therefore impossible to regard
those who obtained such membership and tickets as having ceased
to be members of the public. The court allowed an appeal brought
by way of case stated against the dismissal by the Maidenhead
Justices of an information against the defendant alleging an
offence of providing a public entertainment without a licence and
remitted the case to the Justices with a direction to convict.
This   case has       considerably clarified          the application of       the
public entertainment licensing laws in this context.


54.    On the above basis,           parties where there is an admission
charge, large numbers of people attend, and there is music for
them   to   dance      to,   would   require    to    be   licensed    under   the
entertainment licensing law.
                                19


Offences and Penalti

55.   It is, generally speaking, an offence to organise a public
entertainment without a licence obtained in advance from the
local authority where one is required by law, or to be in breach
of any of the terms, conditions or restrictions the legislation
empowers the authority to place on a licence.       This applies
equally to private entertainment promoted for private gain where
a licence is required (see Section C).


56.   Stringent penalties for contravening licensing requirements
are now in place.    The Entertainment (Increased Penalties) Act
1990 came into force on 13 July 1990 and increased the penalty
on summary conviction to a maximum fine of £20,000, or six months
imprisonment,   or both,   in all cases where an event was held
without a licence or where a licence condition regarding the
number of people who might be present had been breached.


Confiscation of Proceeds

57.    In addition the Criminal Justice Act 1988    (Confiscation
Orders) Order 1990 came into force on 24 August 1990.   The effect
of this Order is to give magistrates the power to order the
confiscation of proceeds,    where they exceed £10,000,   made by
people convicted of the offences referred to in the foregoing
paragraph.
                                   20


C - PRIVATE PARTIES FOR GAIN


Controlled by:      Private Places of Entertainment (Licensing) Act
1967 (PPE)


Licensing of private entertainments

58.   The PPE enables all local authorities to adopt powers to
require the licensing of private events,            on a broadly similar
basis to public entertainments.          The powers available enable
authorities    to   control   events    involving    music   and   dancing,
including so-called "acid house" or "rave" parties, but can of
course only be used where an authority is able to establish that
an event has been promoted for private gain.


59.   Some organisers of "Acid House" and similar parties have
used the defence that such events are not a "public" event but
are "private". If the organisers of a particular event were able
in some way to ensure that it qualified to be regarded in law as
a private entertainment, it is likely that it would still need
to be licensed, provided that the local authority had adopted the
PPE provisions and that it could be established that the event
had been promoted for private gain.


60.   It is essential for local authorities to recognise that the
whole of the PPE must FIRST BE ADOPTED before its provisions can
have effect.     Local authorities who have not yet adopted these
provisions, or who are not in the process of doing so, may wish
therefore to consider whether circumstances in their area warrant
taking the necessary steps to do so.        Part II of the Schedule to
the 1967 Act sets out the procedure for adoption.
                                           21


Definition of "private gain"

61.   No definition of "private gain" was provided in the 1967 Act
itself which contained only an exclusion designed to dis-apply
the term in certain specific circumstances.                     However,      in those
London Boroughs where the provisions of Part III of the London
Local Authorities Act 1991 have effect an entertainment is to be
regarded     as    having   been    promoted       for    private      gain     for    the
purposes of the 1967 Act if, and only if, -


      (a )   any proceeds of the entertainment ie sums paid for
             admission; or
      (b)    any other sums (whenever paid) which, having regard to
             all the circumstances, can reasonably be regarded as
             paid     wholly       or   partly         for     admission        to     the
             entertainment; or
      (c)    where the entertainment is advertised (whether to the
             public    or   otherwise),         any    sums    not    falling    within
             paragraph (b) which are paid for facilities or services
             provided for persons admitted to the entertainment;



are   applied      wholly or      partly    for    purposes      of   private        gain.
Further,     if, in criminal proceedings relating to the provision
at any premises of an entertainment in respect of which a licence
is required under the 1967 Act without such a licence being held,
it is proved -
      (a)    that    any    sums    were        paid   for     admission        to    the
             entertainment or to the premises at which it was given
             and    that    the    entertainment         was   advertised       to     the
             public; or
      (b)    that any sums were paid for facilities or services
             provided for persons admitted to the entertainment and
             that the entertainment was advertised (whether to the
             public or otherwise); or
                                      22

       (c)     that the amount of any payment falling to be made in
               connection with the promotion of the entertainment was
               determined   wholly    or    partly    by        reference     to    the
               proceeds of the entertainment or any facilities or
               services provided for persons admitted to it;


the entertainment        shall be deemed to have been promoted                      for
private gain unless the contrary is shown.


Offences and Penalties

62.    As explained in paragraph 55, it is generally speaking an
offence to organise a private entertainment for private gain,
without a licence obtained in advance from the local authority
where one is required by law; or to be in breach of any of the
terms, conditions or restrictions the legislation empowers the
authority to place on a licence.             Paragraphs 55 to 57 describe
the offences and penalties under the Entertainment                         (Increased
Penalties) Act 1990, and the confiscation of proceeds which may
be made under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Confiscation Orders)
Order 1990 which apply respectively.


D - PRIVATE PARTIES NOT FOR GAIN


Relevant legislation : Part III of the Environmental Protection
Act 1990

Tstnal authority powers

63.    In the case of private parties which are not held for gain,
and which do not come within the scope of licensing legislation,
the powers available to local authorities are restricted solely
to    the    noise   nuisance   abatement    powers       of    Part   III    of    the
Environmental        Protection Act   referred       to    at    Section A.        This
includes the power under section 81(5)                to seek a High Court
injunction      (see   Section   E,   paragraph      66)        if   the   authority
considers that summary proceedings would provide an inadequate
remedy.
                                      23

E - HIGH COURT INJUNCTIONS


Reasons for seeking an injunction

64.      Experience   has   shown   that    applications        for    High    Court
injunctions can be successfully sought to prevent parties from
taking place and that it is possible to use this procedure at
very short notice to stop parties occurring even in circumstances
where the local authority has had very little prior warning of
the date and venue. Examples of court injunctions being sought
and obtained quickly are provided by action successfully taken
by Windsor and Maidenhead RBC, Brentwood DC and Newbury DC3 in
relation to acid house parties planned within their areas. Even
where an injunction does not physically prevent the party from
taking place, the penalties for infringement of the terms of an
injunction    - viz.    imprisonment       or    an   unlimited       fine    - have
"teeth" and are likely to be a strong deterrent.


Injunctions in anticipation of nuisance

65.   It is open to a local authority to seek an injunction to
restrain those responsible for a potential nuisance, using the
powers    available    to   them    under       section   222    of     the    Local
Government Act 1972. Section 222 empowers a local authority, if
it considers it expedient for the promotion or protection of the
interests of the       inhabitants of their area,           to prosecute or
defend or appear in any legal proceedings and,                  in the case of
civil proceedings, may institute them in their own name.                         The
section 222 procedure can be used, in association with the




      3 Windsor and Maidenhead RBC: Municipal Journal, 15 September
         1989, No. 37

         Brentwood DC : Municipal Journal,             1 September 1989, No.
         35

         Newbury DC : Municipal Journal, 29 September 1989, No. 39
                                         24

entertainment licensing legislation, with the aim of preventing
unlicensed parties from taking place.


Injunctions under the Envirnnmental Protection Act 1990

66.    Alternatively, an authority can act under section 81(5) of
the Environmental Protection Act 1990 which empowers a local
authority to take proceedings in the High Court for the purpose
of    securing     the    abatement,    prohibition      or   restriction          of    a
statutory noise nuisance, if they are of the opinion that taking
summary proceedings          for an offence under section 80(4)                    would
afford an inadequate remedy.


Anticipatory notices

67.     Obtaining        a court   injunction   can be        expensive.       A    less
expensive alternative which might prevent a party taking place
is the service of an anticipatory notice under section 80 of the
Environmental Protection Act            (see paragraphs 30-31).            The fact
that an anticipatory notice may be served on the owner of the
land may dissuade him from allowing the event to take place on
his land; and if anticipatory notices have been served, it does
allow prosecutions to be taken if the party goes ahead. However
the maximum penalties for infringement of an abatement notice are
not as severe          as those    for infringement of the             terms       of an
injunction.


Procedure    for   seeking an injimction

68.    The injunction procedure has been successfully employed in
association       with    the   entertainment    licensing       legislation            to
prevent unlicensed parties from taking place. In such a case the
procedure for seeking an injunction would be as follows:


       1.   The   local     authority must     resolve    to take       injunction
       proceedings in the interests of the inhabitants of its area
       if   it    is     proceeding    under   section    222     of    the        Local
                                           25

        Government Act 1972. In cases of urgency, the authority may
        wish to arrange for this function to be discharged by an
        emergency committee or sub-committee, or by an officer of
        the authority.


        2. An injunction may be sought from the High Court as soon
        as the evidence has been assembled. It will be essential to
        convince     the   Court    that    remedies    available     under   other
        legislation, eg the noise nuisance abatement provisions of
        the   Environmental        Protection    Act    1990   or   entertainment
        licensing law, would not succeed in preventing the party
        from being held. The Court will also require evidence of the
        following:


              i) the location of the party, ie evidence that it will
              take place in the area of the local authority;


              ii) the identity of the owner of the land and/or the
              organisers of the party;


              iii) that no licence has been granted for the party or
              that if an application for a licence were made it would
              not be granted because of,               for example,    inadequate
              safety provisions,           anticipated noise problems,        poor
              highway access, poor facilities for emergency vehicles,
              etc;


              iv) that the party would constitute a noise nuisance
              if it went ahead.


Cases   of urgency

69.     As already pointed out informiation as to the location and
organisers of pay parties frequently becomes available very late
in the day. In cases of urgency an ex-parte application can be
made - this means that the local authority does not need to serve
on the person against whom an injunction is being sought a notice
                                        26

that   it     is   seeking   an   injunction   against    them.    In cases    of
extreme urgency it may be possible to obtain an injunction from
a High Court Judge over the telephone. The local authority must
therefore be geared up to produce the necessary paper work, eg
the Writ,      Affidavit,     draft Order,     at very    short    notice.    For
example,      if a telephone injunction is obtained the Judge will
usually require the writ and affidavits to be filed in the court
office the next day that office is open and a Solicitor will have
to give an undertaking to that effect.


70.    In all cases it is essential that local authorities move
quickly to seek an injunction. It is important to try to get an
injunction before a party gets underway. Enforcement becomes more
difficult the more established a party has become and a Judge is
unlikely to grant an injunction which cannot be enforced.


Service of Order

71.    On obtaining an injunction a copy of the Order must be
served upon the people against whom the Order has been obtained.
If it is physically impossible to hand a copy of the Order to the
person it can be acceptable to show to a court that they have
been informed of the contents of the Order.


Breach of Terms

72.    If a person breaches the terms of an injunction then the
local authority can make application back to the High Court to
have   that    person committed       to prison   or     to have    his   assets
sequested. The Judge has power to impose a prison sentence but
may after hearing the application impose an unlimited fine as an
alternative to imprisonment.
                                                27


Undertaking as to damages

73.     The       advantages       of    the     injunction     procedure       are   clear
although local authorities will need to be aware of the fact that
before obtaining an injunction they may be required to give "an
undertaking as to damages". This means that if a person succeeds
in    having      the     terms    of    an     injunction      set    aside    the   local
authority will be liable for any loss that person has suffered
in connection with the interim Order - eg losses concerned with
a cancelled party.


Contingency pi axis

74.    In view of the need for quick action to forestall nuisance
from    pay       parties,        it    is     strongly      recommended       that   local
authorities and the police,                    in addition to close liaison and
sharing      of    intelligence,             should   jointly    prepare       contingency
plans, if they do not already have them.                       In the case of a local
authority it might include:


       (a)     Contact list/telephone numbers.
       (b)     Arrangements for contacting neighbouring authorities.
       (c)     Arrangements for obtaining authority, if necessary,
               (i)         for service of notice(s);
               (i i )      to obtain an injunction;
               (iii )      copies of Committee delegations.


       (d)        Means    of     identifying         land   owners,    obtaining      site
       details, maps, likely disturbance to local area, assessing
       the effects of the event.
       (e)     Supporting documentation eg:
                          - procedure for injunctions
                          - copies of legislation
                          - copies of licensing regulations                             and
                            conditions
                          - telephone lists
                          - check list of evidence required.
                                     28

                                Part III
  POLICE ROLE AND COOPERATION WITH LOCAL AUTHORITY


Prnvicling    anaistance to local authorities

75.    The police have an important supportive role to play in
providing back-up assistance to local authority environmental
health officers who are called upon to deal with noise                     from
parties which are disorderly or violent,               or could become so.
Responsibility for maintaining public order, and for dealing with
the    criminal   activities   which      can   be   associated    with   noisy
parties      (ie sale of alcohol,    drug usage,       illegal parking and
highway obstruction,      and reckless or drunken driving),               rests
directly with the police.


76.    Moreover, the police, unlike EHOs, are trained to deal with
people who may have consumed excessive amounts of alcohol and/or
drugs.       They are also likely to have the experience to know
whether and what type of drugs are being taken at any particular
type    of   party.   These    are   important       operational    issues   to
consider before deciding to stop a party,              and the police will
wish to assess them in consultation with the environmental health
officer.


77.    As already noted in paragraphs 29 and 31,              environmental
health officers will clearly need to seek police assistance if
they are called upon to deal with a party which is under way, and
has become so disorderly that there could be a threat to their
own safety if they attempted to enter the premises on their own;
or there were a risk that any attempt to do so could spark off
an outbreak of worse disorder or even violence.
                                              29


Cooperation and coordination

78.      Generally there is already a good working                          relationship
between the police and environmental health officers. A major
difficulty in dealing with pay parties                          is the secrecy often
surrounding the event. It is important that local authorities and
the police should co-operate, share intelligence and co-ordinate
action.


79.     The problem is not confined to the area of any one local
authority          or    police       authority    and    may   require     co-operation
between       a     number       of    authorities       across   a   wide     area.    The
continuous change in location of party venues, which can be as
much     as    400       miles     apart,    may    necessitate       the     sharing    of
intelligence not only on a regional but on a national basis.


80.     In April 1990 the Midlands Pay Party Unit was set up for the
purpose       of    gathering         information    and    intelligence       about    the
likely occurrence of pay parties and the co-ordination of action
with regard to them. The Midlands Unit covers the areas of the
police     forces         of   West     Midlands,    Warwickshire,          West   Mercia,
Leicestershire, Northamptonshire and Staffordshire. Up to October
1991    it had          recorded      in excess     of   500 parties      and no major
illegal party (2,000 plus attendance) had occurred since June
1990.


81.    A similar Pay Party Unit set up in October 1989 to cover the
South-East during the period when there was a particularly bad
spate of unlicensed pay parties was disbanded in October 1990.


Associated criminal offences

82.     Apart from noise disturbance, there are many other problems
which can occur in association with noisy parties and which may
contribute to the general disturbance to a neighbourhood caused
by a party. Activities such as the illegal sale of alcohol, drug
                                30

usage, illegal parking and highway obstruction, and reckless or
drunken driving    are all criminal offences in respect of which
the police have a wide range of powers to take action.


Breach of the Peace

83.   The police have wide powers at common law,    including the
power to arrest people and enter premises without warrant,       to
enable them to deal with or prevent a breach of the peace or a
public nuisance.


84.   If disturbance from a party is such as to warrant the police
taking action to prevent or stop the party themselves, the police
usually tend to rely mainly on their powers to stop or prevent
breaches of the peace. Violence,     actual or apprehended,   is an
essential ingredient of breach of the peace. The Court of Appeal
in R v Howell (1982) provided a useful definition:    "There is a
breach of the peace whenever harm is actually done or is likely
to be done to a person or in his presence to his property or a
person is in fear of being harmed through an assault, an affray,
a riot, unlawful assembly or other disturbance".


85.   The use of this power depends very much on the circumstances
of the case and could be open to legal challenge. Use of breach
of the peace powers    to close down a party may be easier to
justify because complaints from members of the public, some of
whom may be threatening to take the law into their own hands, can
provide a stronger basis for action. Sometimes the threat to put
a stop to the party under breach of the peace powers has been
sufficient to persuade those concerned to pack up voluntarily.
Although the police have used breach of the peace powers to
cordon off the planned venue for an acid house party, using the
power to try to prevent a party is more vulnerable to criticism
even if they may be able to point to clear evidence of breaches
of the peace resulting from previous parties.
                                              31


Public Order Powers

86.     Apart from breach of the peace, there are in relation to
open air parties, powers under section 14 of the Public Order Act
1986 which could be applied to impose conditions as to numbers
and duration which,            if ignored, would give a power of arrest.
However,     the power to            impose conditions         only applies         if the
senior police officer reasonably believes that there will be
serious public disorder,               serious damage to property,                serious
disruption       to    the    life    of   the     community    or     intimidation       of
individuals, established or contemplated, and that the imposition
of conditions          is    necessary to prevent           one    or more     of    these
occurring.      Mere annoyance or inconvenience is insufficient to
warrant the use of this power.


Public    nui Fiance


87.     A public nuisance is "an act, not warranted by law...the
effect of which is to endanger the life, health, property, morals
or comfort       of the public,            or to obstruct         the public        in the
exercise or enjoyment of rights common to all of Her Majesty's
Subjects".4       Public nuisance and conspiracy to commit public
nuisance are arrestable offences. The offence of committing or
conspiring to commit a public nuisance is triable either way and
the     Crown    Court       can   impose     unlimited        fines    and    terms      of
imprisonment.         However,       although a few prosecutions have been
instigated,      this is a difficult area to enforce.                      Substantial
obstruction,          inconvenience or damage must                be   involved     and    a
considerable number of persons or a section of the public must
be affected. It would not be enough to show that a few neighbours
had been disturbed or that motorists found it more difficult to
drive    their    cars       along    roads      in   the   vicinity.     It   would      be



        4 Archibold's Criminal Pleading and Practice, 43rd ed (1988)
           paras 27-44 and quoted in Clerk and Lindsell on Torts,
           16th ed (1989) para 24-02.
                                       32

necessary to prove intent or recklessness on the part of the
accused and that the action was unlawful,               and the disruption
caused must be balanced against the "nuisance" caused by other
permitted public events.


Powers of entry

88.    Powers of entry without a warrant, in the context of public
entertainment licensing,          are normally restricted to permitting
entry to a licensed place in order to establish whether or not
the terms, conditions or restrictions attached to the licence are
being complied with. The licensing laws empower the police to
enter,     with    a warrant,    any place   where     they have     reason    to
suspect that a licensing offence is being committed.


Power nf arrest

89.    The police do not have specific powers to arrest anyone who
commits     an offence against the entertainment              licensing laws.
However, they do have a general power of arrest under section 25
of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, which they may use
when certain conditions are met which make the service of a
summons inappropriate or impracticable;              for example failure to
give name and address, or risk of causing injury or damage to
people or property.


Power to seize equipment

90.    The police have no general power which would enable them to
seize equipment at noisy parties.            They have powers in section
19    of   the    Police   and   Criminal   Evidence    Act   1984   to   seize
equipment for evidential purposes.           The use of these powers is
limited to situations in which an offence has been committed and
it is necessary to seize material which might be needed                       for
evidential purposes in order to prevent it being lost, stolen or
destroyed. There must be sufficient grounds to justify seizing
the property to prevent it from being lost, stolen or destroyed.
                                INDEX

Abatement notice                                           14
                    in anticipation                        17,  30
                                                           67
                 non-compliance                            15
                 service of                                16
Acid House parties                                        4, 58
Appeals                                                 18
Associated criminal offences                              82

Blues parties                                            6
Breach of the peace                                      83

Confiscation, definition                                 26
              equipment, powers of                       25,   27
              of proceeds                                57
Contingency plans                                        74
Control of Pollution Act 1974                            13
Coordinating action                                      78
County Court Rules 1981                                  38
Criminal Justice Act 1988
         (Confiscation Orders) Order 1990                57,   62

Dance parties                                            4
Deprivation order                                        41

Environmental Protection Act 1990                        13,   25,
                                                         32,   63,
                                                         66
Entertainment   (Increased Penalties)   Act 1990         7,    56,
                                                         62
Entertainment licensing,   powers of entry and arrest    88,   89

Identification, problems                                 16
Injunctions, cases of urgency                            69
             High Court                                  64
             in anticipation                             65
             undertaking as to damages                   73
             breach of terms                             72
Interpleader proceedings                                 38

L icensing legislation, offences and penalties           62
Local authorities, provision of support                  77
Local authority, role                                    10
                  statutory powers                       11
Local Government Act 197 2                               10,    20,
                                                         35,   65
Local Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982     43,   44
London Government Act 19 63                              43
London Local Authorities Act 1991                        61

Midlands Pay Party Unit                                  80

Noise nuisance                                           13, 14
Noise Review Working Party                               9
Pay parties                                                 3, 58
Penalties                                                  19
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984                      12, 25
Police (Property) Act 1897                                 33
Police, power of arrest                                    89
        power to seize equipment                           90
        powers of entry                                    88
        role                                               75
Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973                         33, 41
Powers of entry                                            21
                residential premises                       22
                warrant to enter                           23
Private gain, definition                                   61
Private Places of Entertainment (Licensing) Act 1967        58
Public entertainment, definition                           50
                      caselaw                              51
                      licence applications                 46
                      licence conditions                   47
                      offences and penalties               55
Public nuisance                                            87
                conspiracy to commit                       87
Public Order Act 1986                                      86

Raves                                                  4

Scotland                                                   9
Seized equipment,   for evidential purposes                90
                    return to owner                        32
Shebeens                                                   6
South East Pay Party Unit                                  81
Statutory Nuisance (Appeals) Regulations      1990         18

Violence                                                   84

Warehouse parties                                          5
Faculty of Public Health Medicine
4 St. Andrews Place                           Telephone 071-935 0243
London                                                  071-486 8111
NW1 4 L B ^ ^                                       Fax 071-224 6973



           We      acknowledge               with   thanks     receipt     of

           communication              dated                    ^         " 'T p -'-'

           addressed             to   P

           c o n c e rn in g :
              P         ti (_                              t-]vj
                                      ^ -3     .     "h a ru                           /4*v'
                                                                                       -o
                                                vONOO/t^                     titli     O
                                                                                       w
ilty of Public Health Medicine
                                                                     a
                                                                     5
                                                                                       -t
                                                                                       >
                                                                     m                 0
 4 St. Andrew’s Place                           19.! 94                    = 19 =
   London NW1 4L.B
                                                                     tu                *0
                                                                     a.
                                                                     <9   HF 79152 0
                                                                                       >
                    Dr-          i.     ^        \\       ^    C'X \_\ y‘x

                                            fy}C:-.s\ K       i of/', c—
                   fcrv                          I'Ha.rw ."u^ Co-<^rcLj              O -V-UVx

                                      'WcVvi-    H o Vaj 'lL-


                    t-G <\J tiO/V                     S'va_3 »^ 'XMS
                 OS'




                                                                                                 (j3 ^ ^
    CcykczAs

                                             f ^    x    ■




           ( f ju         ,     < h k ( *           *°   «a *                        ^       ^    y    -




                                                                                 Ci-t?


f     J    a    z     .                                                                            ^           * * * *   '




                              ' rl ' ^             <i    "   ^       ^       ( T     ^ y ^ '                     ^
           A
                                         /   >&e                 ^                                         f r ^ L k ^ j
                g^yf- <5U^cA- Z6^ *-
    CtsQ
                                     ’                               ( f f^              ~

                          b*-    ^

                                                                         ic/*\
                                                                                 oC^ M-&^lAx               ,


               l^ l       ;[H     A&A&J
Other SIPRI publications:

43. Chemical   disarmament:       new     weapons          for        old, / A&W    1975.
    91-85114-27-8

44. Chemical disarmament:        some   problems         of verification, A&W 1973,
    91-85114-20-0.                                               /
                                                                  /
45. Chemical   weapons:      destruction         and       conversion.       T&F,   1980.
    0-85066-199-4.                                            /

46. Delayed toxic      effects    of    chemical       warfare        agents. A&W, 1975.
    91-85114-29-4.

47. Ecological consequences of the Second/lndochina War. A&W, 1976.
    91-22000-62-3. pp 24-45, 53-55.

48. The effects of       developments in tlfe biological and chemical
    sciences on CW       disarmament negotiations, SIPRI research report
    13. SIPRI, 1974.

49. The   fight against infectious /diseases:                    a role for applied
    microbiology in military redeployment.                       SIPRI, 1979, mimeo.
    91—85114—26—X.

50. Herbicides in war. T&F, 1984. /b-85066-265-6.

51. Medical protection      against/ chemical            warfare agents. A&W, 1976,
    91-22000-44-5.

52. Weapons of mass destriyStion           and     the     environment.       T&F, 1977.
    0-8066-132-3. pp. 31-48./

Additional Bibliography

53. Duffy   John   C.   / Health and             Medical Aspects of Disaster
    Preparedness,   NATp.   Challenges            of   Modern  Society, 1991,
    0-306-43495-4.  Includes:

    a. Chemical Ha/ards on Ships, Especially Tankers: Toxicargo In
    General And Chefifical Tankers, Chemical Hazards on Board,

   b. Roles an<a Function         of    Antipoison         Centres in Toxicological
   Emergency ancl Disaster

   c. A multzidisciplinary approach to                 the   medical management of
   man-made amd natural toxic disasters

    (R) indicates RESTRICTED document.
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Reference   15E50X5

Dr John Ashton
Chair, Committee on Health Promotion
Faculty of Public Health Medicine
4 St Andrew's Place
London NW1 4LB




                               Direct Line 071 210 5769
                               Fax Number 071 925 2670

                               17 January 1994


RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC     SAFETY   AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

In regard to my letter of 10 January, it has been pointed that
the  last paragraph    on page    1   of Annex C is open to
misinterpretation.     It would be better amendedto read
"Environmental Health Officers haveauthority .... hygiene and
general cleanliness in relation to the storage ...etc. [TSOs are
concerned with certain other aspects not relevant to your
enquiry].




                               DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                               Senior Medical Officer
                               Emergency Planning
                                Co-ordination Unit


Blind Copies:   Mrs
                Dr E Tebbs
                Dr K Binysh
                Dr J Rees
                                                           RECEIVED       Mrs S C Appleby
                                                                                   HEF(M)1
                                                           M JAN      m           DHMTAO12
                                                           EFvlERGENPepjaLrtment of Health
                                                           PLAMNiNG UNIT
Item posted:           Thu 13 Jan 94 17:42
Message ID:            PC1332-940113164236-73E0

TO:                   Dr L Martin
                      Contin
                      DHMTA013
                      Department of Health

CC:                   Dr E Tebbs
                      HP(M)1
                      DHMTA012
                      Department of Health

                      Dr Kathie Binysh
                      HP(M)5
                      DHMTA026
                      Department of Health

                      Dr John Rees
                      HCD-PH
                      DHMTAO 01
                      Department of Health

Subj ect:             Public Safety & Hygiene

Thankyou for your minute and copy of the reply to Dr Ashton at the
Faculty of Public Health Medicine.
I would like to point out that only Environmental Health Officers have
the power to enforce food hygiene standards etc, NOT Trading Standards
Officers (Annex C, Page 1, Paragraph 8).
I hope this is useful for future reference.




      Iaa'UC     6r
        Ckm .                                         •f

                        *   l&                    e
                                                  )
                                              ■ boe



49
                                                                Cm*                  ^


                                   ~      1                ~                     '                     *

      UaJLA       k                                                   ^      ^                     ^

                      awl                                                              !~rs ° s
                                                                                         - A   •

       CA-hUl-               -at         a* T **               **          k <r~- e ~ r~ y j,
15E50/5




Dr Binysh                                     From: Dr L J Martin
Dr Rees                                             EPCU
Dr Tebbs
j—  ---                                        Date: 12 January 1994

                                               Copy: Mr


RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC    SAFETY   AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

I am grateful to present colleagues, to M   r   \ and to 4 OGDs,
for contributions which have enabled me to reply to Dr Ashton of
the Faculty of Public Health Medicine.

I attach copy papers for each of you. It will be interesting to
see whether the Faculty declares its hand.

DOE, who provided a detailed response, have expressed particular
interest in this enquiry.    I am therefore keeping my opposite
number there,              L in the picture.




                                                 LAURENCE MARTIN
                                                 603 rh
                                                 210 5769
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE IN ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our ref: 15E50/5


Mr                Home Office
Mr D Instone     DoT
Mr               - DOE
Mis^               - DNH



                                               Direct line: 071 210 5769
                                                        Fax: 071 925 2670


                                                          12 January 1994

Dear Colleague


RESPONSIBILTY FOR PUBLIC        SAFETY   AND   HYGIENE    DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

I am grateful for contributions from other Departments which have
enabled me to send the attached letter.   It will be interesting
to see whether the Faculty of Public Health Medicine eventually
declares its hand.

If anyone would like a set of the annexes collated from material
collectively supplied, please let me know.




                                                   DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                                   Senior Medical Oficer
                                                   Emergency Planning
                                                     Co-ordination Unit
                         FAX              SHEET



                                                           Richmond House

                                                              79 Whitehall

                                                      London SW1A 2NS

                                                  Telephone 071 210 3000




        NAME:           J)   /MS'70*/ &           TEL:       X7&        6 67 /

        DEPARTMENT/      v   ,
                             _                    ROOM
        RHA:            J j O/ ■                  NO:
TO:

        FAX NO:        £76       ^6 #             PAGE 1 OF 3

        COPY T O :                                TEL:
        FAX NO :




        NAME:        Dr Laurence Martin           TEL:        071-210-5769

FROM:   UNIT:        Emergency Planning           ROOM
                     Co-ordination Unit           NO:         603

        FAX NO:      071-925-2670                 DATE:
                                                               n S&c




                                                       9      9     0     s
«




    PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

    Our Reference   15E50X5

    Dr John Ashton
    Chair, Committee on Health Promotion
    Faculty of Public Health Medicine
    4 St Andrew's Place
    London NW1 4LB




                                           Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                           Fax Number 071 925 2670

                                           16 December 1993


    RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC    SAFETY    AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
    GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

    Further to my letter of 5 November I am sorry to say that I am
    still awaiting one response to my enquiries, from the Department
    of Transport.

    Despite reminders they have still to put fingers to keyboard.
    I regret that in consequence I cannot achieve a full reply to
    your letter this side of Christmas.

    You will I am sure appreciate my embarrassment over a delay which
    is nonetheless not of my creation.




                                           DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                           Senior Medical Officer
                                           Emergency Planning
                                            Co-ordination Unit
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Reference   15E50X5

Dr John As h t o n
Chair, Committee on Health Promotion
Faculty of Public Health Medicine
4 St Andrew's Place
L ondon NW1 4LB




                                       Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                       Fax Number  071 925 2670

                                       5 November 1993


RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC    SAFETY    AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

Further to m y letter of 8 September I am writing to let you know
that m y enquiries are well in hand.

Pursuit of the questions you raised is revealing a complex spread
of responsibilities, but I hope to be able to let you have a
substantive response within the next couple of weeks.




                                       DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                       Senior Medical Officer
                                       Emergency Planning
                                        Co-ordination Unit
       Jk                                       2 M ARSHAM STREET LONDON SW1P 3EB
                                                FAX           071-276 0818
            THE DEPARTMENT                      TELEX
                                                DIRECT LINE
                                                              22221 DOEMAR-G
                                                              071 -2567 7 3
            OF TRANSPORT                        SWITCHBOARD 071-276 3000
                                                GTN           275773
                                               Room S5/10

rDr    Laurence Martin           n              My Re__
    Emergency Planning
       Co-ordination Unit                       Your Ref:          RECEIVED
    Department of Health
    Richmond House                                                           w
    79, Whitehall
    LONDON SW1A 2NS
L                                j
                                                          2 November 1993


    Dear

    FACULTY OF PUBLIC HEALTH MEDICINE

    1.   A few weeks ago you sent me a copy of a letter you have
    received about public safety and hygiene from the Faculty of
    Public Health Medicine.     I agreed to find out who in the
    Department could advise you on those aspects of the letter
    concerning public transport.

    2.   I am sorry it has taken some time to let you have a response
    but, as I explained to you, this subject involves different
    divisions within this and other Departments.         I have now
    discussed this matter with the Transportation Policy Unit who are
    responsible for cross-modal aspects of transport safety.     They
    have agreed to coordinate a respons e . You may like to contact
    the HEO responsible, Mr             on 276 5809.

    Yours sincerely                                I
                                                   v 1 ^ * 1             ^




                                                                        14



    International Aviation Directorate



    copy
                                                   ^          3   ^     ^           &-
                                                              M r s __
                                                                    Contin
                                                                  DHMTAO13
                                                      Department of Health

Item posted:     Fri 29 Oct 93 10:38
Message ID:      PC1333-93102 90 9384 6-6AD2

To:             Mrs |
                    ___________ |
                ASPU5
                DHMTAO14
                Department of Health

Subj ect        responsibility for public safety and hygiene during large
                gatherings of people



I am sorry to chase you up again for ____________ reply to this. As you
telephoned me on Friday 22/10 and said a reply should be with Dr Martin
during the week of 25/10, I am just reminding you that we haven't still
had a reply.

Sorry to be such a pain!

               EPCU, Ext 5771 RH
15E50X5




Dr John Rees                                 From:         Dr L J Martin
                                                           Emergency Planning
                                                            Co-ordination Unit

                                             Date:         14 October 1993

                                             Copy:         Dr K Binysh


RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC         SAFETY    AND    HYGIENE     DURING      LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

M y minute of 8 September r e f e r s .

I judge that I now have almost            enough   material     to    reply   to
Dr John A s h t o n of the FPHM.

I attach copies of in-house and OGDs responses to date; you will
see that parts of some are mutually contradictory, which simply
emphasises the complexity of both enquiry and arrangements.     I
shall have to sort that out.   DoT have yet to come back to me.

Ha v i n g once ironed out duplication and error, it would seem
sensible for me to extract from the various papers the paragraphs
appropriate to each indent of Dr Ashton's letter.

Meanwhile is there any overall public             health    gloss    you   could
suggest to brighten up the collation?

Thank you   for your help;     I suspect we shall hear more of              this
matter.




                                            DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                            Senior Medical Officer
                                            Emergency Planning
                                             Co-ordination Unit
  *
                       FAX                 MESSAGE
                      Richmond House, 7S Whitehall, London SW1A 2NS
                                  Telephone 071 210 3000




          NAME:                                                      TEL:
          DEPARTMENT/          <v    ___                             ROOM
          RHA:                 S)o     (                             NO:
TO:
          FAX NO:              2.1 6       2   2> C>                 PAGE 1 OF
          COPY TO:                                                   TEL:
          FAX NO :




          NAME:           DR LAURENCE MARTIN                         TEL:    071-210-5769
FROM:    UNIT:          EMERGENCY PLANNING                           ROOM
                        CO-ORDINATION UNIT                           NO:  603
        .-. FAX NO:     071-925-2670                                 DATE:   ti oc^r     *13




                                       S&j/ jCU                                  ,
                           /



        ■%_ Jc^y- 2                                         'T k j f c r - ^ y



        fw ^      U £p                 ^                6 r *»*-<*' ^ °

                                                  ^ A   y

                                                                                     e*/k>
          DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT                          d e c e iv e d
          OFFICE SERVICES
                                                                 “ 6 o h 1993           ervtces
          2   Marsham ^ireet,1^London SW1P 3EB                    e m e rg e n c y
                                                 Switchboard
                                                        GTN            276
                                                   Facsimile     071 - 276 0790
                                                  Direct Line 0 7 1    276 4 2 8 4



Dr L Martin                                                Your Ref: 15E50X5
Senior Medical Officer
Emergency Planning Coordination Unit
Department of Health
Richmond House
79 Whitehall
London
SW1A 2NS                                                     4 October 1993




RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC               SAFETY      AND    HYGIENE         DURING    LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

1. Thank you for your letter of 9 September attaching one from
the Faculty of Public Health Medicine expressing an interest in
and asking questions about the public safety and hygiene aspects
of large gatherings of people.

2. Unfortunately, the questions raised by the Faculty touch upon
the responsibilities of a large number of departments and no
doubt in many cases a number of different interests within those
departments. However, the attached minute to me from a Mrs
in our Local Environmental Quality Division attempts to pull
together a number of the threads.   I hope you will find this of
some help.

3. You will see that at the end of her minute Mrs      expresses
an interest in knowing what has stimulated this enquiry and the
depth of the Faculty's existing knowledge. We should be grateful
if you would advise us and/or keep us informed of developments.

Yours sincerely




Enclosures:       Minute from Mrs      dated 4 October 1993
                  Home Office News Release dated 31 March 1993 on New
                  Age Travellers and Ravers

                   Joint DOE and HO Guidance Note on Control of Noisy
                   Parties dated September 1992

cc   Mr                 0SD6
To: Dr Binysh                                                     From: Mr
     HP(M)3                                                       PMD ASPU5


                                                                  Date^ ^September 1993

                                                                  c.c:   Dr Rothman
                                                                           Dr Martin




RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE DURING LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE


1    Your minute of 16 September and enclosures which I have discussed with Dr
      Rothman, refer. My interest is in the Ambulance Service presence at sporting
      stadia and other large crowd gatherings.

2    The Ambulance Service works closely with the other Emergency Services and with
      local authorities who are responsible for issuing safety certificates to organisers of
      events that attract large crowds. The Ambulance Service acts in both an advisory
      and respondent capacity.
     I am consulting my major incident advisor, who is himself a Regional Chief
      Ambulance Officer; and will let you have a full note of Ambulance Service activity
      in this area, together with some recent literature a.s.a.p.




Ext: 22900
Room: 514 EH
Dr                                   From Dr
Mr                                   Date; 16 September 1993
Mr                                                                          RECEIVED
Dr                                   Copies:
Mr                                   Dr L J Martin                         f   1   SEP 1S93
Dr                                   Mrs
                                                                          PLANNifJQ UfilT



RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE DURING LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

1. Please find attached a copy of a minute from Dr Martin dated the 8 Septembe
together with a letter from Dr John Ashton Chair, of the Committee on Health Promotion
at the Faculty o f Public Health Medicine.

2. Dr Ashton is asking about who is responsible for public safety and hygiene and the
coordination of emergency services in several settings. I note that Dr Martin is already
planning to consult DOE and the Home Office.

3. I think that the queries Dr Ashton is raising are not straightforward and that a single
answer will not be applicable to all o f them. I agree with Dr Martin that this does have
implications for several other Government departments apart from those he has identified.
This would include HSE and DTI - DTp + possible DNH, (we can provide contacts for
these in relation to accident prevention).

4. Would Dr Rothman and M r            toe able to provide some assistance with the query
about the coordination of emergency services? Do Drs Skinner, Tebbs and Mr
           lave any comments they wish to make about the responsibility for hygiene in
these circumstances?

5. Directors of Public Health will have responsibility in this area in as much as they
have the lead responsibility for the health of their population (which is where I would
imagine that Dr Ashton’s interests originate). However, there are clearly others who also
have responsibilities and I suspect that the Director of Public Health’s responsibility is to
ensure that the appropriate mechanisms are in place and provide public health medical
advise should such an event occur.

6. I agree with Dr Martin that I suspect this will lead to an ongoing debate, but I will be
grateful for thoughts and comments at this stage.




Room 546 Wellington House
Ext 24227
                                                                             '= > h g


15E50X5




Dr K a t h y B i n y s h                    From:     Dr L J Martin
                                                      E m e r g e n c y Planning
                                                        Co-ordination Unit

                                            Date:     8 S e ptember 1993



RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC         SAFETY   AND   HYGIENE     DURING     LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

The a t t a c h e d letter from the FPHM arrived unsolicited. It poses
a range of b road questions wit h obvious implications for several
OGDs, n o t a b l y DOE and the Home Office, w h o m I am consulting,
inter alios.

I foresee the po s s i b i l i t y of an ongoing debate,    and perhaps       a
n e e d to define some of the terms used.

For the time b eing I wo n d e r to what extent any of this touches
y o u r areas of interest, or even those of HSE (for w h o m I cannot
identify a n amed contact in the DOB) .        I w o u l d welc o m e you r
comments an d if appropriate a specific c o n t r ibution to the reply
I shall be collating in due course.




                                            LAURENCE MARTIN
                                            Roo m 603 RH
                                            Ext 5769
• Faculty of Public Health Medicine
•   of the Royal Colleges of Physicians of the United Kii
    4 St. Andrew’s Place   Telephone 071-935 0243   Fax 071-2:
    London N W 1 4LB                071 -486 8111


    JA/mi
    6 September 1993


    Dr L Martin
    Room 603
    Department of Health
    Richmond House
    79 Whitehall
    LONDON SW1A 2NS


    Dear Dr Hart in

    The Faculty of Public Health Medicine is concerned about the potential for
    harm when there are large gatherings of people if proper precautions are
    not taken. We are concerned, in the first instance, to establish who is
    responsible for public safety and hygiene and for the coordination of
    emergency services in a number of settings. We are especially interested
    in:

             public transport (including the role in both safety and hygiene of
             different local and health authorities through which a train might
             pass);

             stations and termini for any form of public transport; and also

             public entertainments at fixed venues such as football stadia and
             concert halls;

            public entertainments at temporary venues (whether organised or
            informal) such as pop festivals, street carnivals, 'raves', circuses
            and gatherings of new age travellers;

             roads around either of the above where pedestrians are gathered in
             large numbers and where their movement is restricted.

    I should be most grateful for any information you can provide on these
    matters.

    Yours sincerely




    John Ashton
    Chair, Committee on Health Promotion




    Formerly Faculty ofCommunity Medicine                        Registered Charity No. 263894
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Reference   15E50X5

M i s s ________________
Sport & Recreation Division
Department of National Heritage
2-4 Cockspur Street
London      SW1Y 5DH




                                      Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                      Fax Number  071 925 2670

                                      13 September 1993


RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC    SAFETY   AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

I am writing to seek you help, along with that of colleagues in
the Home Office, DoT, DOE and in house, in connection wit h a
letter (copy attached) received last week.

The Committee on Health Promotion of the FPHM pose a range of
broad questions.     There is no intimation of what m a y have
prompted the enquiry, but I foresee the possible rise of on-going
debate and perhaps a need to agree definition (or scope) of some
of the terms used.

DOE have pointed out that whilst some responsibilities in the
scenarios outlined fall to local authorities, acting on advice
from other bodies where necessary, the two indents referring to
public entertainments invite attention from your Department.

I should be grateful for comments, from yourself or Divisional
colleagues, and for any specific contribution you may like to
offer to assist me in collating a response to the Faculty.

Thank you for your help.




                                      DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                      Senior Medical Officer
                                      Emergency Planning
                                       Co-ordination Unit
hs                                      ftr
                               -
                 tr                jU   T ^ j Et U ) -**»*-
>/ A
                                    X .
                                                         , /%4
                                                            v*1
                                                               1  /k ^ f L !  A      «^»— \ i '
                                                                                          ^ Is?
                                                                                                              R T
                                   ^5s_aJIm
                                   ^I& j Lia a.t O oo jo^^ ^
                                                           uw Z
                                                              L»>/
                                                                 <y-1^*4.
                                                                    -*4 **d L ouojf~~
                                                            1\
               *f('°           s        v>5l^a-Q saaJL -&<3>-|eL /£^l»4 ^
                                        ^ - jlaJiM - d ihi< L^s                 c/

                                                                                                              e   a.
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE O N A L L CORRESPONDENCE

Our R e f e r e n c e      15E50X5
                                                                                             Richmond House
Mr|__________                                                                                      79 Whitehall
Office Services
Department of Environment                                                                London SW 1A 2NS
R oom C12/16                                                                        Telephone 071 210 3000
2 Mars h a m Street
L ondon    SW1P 3EB



                                                                  Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                                                  Fax Number  071 925 2670

                                                                  9 September 1993

RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC SAFETY AND HYGIENE DURING LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

I am wr it i n g to seek your help as a contact in the general area
of e m e rgency planning.

I attach a copy of a letter received this week.                                          There           is no
intimation of what m a y have prompted the enquiry.

The Committee on Health Promotion of the FPHM pose a range of
b r o a d questions. I foresee the possible rise of on-going debate
and perhaps a need to agree definition (or scope) of some of the
terms used.

You m a y agree that, in broad terms, man y of the responsibilities
in the scenarios outlined fall to local authorities, acting on
advice from the Police or Fire Services or a health authority as
appropriate.    Others have implications for the Home Office and
DoT, to w h o m I have also written, together of course with
colleagues in this Department.

I should be^grateful if y ou could seek comments from appropriate
sources w j ^ n DOE, and any specific contribution they ma y like to
offer to assist me in collating a response to the Faculty.

References to any relevant legislation would be h e l p f u l .




                                                                  DR LAURENCE MARTIN^"
                                                                  Senior Medical Ofricer
                                                                  Emergency Planning
                                                                   Co-ordination Unit


 C     A   R     I     N   G              F   O   R           T    H   E             1   9     9     0    s
* Faculty of Public Health Medicine
 of the Royal Colleges of Physicians of the United Kingdom
 4 St. Andrew’s Place   Telephone 071-935 0243    Fax 071-224 6973
 London N W 1 4LB                 071 -486 8111


  JA/HM
  6 September 1993
                                                              im
  Dr L Martin
  Room 603
  Department of Health
  Richmond House
  79 Whitehall
  LONDON SW1A 2NS


  Dear Dr Martin

  The Faculty of Public Health Medicine is concerned about the potential for
  harm when there are large gatherings of people if proper precautions are
  not taken. We are concerned, in the first instance, to establish who is
  responsible for public safety and hygiene and for the coordination of
  emergency services in a number of settings. We are especially interested
  in:

          public transport (including the role in both safety and hygiene of
          different local and health authorities through which a train might
          pass);

          stations and termini for any form of public transport; and also

          public entertainments at fixed venues such as football stadia and
          concert halls;

         public entertainments at temporary venues (whether organised or
         informal) such as pop festivals, street carnivals, 'raves', circuses
         and gatherings of new age travellers;

          roads around either of the above where pedestrians are gathered in
          large numbers and where their movement is restricted.

 I should be most grateful for any information you can provide on these
 matters.

 Yours sincerely




 John Ashton
 Chair, Committee on Health Promotion




 Formerly Faculty ofCommunity Medicine                               RegisteredCharity No. 263894
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Ref erence 15E50X5

Mr
E m e rgency Planning Division
Home Office
50 Queen Annes Gate
London     SW1H 9AT



                                            Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                            Fax Number  071 925 2670

                                            8 September 1993

RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC        SAFETY    AND   HYGIENE    DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

I attach a copy      of   a   letter,     just   received   and   entirely
unsolicited.

The Committee on Health Promotion of the FPHM pose a range of
b road questions. I foresee the possible rise of on-going debate
and perhaps a need to agree definition (or scope) of some of the
terms used.

In broad terms, m a n y of the responsibilities in the scenarios
ou t lined fall to local authorities, acting on advice from the
Police or Fire Services or a health authority as appropriate.

There are however clearly areas such as co-ordination, crowd
control and route diversion w ith implications for those emergency
services, in particular the police, which relate specifically to
your Department.    Some of the issues will have been covered at
E a singwold in looking at crowd related d i s a s t e r s .

I am consulting a number of colleagues in house and O G D s . I
shall be grateful for a contribution from your Department to
assist me in collating a response to the Faculty.

References to any relevant legislation w ould be helpful.




                                            DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                            Senior Medical Officer
                                            Emergency Planning
                                             Co-ordination Unit
15E50X5




Dr John Rees                             From:   Dr L J Martin
                                                 Emergency Planning
                                                  Co-ordination Unit

                                         Date:    8 September 1993

RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC      SAFETY   AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

We spoke about a letter from the FPHM; you ma y like to retain the
attac h e d copy.

I am seeking views in-house and from several OGDs, but in view
of the origin of the letter may need to come back to you for a
public he a l t h expert's overview to assist me in collating a
reply.

Should you pick up my indication of what ma y have sparked this
initiative w ould you please let me know.

I have sent Dr As h t o n a holding reply.




                                         LAURENCE MARTIN
                                         Room 603  RH
                                         Ext 5769
Dr Kathy Binysh                        From:     Dr L J Martin
                                                 Emergency Planning
                                                  Co-ordination Unit

                                       Date:     8 September 1993



RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC     SAFETY   AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

The a t t ached letter from the FPHM arrived unsolicited. It poses
a range of broad questions wit h obvious implications for several
OGDs, nota b l y DOE and the Home Office, who m I am consulting,
inter alios.

I foresee the possibility of an ongoing debate,        and perhaps   a
need to define some of the terms used.

For the time being I wonder to what extent any of this touches
your areas of interest, or even those of HSE (for w h o m I cannot
identify a named contact in the DOB) .     I w ould welcome your
comments and/lappropriate a specific contribution to the reply I
shall be collating in due course.




                                       LAURENCE MARTIN
                                       Room 603  RH
                                       Ext 5769
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON A LL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Reference   15E50X5

Dr J Ashton
Chair, Committee on Health Promotion
Facu l t y of Public Health Medicine
4 St Andrew's Place
London NW1 4LB




                                       Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                       Fax Number  071 925 2670

                                       8 September 1993


RESPONSIBILITY FOR PUBLIC    SAFETY    AND   HYGIENE   DURING   LARGE
GATHERINGS OF PEOPLE

Thank you for your letter of 6 September.

You pose a range of broad questions.  It occurs to me that we may
need to agree definition (or scope) of some of the terms you use.
In the first instance I shall need to consult a number of
colleagues in this and other Departments.

I will w rite to you again when I have collated their responses.




                                       DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                       Senior Medical Officer
                                       Emergency Planning
                                        Co-ordination Unit
A Faculty of Public Health Medicine
  of the Royal Colleges of Physicians of th United Kingdom
  4 St. Andrew’s Place   Telephone 071-935 0243   Fax 071-224 6973
  London N W l 4LB               071-486 8111


  JA/ffil
  6 September 1993


  Dr L Martin
  Room 603
  Department of Health
  Richmond House
  79 Whitehall
  LONDON SW1A 2NS


  Dear Dr Martin

  The Faculty of Public Health Medicine is concerned about the potential for
  harm when there are large gatherings of people if proper precautions are
  not taken. We are concerned, in the first instance, to establish who is
  responsible for public safety and hygiene and for the coordination of
  emergency services in a number of settings. We are especially interested
  in:

           public transport (including the role in both safety and hygiene of
           different local and health authorities through which a train might
           pass);

           stations and termini for any form of public transport; and also

           public entertainments at fixed venues such as football stadia and
           concert halls;

           public entertainments at temporary venues (whether organised or
           informal) such as pop festivals, street carnivals, 'raves', circuses
           and gatherings of new age travellers;

           roads around either of the above where pedestrians are gathered in
           large numbers and where their movement is restricted.

  I should be most grateful for any information you can provide on these
  matters.

  Yours sincerely




  John Ashton
  Chair, Committee on Health Promotion




  Formerly Faculty ofCommunity Medicine                              RegisteredCharityNo. 263894
                                                                           So/S'
                                                                                       R T




                                                RECEIVED
                                                16 JU N 1992
PSOB INV N6
                                                m e d   ^ hml

                                                                      Richmond House

                                                                           79 Whitehall

Pauline Farrell OBE                                                 London SW1A 2NS
Chair of the Hillsborough                                     Telephone 071 210 3000
  Inter-Agency Group
c/o Practice and Development Exchange                From the P a rliam entary U nder
National Institute for Social Work                      Secretary o f State
5 Tavistock Place
LONDON
WC1H 9SS




Dear Miss Farrell

Mrs Bottomley has asked me to thank you for your letter of 15 May
and for the invitation to attend the Hillsborough Inter Agency
Conference in October.    Since Mrs Bottomley's diary is fully
committed for October she asked Mr Yeo if he might be free to
attend.

I'm afraid that Mr Yeo, also, has prior engagements for the time
of the Conference and will therefore be unable to attend.

Both Ministers have, however, asked me to pass on to you their
best wishes for a successful conference. They would be grateful
to receive any report of the event that may be produced.



                                                                     <=-s ie~
Y o u r s sinr.prp.1v

                                                                              j

Diary secretary                                                      SSi



                                                                     > - t.CA.




C    A   R    I   N     G   F   O   R   T   H    E              1   9    9    0    s
                                                             "H * *     -      cm. so js

                                                             From:
Diary Secretary PS(C)                                                CSIC
                                                                                       i'i   'I .!
                                                             Date: 12 June 1992       ^      n

                                                             Copies: Mrs              csi....
                                                                     Mrs             SSI
                                                                     Mr              HC(A)3B
                                                                     Dr Martin      CA-IU
                                                                     File/Float




       P.S.O.B.INV N6. HILLSBOROUGH INTER AGENCY CONFERENCE.


1. We do not regard this event x% appropriate for attendance by the Secretary of State. Neither
do we advise attendance by any other DH Minister.

BACKGROUND
2. The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group was set up after the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster to
coordinate the various Social Services Departments response to the tragedy. The Group comprises
representatives from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire, Liverpool, Nottingham, Sefton, Sheffield,
St Helens and Wirral. This is a local authority group with no input or involvement from the
Department.

3. Following the disaster the Leader of the Liverpool City Council wrote to Ministers requesting
additional financial support for direct social service provision and for the establishment of a
Regional Unit that was then being proposed to provide and coordinate continuing care to survivors
and relatives. The then Secretary of State, Kenneth Clarke, responded by explaining that this
Department has no powers to make additional resources available to LAs for such purposes.

4. During 1990 the Joseph Rowntree Foundation agreed to fund a 2 year research project, under
the auspices of NISW, the central aim of which has been to evaluate the effectiveness and impact
of the services provided by Social Services and other organisations in the aftermath of the
Hillsborough Disaster. The research is due to be completed in July, and we understand that
NESW considers that the results will have a "significant bearing on many areas of contemporary
social work organisation and practice". We don’t yet know when the Final Report is likely to be
published or what recommendations it is likely to make. Ministers and the Department will no
doubt be asked for their views and comments. It will be interesting to see the extent to which this
study complements and/or advances advice given in the report of the Departmentally sponsored
Disasters Working Party, which was published last year and which was generally welcomed by
Local Authorities as a useful and practical guide to the planning of appropriate social and
psychological responses to disasters. The Report was, however given a "cool" reception by both
DH and Home Office Ministers because of its references to the need for additional Government
funding for LAs for disaster response (something which we viewed as being outside the Working
Party’s terms of reference), and because some recommendations were not appropriately based on
arguments made in the main report and therefore lacked evidence and conviction.
■   •
        5. The Conference being planned by the Inter Agency Group is not directly associated with the
        NISW research project, although we understand that NISW propose to enter into a partnership
        with the Group to make it a joint conference. The Conference will attempt to draw together some
        of the lessons that were learnt by those at a senior management level during the aftermath of the
        disaster. The conference will therefore be aimed at Directors of Social Services and Chairnj&h of
        Social Services Committees.

        6. This conference will, we understand, be the firsf of a series of Conferences planned on this
        subject via NISW’s Practice and Development Exchange^ The aim being to disseminate the
        research findings and to produce practical training/educational materials.

        7. Until the final report of the NISW research study is published we cannot judge the extent to
        which pressure may again be put on the Department to provide additional funding to SSDs to
        prepare for and respond to major disasters. Nor can we know how far reaching the proposals
        might be in relation to social work practice and Social Services delivery generally. Ministers and
        officials will need to carefully consider the findings of the research project before deciding on an
        appropriate response.

        CONCLUSION

        8. Until Ministers have had a chance to study the findings of the NISW research project we feel
        that it would be prudent for them to avoid this Conference. There may be implications in the
        findings and recommendations which will impact on other departments -notably Home Office-
        which is itself currently preparing publication of guidance to Local authorities on dealing with
        disasters. We would need to ensure that there was no conflict of interest between Departments.
        A conference in October might be too soon to ensure our adequate consideration of all these
        aspects.

        9. A draft reply for your signature is enclosed.




        CSIC
        243 WEL
        EXT 24041
DRAFT REPLY FOR PS(C) DIARY SECRETARY



Pauline Farrell OBE
Chair o f the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group
c/o Practice and Development Exchange
National Institute for Social Work
5 Tavistock Place
London
W C1H 9SS




Dear M iss Farrell


Mrs Bottomley has asked me to thank you for your letter o f 15th M ay and for the
invitation to attend the Hillsborough Inter Agency conference in October. Since
Mrs Bottom ley’s diary is fully committed for October she asked Mr Y eo if he
might be free to attend.

I’m afraid though that Mr Y eo, also, has prior engagements for the time o f the
conference and w ill therefore be unable to attend.

Both M inisters have, however, asked me to pass on to you their best wishes for a
successful conference. They would be grateful to receive any report o f the event
that may be produced.
                                                                                                                                                                        18 MAY 1992


                     NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK



The Rt. Hon Virginia Bottomley
Secretary of State
Department of Health
Richmond House
Whitehall
London SW1A 2NS
                                                                                                                                                                   15 May 1992

Dear Secretary of State
The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group comprises representatives from the nine
local authorities that have been involved in the social services response to the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster (The authorities are: Cheshire, Knowsley,
Lancashire, Liverpool, Nottingham, Sefton, Sheffield, St. Helens and Wirral).
The group is organising a conference for Chairs of Social Services Committees
and Directors of Social Services to be held on 20th and 21st October 1992 in
Manchester. The purpose of the conference is to share our experiences in the
belief that this will enable those authorities who are faced with future disasters to
manage a more effective response. In view of the national and international
attention such events inevitably attract we would welcome a keynote address by
the Secretary of State with responsibility for the personal social services.
I should be grateful therefore if you would be prepared to open the proceedings
on the second day of the conference. After speaking to your secretary we realise
there are many demands on your time but hope that you will feel able to make a
favourable response to the request.
Yours sincerely




Pauline Farrell OBE
Chair of the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group



Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group c/o Practice and Development Exchange
L O N D O N OFFICE 5 Tavistock Place, London W C 1 H 9SS. Tel: 0 7 1 - 3 8 7 9681 Fax: 0 7 1 - 3 8 7 7 9 6 8
DIRECTOR: D aphne S tathan CHAIRMAN: Sir W illiam U ttir^. Registered Charity N o. 313402, VAT Reg. N o. 417 6759 22, Com pany Limited by Guarantee, Registered N o. 726022, England
                                                                                                      &>lb


             HOME OFFICE                                    m
             Civil Emergencies Secretariat
m            Emergency Planning Division
                                                                      |t line 071-273
                                                                 w itchboard 071-273 3 0 0 8   67 8
             Queen Anne’s Gate London SWI                       Fax 071-273 3900




    Dr L Martin                                                 Your reference   12E50X5
    Senior Medical Officer
                                                                Our reference
    CA-IU (Contingency Planning)
    Richmond House
                                                                Date
    79 Whitehall
    London SW1A 2NS                                                              25 February 1992




    S E M IN A R   :   CROWD   RELATED   D IS A S T E R S


    Thank you for your letter of 14 February to Mr       1 all the
    indications we have received are that this was indeed a useful
    meeting.

    I am sorry that there seems to have been some confusion over
    travelling expenses which should of course have been met. I have
    contacted Mr        ~~1 at Easingwold who suggests that you write
    directly to him at the Emergency Planning College to claim the
    amounts due to Dr Fisher and Dr Baderman. I have also written to
    Mr Thornley suggesting that he writes independently for his own
    reimbursement should he require to do so.
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Reference   12E50X5

Professor T J Scanlon
Director
Emergency Communications Research Unit                    Richmond House
Carleton University
                                                              79 Whitehall
Ottawa
Canada                                                  London SW1A 2NS
K1S 5B6
                                                    Telephone 071 210 3000

                                    Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                    Fax Number 071 925 2670

                                    25th February 1992


EMERGENCY DISASTER PLANNING

When we met at Easingwold earlier        this   month   I mentioned two
individuals you might wish to contact.

The first is:

Mr P E A Savage MS FRCS
(Consultant Surgeon)
Queen Mary's Hospital
Frognal Avenue
Sidcup
Kent
DA14 6LT

He was the author in 1979 of "Hospital Disaster Planning". On
checking with the Library here I am advised that this book is out
of print.

The second name was that of Dr Jan de Boer, currently one of my
colleagues* representing the Dutch Ministry of Health on the NATO
Joint Medical Committee. He has several publications on emergency
and disaster planning, but again regrettably I was unable to find
them listed.

I am sorry not to have been more helpful.

I found the    'Crowds' seminar very useful and was glad to have had
the opportunity to meet you.




                                    DR LAURENCE MARTIN
                                    Senior Medical Officer
                                    CA-IU (Contingency Planning)
gig   Carleton University
      Ottawa, Canada K1S5B6


      o_0eph Scanlon
      Director
      Emergency Communications Research Unit


      Bus.: (613) 788-7428           Res.: (613)235-9239
/W ^




           *7
       ^rtcr




                *
                    £ '\*
                                                            5 o      5


                                 e/^\
                                                                             ;C ^
            \

i/Uuttf'O            gk)o*Ac«                   dec*'***
                                                    ClL "' ,        ^ ■ ,,


                                                                    va
                                                /v//f
            Pe7£R     JftVifar


                                        4*a.4<w 1  M* a t s l e o ' e v y < i n u te jg c j*
                                                ^ SsJ uJin^hr^N (j^nrckt' l |l<^c^
                                                                                    3(,t.
                                                    ^ ° Go~k. tS<^_oC>
                                                     Mu               H< ^ i 5 S U g t




                ^ u a ^ ( k —'^ A       b - A ly j h s - ^

            C&s^gJ- «J/f
0

    fVo Of.o*
        u



     £>fi/H       ^CT


    fe.1   0 ^   302-   'u L 'l'-g
Departments of Health and Social Security
LIBRARY AND INFORMATION SERVICES Richmond House Library
     itehall, London SW1A 2NS


                                      "VUc:                 d

                                         *   ^V\aw a O(         fccx^cs>

  ith    c o m p fim e n ts   ' <=v' ^                                     .
                fVoHzuxyv^     cs^v                       dicsAc^ocK^es,




Tel:    071-210 5256/071-210 5257/071-210 5255       lMr- SS-n'ii.
Fax:    071-210 5254
        0         W P\V\C



   D

iAccno (Obi'100)                       #P u bdate                                  N    (02670631
#B1iS5 (HMN XP 7S                               )
TITLE
Disaster planning i manaqina                            m eu 1 ci
PAUT H O R
PA R T I N G T O N _ A _ J and D M V M W
PCORP
F’b.R
Br i t i sh                 Journal
PSOURCE
  London
  1985             H L tu                 V O i                           7U
 p 5 9 0 — 59
NOTES
TAGS
                 LANb_Eng                                                              o
 More        ?    Reply YES                  QUI                                            A
                                                                                          0   z
LOCAL
       cx'46
#Cdate (3                   )
B U L LETIN
      HSA104
KEYWORDS
Hospi t a l _              s e r vicss             s m edia 'F'ubl r e l a t i o n s 'YYH
AB STRACT
These guideli             ■for h o s p i t a l s on dealing with the m ass media •following a matjor
disaster str               the i m portance of the press o f f i c e r ' s ro le and d i s t i n g u i s h e s
three stage            (i) o r g a n i z a t i o n and preparation; (ii) opening a press room to
deal with e n q u i r i e s when the disaster itself and hospital a d m i s s i o n s are a news
story? and/(iii) o rganizing 'human interest' i n tervi ews when the -first -flood o-f
r e q uests hfes subsided, A disaster e x e r c i s e held at Queen Marys Hospital and the
actual disaster caused by a bomb e x p losion and affect ing the Grand Hotel,
B r i g h t o n ,^ n d the Royal Sussex Co u n t y Hospital in October 1984 provided lesson s
for c o mpiling the guidelines,
ABNOTES
  More            Keply YES, NO or QUIT
X




   D

#Ai_cnu (0 0 6 7 8 8 )   # H u bdate (1984)                                     IS SN   \   0 3 OOb'-34 / )
#B1i ss (HMN XP                  )
TITLE
Planning withfSut panic
PAUT H O R
SA VAGE_Peter
PCORP
PER
Health and Social Serv i c e Journal
PSOURCE
 Basi ngstoke
 1984       Feb 9            vol 94-                                no 48fc>3

 p 170-172
NOTES
Disaster planning
TAGS
 More   ?  Reply YES,            NO or QUIT         5   -
            LANG_Eng
LOCAL
c46
                                                                   I    50                       ( ^
#C date (10 502;1984)          hmb     C_y                %                 9
BULLETIN
HA     CL                                                    <A
KE Y WORDS
Di saster_servi ces   Planning ''Hospitals
A B S TRACT
When a hospital has to cope with a major disaster, an information and control
ce ntre should be set up near the accident and e m e r g e n c y department.  A di sp la y
in the cen t r e should shows (i) deta i l s of the disaster? (:Li) the ti m e at which a

mo b i l e team was d espatched §(i i :i.> avai 1 ab i 1 i ty of operating theatres^                   (iv) the
number and location of empty beds;; (v) the v o l u n t e e r s available: and (vi) the
number of a n c i l l a r y staff a v a i l a b l e for portering. A senior nurse, doctor and
ad min i s t r a t o r should be in the centre to co- o r d i n a t e d e c i s i o n s and re duc e
confusion in communication.             Initial d o c u m e n t a t i o n o-f c a s u a l t i e s may have to be
limited to a numbered bracelet, or neck tag.                    A clerk in each trea tm en t area
 More      ?     Reply YES, NO or QUIT s---
should inform the centre of c a s u a l t i e s admitted and their condition.                                 Information

on c a s u a l t i e s can be d i splayed using a 'S t r a t h o p l a n ' rack where numbered flags
c o r r esponding to tags are moved across the board.                   A staff report, board keeps
staff loca tions up to date and v o l u n t e e r s can wear coloured sashes to indica te
how they can help.           A relatives'' r e c eption centre is best staffed by social
work e r s who can comfort rel a t i v e s and e x c h a n g e information with the centre.
Commu n i c a t i o n between staff and with n e i g h bouring h o s p i t a l s is vital. Two
Depa rtment of Health and Social S e c u r i t y health cir c u l a r s (HM(54)51 and H C (77)1)

give g u i d e l i n e s to health a u t h o r i t i e s on how to deal         with major accidents,
ABNOTES

#A date     (27;0251984)
^   f t .—   ;   f lli




    i
   fit-c tlA -            >    J 4 FEB 1992
f B o o fc s     In (cj ^ U kL \ o k ' , ~

  Ql^OL&iiusjQihe&tzr H<Ju<UASLj 0 iS < <stV err


         P'fTeft SvwnG'G (* * *        l^H S S
                              > S U cuf)         ^
                              From: J B Bettridge CBE, Principal                       &BTL s o j £
                                                            Home Office

                     R e c e iv e d !e m    e r g e n c y p la n n in g c o lle g e
    1
                  // *9F E B J992l(        "The Hawkhills", Easingwold, York, Y06 3EG
                  [Me d   ph m l       Telephone: Easingwold (0347) 21406 Fax No (0347) 22575
Our reference:
Your reference:




   Dr L J Martin MB BS
   Senior Medical Officer
   Department of Health
   Room 347
   Richmond House
   79 VflMtehall
   London
   SW1A 2NS                                                         18 February 1992




   Thank you very much indeed for your help and support at the Crowd Related
   Emergencies Conference last week and, in particular, for organising your ’team ’ on the
   final morning. I have been very encouraged by the feedback we have had so far - many
   have been very enthusiastic about the Conference as a whole - and the talks on the
   medical aspects on Wednesday were an important and valuable contribution.

   Cr-ce again thank you very much for your support and for sparing the tim e to tc&ke
                                                                                 t     psrt.
   I am copying this to the other members of t h e ’team ’.
PLEASE QUOTE REFERENCE ON ALL CORRESPONDENCE

Our Reference      12E50X5 ? ^       fo o V   t j                                      *       E   h V
                                                                f\^   .
Mr D C G Brook
Civil Emergencies Adviser
Home Office                                                                 Richmond House
50 Queen Annes Gate
                                                                               79 Whitehall
London
SW1H 9AT                                                                  London SW 1A 2NS

                                                                  Telephone 071 210 3000
                                               Direct Line 071 210 5769
                                               Fax Number 071 925 2670

                                               14th February 1992

SEMINAR: CROWD RELATED DISASTERS

May I first thank you for inviting me to this very useful meeting
and for the usual excellent arrangements.  If the seminar does no
more than raise awareness and engender dialogue and real liaison
between the many disparate bodies represented it will, I sense,
achieve much.

I regretted that one of my group of speakers strayed from prepared
text and another spoke so slowly as to compromise the timetable.  I
should perhaps have cut them short, but I hesitated to do that when
presenters had waited patiently and had important points to make in
the light of my own introduction.

I am sorry to raise the ugly matter of finance, but both Dr Fisher
and Dr Baderman have spoken to me about travelling expenses. They
of   course   appreciated   as I d i d ^ t h e College covered their
accommodation and subsistence, but in contrast to GD personnel they
paid train fares from their own pockets. As invited speakers,
neither qualifies for official study leave and expenses.      [I have
had no approach to date from Mr Thornley, who travelled by car.]
Is it possible for them to be reimbursed by the Home Office,
directly or via the College, please?




                                               DR LAURENCE M A R T I N ^
                                                                  fficer
                                                                  zy Planning)




   C   A   R   I   N   G         F   O   R          T   H   E         1    9   9   0       s
4jSC7695p/3




  #
                                                                                *    E     h V



Dr. John Ashton
University of Liverpool                                              Richmond House
Department of Public Health
PO Box 147                                                                79 Whitehall
Liverpool                                                         London SW1A 2NS
L69 3BX
                                                             Telephone 071 210 5150

                                                     From the Chief Medical Officer

                                                                  Sir Donald Acheson
                                                 KBE D M MD DSc [HD FRCP FRCS FFPHM FFOM


                                                   July 1990




Thank you for your letter about the conclusions you have drawn from
your personal presence at the Hillsborough disaster.    As I recollect
our discussion, you indicated you w ere satisfied wit h the
arrangements which we have in hospital for dealing with major
emergencies, but felt that we are open to criticism in respect of
the triage on the spot of the disaster.

I am looking into this point and also to your suggestions and will
be in touch.
    g W lg 6 T h e U n iv e r s it y o f L iv e r p o o l
    [fi^tJlvxT^/Jg/



DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH                                     TELEPHONE:
P.O. BOX 147 LIVERPOOL L69 3BX                                       Professor Pharoah 051 794 5576
                                                                        Correspondent 051 794
                                                                 University Switchboard 051 794 2000
                                                                          Telex No: 627095 UNILPL G
HEAD OF DEPARTMENT: PROFESSOR P O D PHAROAH                                         FAX: 051 708 6502




JRA/SMC/j ul09002                                                       W 3 ]0;-HCE
                                                                               «TH£

11     July 1990

Sir Donald Acheson
Chief Medical Officer
Department of Health
Richmond House
79 Whitehall       ^
LONDON
SW1A 2NS


Dear Sir Donald

Further to our conversation in Edinburgh, I am writing to confirm the two points
which we agreed:

1       That, in the light of the Hillsborough disaster, it would be appropriate to
        ensure that all agencies potentially involved at the scene of disasters
        should review their training programmes and disaster planning to ensure that
        effective triage is practised as and when necessary. In addition, it might
        be appropriate for all Deans of medical schools to be asked to ensure that
        all medical graduates should be familiar with the basics of an organised
        mass casualty response at the site of the disaster as well as at a casualty
        department.

2       That it might now be a suitable time for the Department of Health to sponsor
        a multiragency conference which focuses on all aspects of disaster and mass
        casualty situations - prevention, coordination and response, the actual
        situation when disasters occur, the hospital response, the aftermath
        evaluation of the response. Such a meeting might profitably draw on the
        experiences of those involved in the recent series of disasters (Zeebrugge,
        Piper Alpha, King's Cross, Clapham, Lockerbie - and Hillsborough). It might
        be appropriate to ask the Faculty of Public Health Medicine to convene the
        meeting in conjunction with other relevant organisations.

Once again, many thanks for asking my views on these matters.




DR JOHN ASHTON MBBS MSc FFCM MRCPsych
Senior Lecturer
                                                                                       F or.       P v T iG v iT S s -         ^ ,0 ^         ftU V T O ^ V



                        C^A-O — ^                                      v^WV"
     T H S January    1990 w^£>  A*-k_£\V                "u       P U B L IC                        jl i i rvANj-/ L>rxx         in   i
                               Ar~    /x£te-
                                                                 "s(3 •
           Hillsborough and Working for Patients
      Ninety-five football supporters died at Hillsborough       / all those involved in local emergency responses at
         st April - the greatest disaster in British footbal-       football matches to be aware of how the local response
        ing history. The need to consider the disaster in the       should become coordinated with the district disaster
      light of other recent events such as Zeebrugge, Piper         plan and should know exactly what to do and what
   fl Alpha, King’s Cross and Clapham is in the tradition           the lines of communication, command and responsi­
    \ of public health and has been discussed elsewhere.1 2        bility should be in the event of another disaster.
      Public safety is part of public health.                           The group pointed out that lack of understanding
% 1 In his interim report on Hillsborough, Lord Justice              of these matters had contributed to the chaotic situa­
      Taylor reinforced this point of view in making more            tion that prevailed between 3pm and 4pm at Hill­
      than 40 recommendations “as the minimum neces­                 sborough on April 15th and to the argument which
      sary to ensure that existing football grounds can, for         had ensued as to whether or not it would have been
      the present, be safely used.3 In addition to specific          possible to use a defibrillator safely on the pitch and
      points about ground design and layout and the m an­            to have made m ori use of South Yorkshire s
      agement of entry to, and egress from grounds, these            paramedics - a group much in the news at the present
      recommendations cover the coordination of                   [ time. (Only four of South Yorkshire’s 33 trained
      emergency services (4 recommendations); first aid,          j paramedics were in fact used at Hillsborough.) In the
      medical facilities and ambulances (5 recommenda­               opinion of the MAHWP, had everybody from the
      tions!; and communications (4 recommendations).                emergency services who were involved known
      Interestingly, those recommendations were made                 exactly what to do, a casualty clearing area would
      despite the report finding that “no valid criticism can        have been established and secured on the pitch with
      be made of the response by the St. John Ambulance              the support of the police and it would then have been
      Brigade, by SYMAS (South Yorkshire Metropolitan                possible to have used a defibillator safely and to have -
      Ambulance Service), or by the fire brigade on April            made more use of paramedic skills.
      15th. . .”                                                        The mechanism which the working party proposes
         Since the disaster, a group of 13 doctors, nurses and       to improve the situation is essentially a simple one. It
      a medical student who all became involved with the             involves the establishment by each football club of an
      emergency reponse at Hillsborough have considered              emergency committee which is responsible for ensur­
      the disaster specifically from the point of view of the        ing that proper arrangements are made for
      immediate emergency response. This group has now               emergency cover. That committee would normally
      submitted its report to the second stage orthe"Taylor          consist of the local casualty consultant, chief ambu­
      Inquiry^ The report has implications not oniy~Tor              lance officer, county surgeon of St. John Ambulance
      football clubs, the police and the statutory medical           chief fire officer, chief constable and borough
      services including the ambulance services and                  engineer. The committee would normally meet at the
      thereby the regional health authorities, but also for          beginning and end of the football season and its
      districts and, in particular, for consultants in acci­         recommendations would be binding and conditional
      dent and emergency medicine. The implications are              on the issue of a safety certificate for the ground.
      in l i ne with the extended brief oTDHAs for pubTi c              The idea of involving the local casualty consultant
 . —ilealth under the white paper, W orking for_Patiejrts.           as the person with expertise in emergency medicine
         The medics at Hillsborough Working Party                    is an interesting one. | t is in line with the newly
      <MAHW P 1 felt that constructive suggestions could be          defined x'ole of district health authorities with the
      made concerning the organisation and staffing,                 much greater emphasis on public health and preven­
      training and equipping of on-site emergency services           tion. The provision of such advice and support as
      at football matches and similar events and about the           necessary could be written into contracts and need
      lines of management, coordination and communica­               not stop with football matches. Why should a casu­
      tion between different professional groups providing           alty consultant not have a contractual responsibility
      those services. The working party felt that the best           for, say, spending 20(/t of his or her time on accident
      way of ensuring that an acceptable standard of public          prevention and likewise a coronary care physician for
      safety and emergency provision is attained for all             spending time 0 1 1 coronary prevention? There could
      stadia nationwide is through a strengthening of law            well be an important opportunity in the white paper
      via the current mechanism whereby safety certifi-              for refocusing clinical work upstream towards pre­
      cates for grounds are issued By tKe Borough                    vention, which is highlighted by the Hillsborough
      Engineer.                     ,                                disaster.
         The working party confined itself to a considera­
      tion of on-site emergency services and the capability
      of c'jping v.ith normai medical emergencies at sport­                                                            John Ashton
      ing events. It took the view that at present even the                                                     Senior Lecturer
      normal eventualities are not adequately catered for                                           Department o f Public Health
      and that by and large the medical facilities at football     1    Ashton, J. Personal View: One Disaster After Another. . .B ritish
      grounds in the UK are amateurish, A first step to                 Medical Journal 1989; 298: 1261,
      ensuring an adequate emergency response in the               2    Mohammed. S. and Ashton. J. Playing Safe: Public Health at
      event of a disaster was felt to be having an effective            Hillsborough. Radical Community Medicine Autumn 1989; 37:
                                                                        18.
      system with clearly defined responsibilities in place        3    HMSO. The Hillsborough Stadium disaster. 15 April 1989.
      to cope with more likely smaller scale problems.                  Inquiry by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor. Interim report. Lon­
         The group felt that it was unrealistic, to equip and           don: HMSO CM 765. 1989.
      staff every sports stadium with sufficient resources to      4    Report of the Medics at Hillsborough Working Party (MAHVVpi
                                                                        or. the future provision of emergency services at football grounds.
      cope with another Hillsborough and that the main                  Liverpool: Liverpool University Department of Public Health,
      emphasis should be on ensuring that another Hill­                 1989. Available from: Department of Public Health, University
      sborough cannot happen. However it is important for               of Liverpool. PO Box 147, Liverpool L69 3BX.
                                          THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

y       REPORT OF THE MEDICS AT HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY (MAHUP) 01 THE
,   ; ‘ FUTURE PROVISION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

        Background

        We are a group of doctors, nurses and a medical student who all became

        involved with      the    emergency        response         at   Hillsborough         on    April   15th

        1989,    Some of us were at Hillsborough as football supporters and were

        standing either      on     the   terraces       or    in the      stands      when    the     disaster

       occurred.       Others were among those who responded to media requests for

       assistance at the ground and turned out to help.




       In our opinion the interim report of the disaster inquiry (Cm765) is a

       paradox with       respect    to    the emergency aspects.                 On   the one hand           the

       report found that          'no valid criticism can be made of the response by

       the St John's Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS (South Yorkshire Metropolitan

       Ambulance Service) or by the fire brigade on April 15th                                     ' (para 296

       p 53).     On    the other hand       the report makes              4 recommendations on the

       co-ordination of emergency services,                     5 recommendations            on     first aid,

       medical    facilities       and    ambulances          and    importantly        in     our    view,    4

       recommendations on communications                 .    (Appendix 1)




       It seems clear from the inquiry report that the overall responsibility

       for coordinating the services               responsible for ensuring public                     safety,

       including the emergency services, rested, and at present rests with the

       police    force.     Setting       aside    the       attribution        of blame      for     specific

       failures    on     April     15th,     it     seemed         to    the     working          party    that

       constructive recommendations could be made concerning the organisation

       and staffing, training and equipping of on-site emergency services                                     at
ft


¥


     football     matches       and   similar      events          and    the    lines     of    management,

     co-ordination and communication between different professional                                        groups

     providing those services.            The MAHWP working party confined itself to a

     consideration of on-site            emergency            services     and wishes           to propose      a

     system designed to          cope with normal medical                      emergencies       at    sporting

     events (ie individual or small numbers of casualties/emergencies).                                        It

     is   our view       that   at    present      even       that   eventuality          is    not    properly

     catered for and that members of the public,                          as distinct from club and

     board     members    and    players       cannot         depend      on    an   adequate         emergency

     response.     A first step to ensuring an adequate emergency response in

     the event of a disaster             is    to have an effective system with                         clearly

     defined    responsibilities         in place             to   cope   with more        likely       smaller

     scale problems.




     It is our view that it is unrealistic to equip and staff every sporting

     stadium with sufficient resources to cope with another Hillsborough and

     that the main emphasis should be on ensuring that another Hillsborough

     cannot happen.        It is to be hoped that the main recommendations of the

     Inquiry and their implementation will ensure that that is the case.




     It   is   however,     important         to   give       consideration          as   to    how    a    local

     domestic     emergency response might be                      coordinated with            a large      scale

     disaster response          and what mechanisms                need to be        in place         to ensure

     that all members of the emergency services, both ground-based and those

     who are part of the district disaster plan know exactly what to do and

     what the lines of communication, command and responsibility should be

     in the event of another disaster.




                                                          2
*




    It    is    our   opinion      that      lack      of     understanding           of      these    matters

    contributed       to    the   chaotic       situation between               3.00pm        and   4.00pm    at

    Hillsborough on April 15th 1989.                   In our opinion that chaotic situation

    was not necessary and has led to at least one erroneous conclusion in

    the interim report - namely that 'to attempt to use a defibrillator on

    the pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous

    owing to the risk of injury from the electric charge'.                                    In our opinion

    had    everybody       from   the      emergency         services      who    were      involved     known

    exactly what they had to do,                 a casualty clearing area would have been

    established       and    secured       on    the   pitch        in    addition       to    that    in     the

    gymnasium.             It would     then      have       been    possible          to     have     used     a

    defibrillator safely and to have drawn on the skills of more of the 33

    South Yorkshire paramedics who were available                               for disasters         than the

    few who were actually used.




    Similarly it is clear from the evidence given to                                  the inquiry that a

    third      casualty     clearing       station     should have             been   established behind

    Leppings Lane goal as part of a preformulated plan,                                that there was no

    such       plan    and that       no     casualty           clearing         station       was    formally

    established.       These points all refer to a fundamental weakness                                  in the

    arrangements for an emergency plan for the ground.




    Recommendations

    1.      Organisation and staffing

            It is      our view       that      the interim report of the Taylor Committee

            provides a       good starting point for ensuring an adequate first aid

            and   emergency       response        at   football          and    similar       grounds.        The




                                                         3
’   •
        report recognises the inadequacy of depending on a club doctor who

        may not have experience of mass casualty work as the mainstay of

        the on-site response.               However,      we feel that the recommendations

        inthe interim report do not go far enough in two respects:

        a)   It seems to us that the most appropriate medical input is to

             be   found       in     the    District       General         Hospital    accident      and

             emergency department and that negotiations should take place

             in each district for the consultant casualty surgeon to take

             on   the    responsibility          for      providing         cover    for    appropriate

             public events.            Normally this responsibility would be met by

             making       available          junior       casualty          staff     and     operating

             department        assistants       to       work   closely       with    the    paramedics

             from the ambulance service in operating a rota for adequate

             match day cover.              The responsibility for financing this cover

             should be with the football club.

        b)   In   order       to    ensure    that proper         arrangements         are    made   for

             emergency cover it should be the responsibility of football

             clubs      and        allied    organisations            to    convene    an     emergency

             committee consisting of:

                                    a casualty consultant
                                    chief ambulance officer
                                    county surgeon of St John's Ambulance
                                    Chief Fire Officer
                                    Chief Constable
                                    Borough Engineer

             who should collectively advise on the arrangements to be                                 in

             place.       The        responsibilities           for        funding    the     necessary

             arrangements           should     lie    with      the    football       club    or   other

             organisation arranging the event.




                                                     4
’   •
                    The   responsibilities            for    ensuring      an   adequate    emergency

                    response should lie clearly with the members of the committee

                    and the arrangements proposed should be                     enforceable by law

                    via a strengthening of the Safety Certificate mechanism.




        With regard to the medical emergency response itself it should be the

        responsibility      of        the      consultant        casualty       surgeon     to        make

        recommendations    for    staffing,       training       and   equipment     to   provide      the

        necessary emergency       service.        The    involvement of more highly              trained

        health workers    in a duty rota would be anticipated to free St John's

        Ambulance staff to concentrate on the less serious emergencies.




        An    emergency plan for minor           emergencies       for which the      on-site      staff

        might expect to be self-sufficient and for major emergencies where the

        on-site staff would need to fall in and work closely with the district

        emergency plan should be formulated and be a statutory requirement for

        the issue of a safety certificate.




        The    co-ordination     of    these    two     plans    should    be   facilitated      by    the

        casualty    consultant,       chief    ambulance        officer,    county   surgeon      of    St

        John's Ambulance, Chief Fire Officer and Chief Constable being members

        of both emergency plan teams.




        Training and Equipment

        The on-site emergency plan should provide the basis for a programme of

        training to involve all those employed on the staff of football clubs

        and similar organisations so that they all know what to do in the case




                                                         5
'   •
        of both     containable      emergencies      and    full-scale      disasters.          Training

        should also take account of the need for certain key staff eg stewards

        to be trained in basic first-aid.




        The interim report of the Taylor Inquiry makes certain proposals about

        the   first   aid    facilities      and   equipment       which    should    be    present    at

        football grounds.       We would wish to commend to the inquiry the circular

        from Dr E B Lewis, Surgeon in Chief of the St John's Ambulance, London

        dated   9th   June    1989   which    lists    the       recommended      first    aid    medical

        arrangements    at    football     grounds     in    the    light    of    the     Hillsborough

        disaster.     We note particularly           the    inclusion      in that circular of a

        list of equipment which is only to be used by appropriately trained and

        designated personnel (oxygen and Entonox) and a list of equipment which

        is only to be used by registered medical practitioners                            familiar with

        their use     (advanced monitoring ECG,             BP   and pulse oximeters,            advanced

        treatment     drips    and    sets     and    defibrillators         (appendix        2).     The

        equipment     to be    contained     in each medical          room would ultimately be

        decided and regularly checked by the responsible casualty consultant.




        Lines of management, co-ordination and communication

        The     football      club    emergency       committee        should        be     responsible

        individually and collectively for              the arrangements           for a containable

        on-site emergency and for ensuring adequate linking in to the district

        disaster plan response          in the     event of        a non-containable         emergency.

        The responsibilities are as follows:




                                                       6
The   football club   to convene       regular meetings   of    the   emergency

committee prior to the start of each football season and at its

conclusion and at any time in between at the request of a member

of the emergency committee.




The casualty consultant should:

ensure that an adequate emergency rota is provided to a level as

agreed    with the    emergency committee       in   order to     satisfy   the

requirements for the Safety Certificate and the emergency plan;




ensure that a rolling programme of staff training is developed in

keeping with the agreed emergency plan.




ensure    that adequate    and effective       equipment is      provided    in

keeping with the agreed emergency plan.




The County Surgeon of St John 's Ambulance should:

ensure that an adequate emergency rota is provided as agreed with

the requirements of the Safety Certificate and the emergency plan;




ensure that a rolling programme of staff training is developed in

keeping with the agreed emergency plan.




ensure    that adequate    and effective       equipment is      provided    in

keeping with the agreed emergency plan.




                                   7
’   +
             The responsible casualty consultant and the County Surgeon of St

             John's   Ambulance       should   be   responsible        for    co-ordinating    the

             medical and first-aid response and ensuring full understanding of

             each others roles.




        4,   The Chief Fire Officer should:

             ensure that the Fire Service response is fully co-ordinated with

             that of the other emergency services and that staff training is

             developed in keeping with the agreed emergency plan,




        5,   The Chief Constable should:

             ensure   that   the    emergency services         are   able    to carry out     their

              tasks in an orderly,      effective and efficient way in keeping with

              the agreed emergency plan and that appropriate staff training is

              developed,




        6,   The Borough Engineer should:

              ensure that statutory requirements for crowd                   safety and for     the

              issue of a Safety Certificate are insisted on and met and that no

              public event       takes place without these           requirements having been

             met.




        It   should   be   the    responsibility        of   all   members    of   the   emergency

        committee to ensure that good communication between them is maintained

        at all times both on and off match days,




                                                    8
The      interim         report of      the Taylor               Inquiry makes        4    recommendations              about

communication         in a more         general             sense.      We believe         these     to    be      of   great

importance         in preventing         another Hillsborough.                      However,      we would wish            to

point out the importance of good communications between emergency agencies as

well     as     within       them.          In        our       opinion the        failure      of     inter-agency

communication contributed to the chaos on April 15th 1989.




Conclusion

In    our     opinion,      the       medical         facilities         at    football         grounds       in    the    UK

are      amateurish.            A system such               asdescribed       above        would     professionalise

thearrangements           and bring          them up             to    the standard        which     the      public      has

a     right    to    expect.Part            of        the    weakness         in          the    present        situation

appears       to    be    the     extent to            which      what    are      essentially            quasi-public

organisations ie football clubs fall outside public jurisdiction because they

are    privately         owned.        If        an    acceptable         standard of           public        safety      and

emergency provision              is    to be          attained        for all      stadia nationwide               then any

recommendations            from the      Taylor             Inquiry           should be         made      a     statutory

requirement enforceable by law via the Safety Certificate mechanism.




Sister ____________ Nursing Officer in Occupational Health, Merseyside.
Dr John Ashton, Senior Lecturer in Public Health, University of Liverpool
Dr               General Practitioner, Sheffield.
Professor Tim Cooke, Department of Surgery, University of Glasgow.
Dr I                   General Practitioner, Liverpool.
Mr                  Senior Nurse Manager, Wirral Health Authority.
Dr                   General Practitioner, Sheffield.
Dr|             General Practitioner, Sheffield.
Dr John Hewitt, Consultant, The Women's Hosptial, Liverpool.
Dr              , General Practitioner, Sheffield.
Dr              General Practitioner, East Kilbride, Scotland
Dr                 General Practitioner, Sheffield.
M       r       , 4th Year Medical Student, University of Liverpool.




                                                            9
’   •

        Appendix 1.   Recommendations of the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry

        Interim Report



        Coordination of emergency services

             The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through

             senior nominated officers regular liaison concerning crowd safety

             at each stadium.

             Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should

             ensure that the fire service and ambulance service are given full

             details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the

             number of spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and

             exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning the

             control or movement of the crowd.     Such details should be readily

             available in the control rooms of each of the emergency services.

             Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of

             emergency vehicles from all three services should be reviewed.

             They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and

             accessibility within the ground itself.

             Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be

             briefed as to the contingency plans for the arrival of emergency

             services and should be informed when such services are called as

             to where and why they are required.




        First aid, medical facilities and ambulances

             There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained

             first aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the

             responsibility for securing such attendance.




                                             10
    There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms.          The

    number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within

    them should be specified by the local authority after taking

    professional medical advice and should be made a requirement of

    any Safety Certificate.

    The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at

    each match and available to deal with any medical exigency at the

    ground.      He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid.

    He should be present at the ground at least an hour before

    kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the

    match.    His whereabouts should be known to those in the police

    control room and he should be immediately contactable.

    At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate

    ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an

    expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

    The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where

     larger crowds are expected should be specified by the local

    authority after consultation with the ambulance services and

     should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.




Communications

    There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to

     enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated and

     answered.     The radio system should be such as to give operators in

     the control rooms priority over, and the capacity or override,

     others using the same channel.       Additional channels should be

     used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.




                                     11
Consideration should be given to sound-proofing the control rooms

against excessive crown noise.

To complement radio communications, there should be a completely

separate system of land lines with telephone links between the

control room and key points at the ground.

Within the control room, there should be a public address system

to communicate with individual areas outside and inside the ground

with groups of areas or with the whole ground.    Important

announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the

attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the

ground.   This arrangement should be prominently advertised on

every programme sold for every match.

Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising

boards to address the crowd.     Consideration should also be given

to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to

indicate to the control room the existence of certain emergencies

or requirements.




                               12
                                                                                               APPENDIX 2

                                                                           St John Ambulance
                                                  A V o l u n t a ry O r g a n i z a t i o n o f The O r d e r o f St. l o h n


                                                                            H.Q. St. John Am b u l a n c e
                                                                               1 Grosvenor Crescent
                                                                                   London SW1X7EF
                                                                                            T e l e p h o n e 01-235    5231

9 June     1989


TO:     County      Commissioners

COPY    TO:     County      Commanders
                County      Surgeons
                County      Nursing Officers




                            FIRST     A ID   MEDICAL           ARRANGEMENTS                       AT

                                          FOOTBALL GROUNDS


The r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for d e t e r m i n i n g the l e v e l of f i r s t aid
r e q u i r e m e n t s at L e a g u e F o o t b a l l M a t c h e s has b e e n d e l e g a t e d by the
H o m e O f f i c e to L o c a l C e r t i f i c a t i n g O f f i c e r s , a n d d e s p i t e
c o n t i n u i n g p r e s s u r e f r o m St J o h n A m b u l a n c e the Horae O f f i c e w i l l
n o t a m e n d this d e c i s i o n .          T he St J o h n A m b u l a n c e v i e w is t h a t the
p r o v i s i o n of an a g r e e d l e v e l of f i r s t a id f a c i l i t i e s s h o u l d be a
s t a t u t o r y r e q u i r e m e n t t h r o u g h o u t E n g l a n d a n d W a l e s , n o t j u s t in
c e r t a i n c o u n t i e s s u c h as G r e a t e r Lond o n .

N e v e r t h e l e s s , this is c o n s i d e r e d an a p p r o p r i a t e time f or C o u n t i e s
a c t i v e l y to p u r s u e the p r o v i s i o n of f a c i l i t i e s a n d e q u i p m e n t that
it is c o n s i d e r e d " h o u l d be a v a i l a b l e at L e a g u e F o o t b a l l G r o u n d s .
The a n n e x to this l e t t e r g i v e s r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h r e g a r d to the
b a s i c St J o h n A m b u l a n c e a t t e n d a n c e at L e a g u e F o o t b a l l M a t c h e s
t o g e t h e r w i t h the b a s i c m e d i c a l f a c i l i t i e s t h at s h o u l d be
available.

It is e s s e n t i a l t h a t t h e r e is c l o s e l i a i s o n e s t a b l i s h e d and
m a i n t a i n e d b e t w e e n SJA, the L o c a l C e r t i f i c a t i n g O f f i c e r , the
M e d i c a l O f f i c e r of the f o o t b a l l a u t h o r i t y , the l o c a l e m e r g e n c y
s e r v i c e s ( a m b u l a n c e , f i r e and p o l i c e ) , and the C o n s u l t a n t of the
local A c c i d e n t and E m e r g e n c y D e p a r t m e n t .     C o n s i d e r a t i o n s h o u l d be
g i v e n to s e t t i n g up a w o r k i n g p a r t y w i t h r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s f r o m
these au thor ities .                It is m a n d a t o r y t h at the C o u n t y S u r g e o n , St
J o h n A m b u l a n c e , be i n v o l v e d in all s u c h n e g o t i a t i o n s f o r it is
upon him that p r o f e s s i o n a l vicarious r e s p o n s i b i l i t y will devolve.

The C h i e f C o m m a n d e r w i l l be w r i t i n g in the n e a r                             future             about
d o n a t i o n s , a n d in d u e c o u r s e we w i l l be w r i t i n g                          to y o u           following
the H i l l s b o r o u g h E n q u i r y .




Dr E B L e w i s                                                                         Mr      A J Sunderland
Surgeon-in-Chief                                                                         C o m m i ssio n e r - i n - C h ief
                          ANNEX          TO ST J O H N           AMBULANCE           SUBMISSION
     RECOMMENDED         FIRST       AID        MEDICAL            ARRANGEMENTS              AT     FOOTBALL GROUNDS
                                                DATED         27 A P R I L     1989




1-    The      following        is       to     be      considered            a guideline               of     the     basic
requirements            for    St J o h n          Ambulance            attendance           at     League           Football
Matches;


2-    Personnel          and    Ambulance:                    A minimum         of     three        SJA       members           for    up
to   1,000     spectators,               and       one     additional            member         for      every         1,000
spectators        above        the       first          1,0 0 0,    up    to a t o t a l           of    10,000
spectators.             Thereafter              an      additional            member        fo r    every        additional
2,000    spectators.


3.    Ambulances:              A minimum                of on e     SJA       ambulance            and       cr e w.


4.    Accommodation


        (a )    Main      First          A id      Room


                 (i)      There          should          be    provided          and      maintained             by       the
                owners         at    least           one      properly         equipped,            adequately              heated,
                 electrically                 lighted,           and     p r o p e r l y .v e n t i l a t e d        first       aid
                 room     used       solely             for    that      purpose.           T he    minimum            size      of
                 the     room       to    be:


                 200      sq ft f o r          grounds          with      a capacity               for        10,000 persons
                 250      sq ft f o r          grounds          with      a capacity               for        25,000 persons
                 3 00     sq ft f o r           grounds         above                                         25,000 persons
                 ( t he s e    figures             include         50    sq    ft    for     storage            and       coats)




                 (ii)         Adjacent             to    this      main       first       aid      room,        and       having
                 reasonable              direct          access         from     it,      there          shall       be     at   least
                 one     w.c.       with        a wash         basin       and      hot     and     cold        water        supply;-
                 The     w.c.       is     to      be    kept      in w o r k i n g       order          and    in     clean       and
                 hygienic           condition              by .the o w n e r s         of     the       ground         to    the

                 satisfaction                 of     the      licensing          authority.
                                                       -2-




     (iii)      The       first        aid       room should              have        suitable          access       for
     ambulances,            and        for       first           aid    personnel           a nd      the
     public         from    every           part        of       the    ground.


     (i v )     There       should           be        provided          and    maintained              at    the
     expense         of    the        owners           of    the       grounds,        at    least          four
     electric         sockets,              an     internal             telephone           or     radio
     telephone            (essential              for        communication              with          the    Ground
     Control         Centre),           a telephone                    connected        to an          external
     line,      a hot       a nd       cold        running             water    supply,            including
     drinking         water,           over        a sink          or    handbasin,              all    to    be
     kept      in    a clean           and       hygienic              condition        to       the
     satisfaction                of    the       licensing              authority.


     (v)       There       should           be     provided             a Notice        Board          showing
     the      names       an d    internal              telephone             numbers        of       club    offices
     and      senior       officers.                   It    is    essential           this        Notice
     Board      contains              the    address              of    the    hospital,              its
     telephone            number,           and        the       emergency        telephone             number       of
     the      Accident           and    Emergency                 Department           ON-TAKE          that       day.
     This      information              should              be    signed       an d    promogated             by    the
     senior         SJA    officer           on        the       occasion       of     the       dut y .


     (vi)           There        should           be    suitable          sign-posting
     throughout            the        ground           provided          and    maintained              in    the
     position(s)             indicated                 to    the       satisfaction              of    the

     licencing            authority.




5.   Emergency            First        Aid        Posts


     (a)       These        should           be    permanent             locations            for      the    storage
     of    equipment             for    the        immediate             use    of     SJA       Members       on

     duty.
       (b)        There       should        be    an    internal          telephone           and/or           a
       radio,       a map          of    the     ground       with       the    locations           of
       other       First         Aid     Posts     etc       being       used     on    a particular                day,
       and    a Notice             Board        showing       the       names     and    internal
       telephone             numbers        of    cl u b     offices       and      senior         officers.
       It    is    essential             this     Notice          Board    contains           the    address             of
       the    hospital,              its    telephone             number,       and     the    emergency
       telephone             number        of    the    Accident          and     Emergency          Department
       ON-TAKE          th a t     day.         This    information             should        be    signed          and
       promogated             by     the    senior          SJA    officer        on    the    occasion             of
       the    duty.


6.     Main tenance


       The    Main       F i r s t Aid      Room       and        the   Emergency         First         A id
       Post(s)          s h o u l d be     equipped,             cleaned        and m a i n t a i n e d        at   the
       expense          of    the o w n e r s     of       the    ground.


7.     Communications


       In    addition            to the     telephones              and/or       radio     referred
       to    above       there should             be    an       SJA    radio      network
       established               providing            communication              between:


       (a)        the    Main        First       Aid    Room
       (b)        the    Emergency              First       Aid    Posts
       (c)        SJA    ambulance(s)
       (d)        Key    SJA       personnel           in    the       ground.




Medical      Equipment


(a )   Main       First       A id      Room


       12    Furley          type       stretchers
        1 scoop         stretcher
       2 carrying             chairs
        trolley         stretchers              - 2 in       situ       with     screens,          plus
            2 for       general          use     at    large        grounds,        or o n e       at    smaller
            grounds
                                          -   4   -




6    ' S n a t c h 1 Bags:         the    contents             to    include:
     6 x No         1 dressings
     6 x No         2 dressings
     6 x No         3 dressings
     4 x 20x10cm            waterproof                adhesive       dressings
     4 x large            burns    dressings
     cutting         shears
     6 pairs         disposal          gloves


24 w o o l      blankets

12    cellular            blankets
6 pillows            with    plastic          covers
disposable            paper       sheets
b u c k e ts
bowls
'No S m o k i n g '        signs
paper      cups       and    Dispenser
paper      towels          and    Dispenser
supply         of    black       plastic          bags       for    normal    rubbish
supply         of    yellow       plastic             bags    for    medical      waste
     (Arrangements               must    be       made       for    all   waste    to    be    disposed
     of   correctly)


cupboards            for    stretchers
cupboards            for    blankets
cupboards            with    formica          top       (for       dressing)      etc    containing
      first         aid    and    medical             supplies
emergency            lighting
portable            lighting       -    (recommend             helmet       lights)
torches         of    various          sizes


equipment            which,       if a v a i l a b l e ,       is    only    to   be    used    by
appropriately               trained       and          designated         personnel:


     Oxygen
     Entonox


equipment            which,       if a v a i l a b l e ,       is    only    to   be    used    by
registered            medical          practitioners                familiar      with    their      us e :
                   advanced    monitoring        ECG   BP   and   Pulse   Oximeters
                   advanced    treatment       drips    and   s e ts
                   defibrillators




(b )   Emergency      Aid    First    Aid   Po s t s


       12   Stretchers
       24   Blankets
         3 Snatch     Bags    - see    8(a)    above    for   contents




9 June      1989
                                                 Cjl
                                                  OA*-
3 OC : h i   i
                                                  Mr        :A/>


                           lO DOWNING STREET      Uj.^1
                             LONDON SW1A 2AA       2 October 1989
From thePrivateSecretary                          Mv'       ^


                                CONFIDENT!




                                  FOOTBALL

     The Prime Minister was grateful for the Lord President's
minute of 27 September which she has noted without comment.

     I am copying this minute to               (FCO), the private
secretaries to the members of H uommitteer
                        1.WW/ ;                         ww*
Office),                  (Department of Environment) and
         (Cabinet Office).




                              CAROLINE SLOCOCK




                psq.
Lord President's Office.




                                CONFIDENTIAL
                                       CONFIDENTIAL




PRIME MINISTER


FOOTBALL

H Committee this morning considered a helpful paper by                                  Douglas
Hurd and Chris            Patten    reviewing the state of play on                      football
related issues.


2.      Proceedings        on    the     Football     Spectators         Bill    will    resume
shortly.          Sniping by the Opposition and the football authorities
at    the    football      membership      scheme will        continue.         Lord    Justice
Taylor's final report              is expected around the turn of the year,
and although thought unlikely to come out against the scheme, may
seek refinements to it.                  Difficult Parliamentary debates on the
commencement         orders      allowing      the    appointment        of     the    Football
Membership         Authority       and    establishing        the    Football         Licensing
Authority could follow.                The World Cup in June next year provides
a    natural      focus    for   hooligan      activity.         And     every     individual
match carries the potential for confrontation.


3.      Much action is, however,               in hand.       The Football Spectators
Bill    has       made    much   better     progress      than      at   one     time    seemed
likely, not least thanks to the efforts of Colin Moynihan.                                There
is much support for Part 2 of the Bill introducing Restriction
Orders on convicted football hooligans.                        The Holland v. England
match       has    been    cancelled      at   Colin    Moynihan's         request.         The
exchange of intelligence and of liaison officers between police
forces      is    increasing.          The head      of the    new National            Football
Intelligence Unit takes up post on Monday.                          On safety,         the Home
Office is monitoring action by football clubs to                                implement the
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor's interim report.




                                       CONFIDENTIAL
                                       CONFIDENTIAL




4.     The    Committee          considered       the    possibility           of    withdrawing
passports       from        known     football        hooligans,         but    the        practical
problems      in the way of this continue to be                          immense.           For    the
moment,      it seems sensible to focus our efforts on making Part 2
of    the    Bill     work      and   on    further      improving police             enforcement
effort.       The        Committee    also      looked    at     the possibility            of     our
seeking      the      abandonment          of   the    England     v.    Scotland          match    at
Wembley next spring and the withdrawal of England from the World
Cup.        They felt it would be premature to reach a firm view on
either.             It    appears     that      the    Scottish     Football         Association
privately       favours         cancelling       the     England        v.     Scotland      match,
especially if both countries are in the World Cup.                                  So this issue
may resolve itself, to everyone's satisfaction.                                Withdrawal from
the    World       Cup     is    an    altogether        larger     issue.            If    England
withdrew,       the      likelihood        is that the determined hooligans will
make    their      way     to    Italy anyway and          find a different                cause    to
champion.          In view of this and the irritation which a call                                 for
withdrawal will            cause genuine          football       fans,       colleagues      saw no
advantage in seeking withdrawal now.                           This is clearly something
we shall, however, need to keep under review.


5.     The Committee endorsed a programme of work over the next 12
months focusing on four main areas:


       i.     completing the passage of the Football Spectators Bill
       and bringing             the   National        Football    Membership          Scheme       and
       Restriction Order provisions into operation?


       ii.     bringing the National Football Intelligence Unit fully
       into operation;


       iii.     strengthening international cooperation in preparation
       for the World Cup;




                                       CONFIDENTIAL
                                    CONFIDENTIAL




        iv.    considering and acting on Lord Justice Taylor's                  final
        report.


6.      On this       last,   colleagues   recognised that perhaps        the most
difficult issue we may face over the coming months will arise if,
in     his    final    report,   Lord   Justice    Taylor    were   to   seek   some
modification to the Football Membership Scheme.                 They agreed that
in order to minimize the possible impact of that risk we should
aim,    so far as possible,          to uncouple work on implementation of
the scheme from consideration of the Taylor Report.                      We should
also focus attention as much as possible on the other action we
are taking       - on     safety,    on police liaison and tactics,         and on
international cooperation and joint action.                 The aim should be to
present our policies as positively as possible, emphasising that
they embrace a broad front.             It will be important for colleagues
actively to assist Douglas Hurd and Colin Moynihan in that task.


7.      I am copying this minute to the Foreign Secretary,                 members
of H Committee, Attorney General, Solicitor General, Minister for
Sport and Sir Robin Butler.




GEOFFREY HOWE
27 September 1989




                                    CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                Reference

                        4 A                                                                        —   ) —v \ . ' -
             /Ka                     CS                          fy & A A - i
                                                                                                                 s
                    ,.ii - y                                                     c s 1 c.
                                S£X
                                                                   8>vJ&: (>            * *   r1
              fa               |c s I
             ^                       fm>                                     CC •     f^Xo.Jfi'CaeL^'
             M/                s s t
             iMam              S^ X                             RECEHfSB
              Mh \                    Sj 'X                   0 9JUN1989
              kt                               /%sr
                                                               m?d         mto
              K                                 ^o&-

              fe itJ /y M     Q-H'!C& C ^ iS .1 I            (~ nLL S / I 0& & U£rH



                 U          CLio                                          ^

                  cjL) c ^ j i ^                         b+fk.                  y&u
                  4zo   l*^A sV *L        (K    C ty ^ ^ \

                   y X zJ L     uv^U tvMy'
                                                                    '    ^       sA l -




                                                                   S/6 0 ^ A^iM
                                                                    aA w   v
                                                                     <^TAi 3^/J"



CODE 18*78
    BM/89260
                         DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH A N D SOCIAL SECURITY
                            Richmond House, 7 9 Whitehall, London SW1A 2N S
•      ©                                  Telephone 01-210 3000

                              From the Secretary o f State fo r Social Services




    POH(l)1659/153


    K Coombs Esq
    Leader Liverpool City Council
    PO Box 88
    Muncipal Buildings
    LIVERPOOL
    L69 2BH                                                        1 J U N E 1989




    Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial
    support for direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you
    propose to establish to provide and co-ordinate continuing care in
    the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy. You also wrote to
    John Moore, Secretary of State for Social Security and to
    Nicholas Ridley Secretary of State for the Environment.   Please
    accept this as a reply to all three letters.

    The Department's Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed
    of the action taken by the local social services departments
    together in the wake of the tragedy and I know that the Chief
    Inspector has written personally to all the Social Services
    Directors in appreciation of the remarkable efforts made by them and
    their staff.

    The precise response to a tra^e^ty" of this sort needs to be decided
    on the spot, on the basis of a careful examination of needs. My
    Department has no power to make additional resources available to
    local authorities for this purpose. However, I understand from
    Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment, that under a
    model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
    emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided
    special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
    circumstances.

    The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local
    Authority Associations and provide for assistance towards the
    immediate and additional costs of dealing with an emergency once
    expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond which local authorities would
    normally be expected to budget for.  In the case of the last use of
    the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold was
    (for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive
    product of a l.Op rate.
    *
        4

E .B .
   ♦        @

  If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind,
  Nicholas Ridley is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed
  application (though at first sight it looks as if the level of
  expenditure needed would be substantially below the likely threshold
  for the authorities involved). I know that he will keep me informed
  of events if you do decide to pursue this possibility.

  The Government has, of course, as you mention, already made a
  contribution of £500,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most
  closely affected by the Disaster

  Copies of this letter go to John Moore and Nicholas Ridley.




                                                     KENNETH CLARKE
