DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH A ND "ST                                                   S H o T g 3 5 t5 6
             REGISTERED NUMBER
Numerical                                 VOL.
                                                          § ^ c j | 4 \ O j u i l f ^ v v ie r'j'fev iC u U )
 prefix
                                                 H iClSfctfVC'U,


               CTP             (+ 2-1%
                                                   1 5     A e k \ ^               I H Z '0!
                RELATED PAPERS             \




              BEGINS               ENDS


                                  C c*%
            Title of F S
                                           TRANSIT MARKINGS                                     RECORD MATTERS

                                                                                                          Use spare space
                                                         Referred to
                                                                                                       for changes/notes
     BRING FORWARD
     MARKINGS ONLY
            To Whom

                                                                                                             A




                                                                                             Branch Review Decision
                                                                                             (see HQ permanent
                                                                                               instructions)

                                                                                           ^OESTROY rrow

                                                                                                DESTROY \fi ( j ~( J(year)
                                                                                             (any date 2 to 5 years after
                                                                                             last action)

                                                                                                                        SECOND
                                                                                                     W IN                   (25 years
                                                                                                tpr firftt ff

                                                                                            Boldly delete inappro­
                                                                                            priate iteprg

                                                                                            Signed

     To be noted after                                                                      Name..
      settlement by
                                                                                            Grade
    rniS RLE m ust
                                                                                            Branch...
     ^turned fok PA 3B
     m o, NELSON"
    ACTION is G O M P L C IW
                                                                                            Index noted (initials)


  EF 49                                                                (01433rPrinted in the UK for HMSO 2 /8 8 Dd. 8106109 C 700 (15121)
II
  EM402 IRET 133585153-000003                 RTID.NE
 EM -NE-0 1- A - A Q - 0 0 0 3 - F - 0 1- 2 4 0103466848
 S K P :E H 800524143                    CUST:CTP/42/8
 REF1 CTP/42/8                           NRM
 R eference #1; CTP/42/8
 Minor Dese: DH00057541    Srv: 18/03 5:30pm GMT     For: RPRATT:
 ROSEANNE PRATT DRO                      ROSEANNE PRATT DRO
                                                         MCVT
                                             ,, .-n,,,,^., :,- ,   .. ....
                                                                         Mll:Jj(i!4!!!|i|'ll:'lliHi!Mll|!!uli!lll;l..!!Nilllllu.jiljl.,.Mill.;1!,11.11.




1   t       o      m     e           k e s s o
                                                                                                                                                          th o ro u g h




    Friends a n d relatives p a y th e ir respects to H illsborough's dead.


                                     By Tim Newburn
                             National Institute for Social Work
                                                                    considerable strain was often placed upon
       HIS article reports some of the
    T  findings of a two-year study of
    the social work response to the
                                                                    relationships and the ability to continue working.
                                                                          Family and personal relationships in
                                                                    particular frequently came under stress after
    Hillsborough disaster which                                     Hillsborough. There were many that were quite
    focused on the 'needs' of those                                 radically changed and some that simply didn't
                                                                    survive. For the bereaved in particular this
    affected by Hillsborough,
                                                                    represented a 'double loss'. Negative or
    evaluated the services they were                                problematic consequences were reported both
    offered, looked at the nature of                                between partners and between parents and
    the work undertaken, the impact                                 children.
    this had on the staff, and the                                         Many of those affected by the disaster found
                                                                    that their working lives were disrupted. Whilst
    nature and effectiveness of the
                                                                    employers were generally sympathetic to the
    supervision and support offered                                  need for compassionate leave in the immediate
                                                                                                                          Tim N ew burn.
    to them.                                                         aftermath of the disaster, memories were short, of those affected by disasters, may exacerbate
                                                                     and requests fo r leave at later dates did not rather than mitigate suffering. Hillsborough - like
                                                                     necessarily receive a similar response.              other disasters - is an ongoing tragedy for many
                The impact of Hillsborough                                 There is an important lesson here which runs of its 'victims'.
                The disaster was found to have impacted on           th ro u g h o u t the study and which cannot be
        people's lives in five main ways: practically,               repeated too often: disasters are not simply            The nature of the disaster service
        emotionally, on behaviour, on relationships and              isolated or one-off events which recede into the
                                                                     background as the years pass.                             The key aspect of the job undertaken by
        on work. A lthough it is the emotional
        consequences of disaster that are most usually                     Disasters are followed by a series of events - social workers in the aftermath of the disaster
        discussed, the catalogue of practical,                       official inquiries, inquests and so on - which are was listening to relatives' and survivors' painfully
        psychological and emotional problems facing                   not only a vivid reminder of the tragedy but explicit accounts. It was the fact that this work
        t h o s e affected by disaster meant that                    which, because they are not geared to the 'needs' was so intensive and yet repetitive that many



                C IVIL PRO TECTION
                             ^                 __      idi:^_Wtoa.i^Whidifc::)




   w o r k e r s singled o u t as b e i n g t h e key to               people, not just in early days, but later on, when collaboration with the worker, determined was
   se p a ra tin g disaster work from the mainstream                   other sources of support have disappeared or appropriate.
   jobs they had done before (and since).                              when particularly stressful occasions arise.                 Watching the video material, although
        Of course, not everyone sought out or                                Early on, practical help tended to be not only frequently harrowing and extremely distressing,
   accepted professional help. The research                            the most useful avenue, but the most likely to was almost universally agreed to have been a
   identified five major barriers to accepting or                      lead to acceptance. The offer of practical support positive thing to have undertaken,
   requesting help - recognition, acceptance,                          and help was much less threatening - not only for
   worthiness, information, stigma - and each of                      the user but also for the social worker - than any
  these have im p ortan t im plications for the                       talk of counselling. It represented something                        Caring for the carers
   organisation and running of a post-disaster                        concrete that the worker could do.                           Involvement in disaster work frequently had
  service. Most importantly, services need to reach                         It showed that they were prepared to help a profound impact on the carers, Three factors
   out to those affected by the disaster. The majority                and th a t they would respond to what the were found to be particularly significant. Firstly,
  will not seek help without being prompted.                          individual person wanted. As was suggested the nature of the work. The highly intensive and
        Services need to be provided by staff who                     above, such tasks are not only im portant in repetitive nature of the 'counselling' role left
  feel confident about what it is they are offering.                 themselves, but they are also valuable because workers feeling preoccupied with aspects of the
  Services need to be available over an extended                     they help facilitate the trust that is important if disaster, or trigg ere d memories of earlier
  period of time - at least two years - and it needs                 other work is to be undertaken.                         incidents i n their lives.
  to be clear at the outset to all concerned - staff                       It is ironic therefore that these aspects of the        Secondly, and relatedly, there were the
  and potential users - that this will be the case.                  work are often accorded relatively little emotional and behavioural consequences of the
                                                                     importance in analyses of the social work task work. Workers reported sleep loss, nightmares,
                                                                     after disaster.
                       Relationship                                                                                          weight loss, loss of concentration, increased
                                                                           Both workers and users confirm ed that vulnerability and increased alcohol consumption.
        Two factors were identified as having been                  'listening skills', 'empathy' and 'flexibility' were           Finally, there were the organisational
  crucial in determining whether the first approach                 the keys to building up a successful working problems and role stresses experienced by social
  made by a social worker would be likely to lead                   relationship. Users made direct reference to the workers. Some of the emotional, psychological
  to fu rth e r contact and to some form of                         importance of services taking account of what and personal difficulties that workers experienced
  relationship being established.                                  they wanted, and what they felt they would were exacerbated by organisational problems
        They were, firstly, the extent to which and                 benefit from.                                           that they encountered.
 the m ann er in which workers made clear what                             Comparisons of different practices between             Thus, for example, many workers felt poorly
 their purpose in calling was and, secondly, the                   teams suggested that workers who presented supported in their disaster work. There were
 time and the way in which the first contacts were                 themselves as experts or who insisted on a highly problems in relation to the supervision of staff,
 made. The ab ility of workers to present a                        structured approach to the work were, as far as many of which were related to difficulties staff
 straightforward and positive reason for calling                   the users were concerned, likely to be less experienced in talking to line-managers about
 was central in overcoming widely-held resistances                 successful.                                              problems either with work, or personally.
 to the social work profession.                                           Thus, one of the most novel areas of work               Because of the highly stressful nature of the
        Practical support tended to dominate the                  undertaken by Hillsborough social workers was work, staff need to be closely and sympathetically
 work in the early stages, to g e th e r w ith or                 the use of video and other photographic material managed, as well, I would argue, as having access
 fo llo w e d by a strong element of personal                     with survivors and others affected by the disaster. to support outside their organisation. Social
 support: accompanying people to a wide variety                           There never appeared to be a set pattern to workers appeared to be just as reluctant as anyone
 of public and private events and adopting a                      when and how this would take place, but rather else to admit that they need help, especially if their
 befriending role - essentially 'being there' for                 it tended to be geared to what the user, in employers are involved. Consequently, services for




A d is tra u g h t youngster is c o m fo rte d b y a policew om an.



                                                                                                                                             CIVIL PR O TEC TIO N
staff need, firstly, to be proactive - the 'helpline'
m odel is not one that is appropriate for a staff
care system.
     The outreach model tha t is employed by
                                                                                                                                 Manual for
social workers for use with their 'clients' is the
one that needs to be utilised by those attempting                                                                                social services
to care for professional staff.
     Secondly, staff care services need to be extra-
departm ental - social workers do not trust
                                                                                                                                 launched
counselling services that are linked to their own
                                                                                                                                 A NEW emergency planning manual dealing
organisations or line-management structures.
                                                        Scarves and colours le f t on th e pitch as tributes.                    specifically with the role of the social services in
     Looking for support is associated with the
                                                                                                                                 the aftermath of a major disaster has just been
idea of having 'failed' in some way, and there is
                                                                                                                                 published.
an assumption that if it were known within their
                                                                                                                                       The North West Association of Social
organisation th a t they had sought help, this
                                                                                                                                 Services Authorities, representing Lancashire,
would be likely to affect their future career
                                                                                                                                 Cheshire, Merseyside and Greater Manchester,
prospects.
                                                                                                                                 has published the manual for its members,
                                                                                                                                 although it will be made available - for a charge
              Training and skills                                                                                                - to other social services authorities which
                                                                                                                                 request it.
       There was a widespread feeling amongst the
                                                                                                                                       The manual is intended as a guidance
disaster w orkers that the professional training
                                                                                                                                 document which w ill give social services
that they had received had not prepared them for
                                                                                                                                 departments the lead to formulate their own
what they had encountered in the aftermath of
                                                                                                                                 detailed departmental plans. It is supplementary
the disaster.
                                                                                                                                 to the main emergency plans of Icfcal authorities
       Consequently, the social workers felt they
                                                                                                                                 in dealing with major disasters.
had benefited from the 'orientation' training that
                                                                                                                                       The manual is based on the County
they received immediately after the Hillsborough
                                                                                                                                 Emergency Planning Officers Society guidance
disaster - training which gave them some idea of
                                                                                                                                 contained in its Local A uthority Civil
what to expect, and which carried the message
                                                                                                                                 Emergencies Planning Manual and on the
that their basic social work skills were the ones
                                                                                                                                 guidance given by the Home Office's Civil
they should rely on.
                                                                                                                                 Emergencies Adviser.
       Nevertheless, the majority of workers felt
                                                                                                                                       It highlights three crucial issues in a major
that further training would have been valuable,
                                                                                                                                 incident. It advises on 'networking', or co­
and there was agreement that it was counselling
                                                                                                                                 operation between authorities, a liaison
skills that should form the focus of this.
                                                                                                                                 procedure with voluntary organisations and
                                                                                                                                 training fo r both social services staff and
         Social work and disasters                      Life returns to n o rm a l - alth o u g h th e A n fie ld                voluntary workers.
                                                        m e m o ria l serves as a p e rm a n e n t re m in d e r o f                   "The      involvement of voluntary
     Despite the slightly negative sounding tone
                                                        those w h o died.                                                        organisations is especially timely, given the
of some of this article, it is important not to lose
                                                        managers commented not long after the disaster:                          Government's stated wish that social services
sight of the fact that disaster work is, despite the
                                                                                                                                 departments should work closely with them in
stresses involved, widely experienced as                      "The effort, commitment and skill shown are
                                                                                                                                 providing social and psychological aftercare,
exhilarating, satisfying and a source of fulfilment     quite exceptional. Social workers have given
                                                                                                                                 welfare and transport," said Councillor Stan
and growth. As one of the workers commented in          hours of their time, No one has refused to do
                                                        anything. It has shown social work in its true                           Skinkis, Chairman of Oldham Social Services.
interview: "It'll never be the same challenge.
                                                                                                                                       He said in certain major incidents social
Never be the same high as it was after that.            light, a positive light."                      ®
                                                                                                                                 services were being asked to mount emergency
Professionally, nothing w ill ever meet, I'm
                                                                                                                                 responses which match those of the emergency
sure,. . . the work after the disaster. . . Nobody      Fuller discussions o f the research are available in
else will understand that either, except for people;    N e w b u r n T. (1993) M a k in g a D iffe re n c e ? Social            services themselves in speed and sophistication.
that had experienced it,"                               W o rk A f t e r H ills b o ro u g h . L o n d o n : N a tio n a l             "We are not emergency response
     Furthermore, it provides an opportunity tc         I n s t i t u t e f o r S o c ia l W o r k ; N e w b u r n T (1 99 3 )   organisations and in the normal course of
challenge some of the widely-held negative view:        Disaster a n d A f t e r : Social W o rk A f t e r Disaster,             events our officers are not expected to perform
                                                                                                                                 this role. That's why this manual is so
of the profession. As one of the social services,       London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers Ltd.
                                                                                                                                 important,"
                                                                                                                                       The manual sets out planning procedures
                                                                                                                                 and is also intended as a 'rapid orientation'
                                                                                                                                 guide and training manual for social services

   Traumatic stress project launched                                                                                             staff new to this area of work.
                                                                                                                                       It has sections on a range of issues,
                                                                                                                                 including managing a response, sheltering and
                                                                                                                                 evacuation, registration and reception centres,
   THE DEPARTMENT of Health has set up a new initiative at London's Institute of Psychiatry to                                   bereavement, information and communications,
   research traumatic stress. The project has been given initial funding for two years, and is being                             staff care and accommodation and transport.
   undertaken by the Institute's Forensic Psychiatry Department, under the direction of Professor                                      The Association is administered by Oldham
   John Gunn,                                                                                                                    Council and its Director of Social Services, Ram
         The project's main objectives are to conduct research, instigate training and provide a                                 Ramadhan, is its professional adviser.
   clinical care service for those suffering from the effects of post traumatic stress disorder,
         A secondary role is to act as a national resource in response to disasters and provide a                                The P la n n in g M a n u a l f o r Social Services Civil
   consultancy service when needed. The team consists of forensic psychiatrist Dr Gwen Adshead,                                  Em ergencies is available, price £21 (inc p+pj,
   clinical psychologist Rachel Canterbury and nurse therapist Suzanna Rose.                                                     fro m : Press a n d Public Relations Office, Civic
         The te a m wants to hear your comments and welcomes information on local responses,                                     Centre, PO B o x 160, O ld h a m 0L1 JUG. For
   exercises and other issues in emergency planning. Write to the Traumatic Stress Project, Institute                            f u r t h e r i n f o r m a t i o n c o n ta c t Chris A n d re w s ,
   of Psychiatry, De Crespigny Park, Denmark Hill, London SE5 8AF.                                                               Press a n d Public Relations Officer, te le p h o n e :
                                                                                                                                 061-6784708.




  M    CIVIL PR O TEC TIO N                                                                                                                                                                   f
                    NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK




                                                                                                                                 A                            (to.
                                                                                                                    ( Lj-zi
15 October 1992                                                                                                        fC*oL. f\J / S UJ

Mrs ___________                                                                                                                        A>                                       f-J
Community Services Division
Department of Health                                                                                                       ^            A^-f>
Room 224, Wellington House
133-155 Waterloo Road                                                                                                                          ^(<D
London SE1 8UG

Dear Mrs               4___________
Re:            Hillsborough Report
Daphne Statham has asked me to send you a copy of the above
report which is enclosed.
We are currently engaged in development work identifying
implications for mainstream practice and management.    This
work is funded by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation. I would be
very happy to discuss this work with you.
Yours sincerely



Gerald G Smale
Director
Practice And Development Exchange




L O N D O N OFFICE 5 Tavist ock Place, London WC1 H 9SS. Tel: 0 7 1 -3 8 7 9681 Fax: 0 7 1 -3 8 7 7968
DIRECTOR: D aphne Statham CHAIRMAN: Sir W illiam Utting. Registered Charity No. 313402, VAT Reg. No. 4 17 6759 22, C om pany Limited by C uarantee, Registered N o. 726022, England
                       ' p   ' l




S C J 6 < A 1-




                 * 7
DRAFT




        MAKING A DIFFERENCE?: SOCIAL WORK AFTER HILLSBOROUGH




                             Tim Newburn
                  Practice and Development Exchange
                 National Institute for Social Work
CONTENTS
                                                  page



Introduction                                        1



One: The Hillsborough Disaster and the Social
     Services Response                              3

     The Disaster                                   3
     The immediate response to the disaster         6
     The longer-term social services response       7
     The Hillsborough Helpline                     13
     Contact with socialservices departments       15
     First contact                                 16
     The nature of the service                     17
           -   practical support                   18
           -   practical and personal support      18
           -   personal support and counselling    20
           -   individual counselling              21
           -   group work or counselling           23
           -   other work                          24

Two: The Impact of Hillsborough                    26

     The experience of Hillsborough                26
     The impact of Hillsborough                    27
           - practically                           29
           - emotionally                           29
           - on behaviour                          33
           - on relationships                      34
                * parents and children             34
                * partners                         35
                * other relationships              37
           - on work                               38


     The impact on professional carers             40
              - the nature of the work                       41
              - emotional and behavioural impact             42
              - organisational pressures and role stresses   43
                   * beginning the work                      44
                   * the end of the ’honeymoon1              45
                   * supervision and management              46
                   * closing down support teams              49
                   * returning to mainstream work            50


    Three: Social Work and Social Workers in the
           Aftermath of Hillsborough                         51
        Recognising need and accepting help                  51
              -   recognition                                51
              -   acceptance                                 51
              -   worthiness                                 53
              -   information                                54
              -   stigma                                     55
              -   Other triggers                             57


         User’s views of the service                         59



    Conclusions                                              65




v
         INTRODUCTION: SOCIAL WORK AFTER HILLSBOROUGH.




The following report provides an outline of the results of a two-
year study of the social services response to the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster. The aims of the project were threefold:
   to describe the ways in which the seven authorities in the
   North-West together with those from Sheffield and Nottingham
   combined to provide services in the aftermath of the disaster
   to evaluate, from the user's perspective, the effectiveness of
   the services provided
   to identify the skills and methods of work required by staff
   working with such clientele, and the management and support
   necessary to sustain such work

As such the study was divided into two main parts: the first
focused on the 'needs' of those affected by Hillsborough and
evaluated the services they were offered or used, and the second
looked at the nature of the work undertaken, the impact this had
on the staff involved, and the nature and effectiveness of the
supervision and support offered to them.

A variety of methods were used, but the bulk of the data were
collected from depth-interviews with service users and with
social services staff. Two small-scale surveys were also
undertaken; one of people directly affected by Hillsborough, and
one of social workers providing the service in the aftermath. In
all, forty two depth-interviews were conducted with relatives,
survivors and others affected by Hillsborough. The sample was
purposively selected in order to ensure that it covered a broad
range of experiences and demographic characteristics, including
relationship to the disaster (bereaved, survivor, relative of a
survivor, carer of the long-term injured and so on) , age, gender
and type of social service support (varying in intensity of
contact from none to long-term contact). The bulk of those
interviewed were drawn from social services records and,
consequently, the sample is heavily weighted towards those who
had some contact with a social worker after the disaster. By


                                1
contrast, those responding to the survey conducted via
Hillsborough Interlink magazine and the Football Supporters
Association were far less likely to have come into contact with
social services. Questionnaires were completed by a further 176
people affected by the tragedy.

The same pattern was followed in the second part of the study:
thirty-two depth-interviews were conducted with social work staff
- selected to cover a range of experiences and locations -
together with six group interviews. In addition, 69 'Hillsborough
social workers' responded to the staff survey - and this included
over two-thirds of those who had been involved for a period of a
year or longer in Hillsborough-related work. The questionnaires
- which were extremely lengthy and exhaustive - whilst including
a large number of closed questions also allowed space for more
discursive replies.

The report is divided into three main sections. The first
provides a brief history of the disaster and the response of
social services to it in both the immediate and longer-term. The
second section examines the impact of the disaster on all those
affected by it - not simply those who were bereaved and those who
survived, but also relatives of people from those groups and
those who were tasked with providing a service in the aftermath
of the tragedy. The third section considers the social work after
Hillsborough from the point of view of users. What are the
barriers to accepting help? Which aspects of the service did
users consider to have been successful? The report concludes by
drawing some lessons from the Hillsborough experience and by
making some recommendations about the organisation and role of
social services in the aftermath of disasters.




                                2
ONE: THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER AND THE SOCIAL SERVICES RESPONSE



The Disaster

     On 15 April 1989 a football match to decide a semi­
     final round of the FA Cup competition was to be played
     between the Liverpool and Nottingham Clubs. The neutral
     venue chosen was Hillsborough Football Stadium,
     Sheffield Wednesday's ground. Only six minutes into the
     game, play was stopped when it was realised that
     spectators on the terraces behind the Liverpool goal
     had been severely crushed. In the result, 95 died and
     over 400 received hospital treatment. (Home Office, 1989:l1).

This is the brief description of 'Hillsborough' contained in the
Interim Report produced by the Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor as
part of his enquiry into the disaster. That report remains the
most comprehensive description of what happened at Hillsborough
that day, and the following short account of the build up to, and
the immediate aftermath of the disaster is based in large part on
information taken from that Report.

The 1988 FA Cup semi-final had also been played between the same
two teams at the same ground. Although there had been some
difficulties in the organisation of the event, the decision to
use this ground again was largely non-contentious. However, the
decision to use the same ticketing arrangements was widely
criticised. The major problems lay in the numbers of tickets
allocated to each club and to which sections of the ground they
allowed entry: in short, Liverpool FC, despite having a far
higher average home League attendance, were allocated only
approximately 24,000 tickets, compared with nearly 30,000 for
Nottingham Forest.

The early build up to the match was not unusual and was largely
typical of what one would expect prior to a Cup semi-final. As
ever relatively few supporters made their way into the ground
early, and by 2.30/2.40pm (the kick-off was planned for 3.00pm)


                               3
    Taylor reports that there were over 5,000 Liverpool supporters
    outside trying to gain entry at the Leppings Lane end of the
    ground (Home Office, 1989:33). Much of this was due to the fact
    that the Liverpool supporters seeking access to the terracing and
    stand behind the goal at the west end of the ground, and those
    seeking access to the North stand, were all required to enter the
    ground via a small number of turnstiles at the west end of the
    ground - the Leppings Lane. Not only is this a route which is
v   narrow and easily congested, but there were a mere 23 turnstiles
    available to admit the 24,256 spectators who were expected. By
    contrast, there were almost three times as many turnstiles to
    accommodate the Nottingham Forest supporters at the other end of
    the ground.

    Eventually, when it became clear to the police outside the ground
    that the situation was perilous, a request was made to open one
    of the main exit gates to allow entry into the ground. Fans were
    thereby enabled to enter in large numbers in a short space of
    time. The vast majority of those who then entered made their way
    towards a tunnel directly in front of them which led to the two
    central pens on the Leppings Lane terraces which were, by this
    stage, overfull. The match was already underway, and following an
    incident in which Liverpool came close to scoring there was a
    powerful surge forward in these central pens. Extreme crushing,
    particularly to those near the front, led to the deaths of ninety
    five people and injuries to many hundreds of others.

    Although there is not the space here to discuss fully the reasons
    for the tragedy, there is one factor which makes it important
    that some observations are offered. It is that Hillsborough is
    almost alone amongst disasters (certainly in the U.K. in the last
    decade) in having had the behaviour - indeed the 'innocence' - of
    its 'victims' called into question. One 'version' of what
    happened - a version that was quickly made public and widely
    repeated - had the fans themselves as the primary 'cause' of what
    had happened that afternoon. This view came directly from South
    Yorkshire Police and their position was summarised by Taylor as
    follows:


                                   4
   The case made for the police was that large numbers of
   Liverpool supporters arrived late; a high proportion of
   them were drunk and unco-operative; a high proportion had
   no tickets; all of them were hell-bent on getting in on
   time. They say this was unforeseeable and explains why they
   lost control. (Home Office, 1989:33)

In the immediate aftermath of the disaster these claims by the
police were given some credence by the tabloid press that was, as
ever, on the look out for 'good stories'. The bulk of the
allegations, however, were given short shrift in the Interim
Taylor Report. Thus, with regard to the general allegations, the
clear implication in the report is that the behaviour of the fans
was neither unexpected nor unreasonable. The picture presented in
the Taylor Report of the policing of this major sporting event is
a sorry one. The overall impression is of a police force that
failed to plan properly for a number of important contingencies;
that was so preoccupied with the maintenance of public order that
it failed to ensure public safety; that was dangerously slow to
realise not only the potential for but the reality of
catastrophe; and that was represented by senior officers who
compounded all this by insensitivity and dissimulation in the
aftermath.

Those who watched the television coverage of the disaster as it
unfolded will remember the scenes of large numbers of Liverpool
supporters who attempted to save the lives of their fellow fans,
whilst others, dazed and distressed, attempted to find those they
had come with but were now separated from. For the majority of
those who survived and were not seriously injured what remained
was a long and often difficult journey home. Although they have
barely been mentioned so far, it should not be forgotten that
this was also true for the thousands of Nottingham Forest
supporters, who had made their way to Sheffield, only to become
helpless bystanders at a terrible tragedy.




                               5
The immediate response to the disaster


During the afternoon and evening of the 15 April a call for help
was broadcast in Sheffield and large numbers of volunteers from
social services, the medical profession, voluntary agencies, the
clergy and so on came forward to offer help and support both at
the football ground itself and at the other venues that were
being used around Sheffield. A group of social workers and clergy
were in attendance throughout the process of identification at
the temporary mortuary, and in most cases relatives were
accompanied by representatives from both groups until
identification had been completed.

In general terms, social services and related organisations
followed the examples of responses to previous tragedies in
setting about the task of organising a service for those likely
to be affected by Hillsborough. The majority of those who died
and those who were injured came from Merseyside and its environs
and it was, consequently, the social services departments in that
region who carried the greatest social work burden as a result of
the disaster. However, both the Family and Community Services
Department in Sheffield and the Social Services Department in
Nottingham also became quite heavily involved in the 'care1
response, and a number of individual social workers and other
carers and counsellors from around the country took on work as a
result of Hillsborough.

The social services response quickly became a multi-agency
effort, for the information that was available early on suggested
that in terms of casualties, Liverpool was no more significant
than the other local authorities in the area. Consequently, it
was clear that a regional response was going to be required.
Arrangements were made for a mid-Sunday morning meeting of the
five Mersey Authorities: Liverpool, Sefton, Knowsley, Wirral and
St Helens, and this was the beginning of what became known as the
Inter-Agency Group (IAG), consisting of representatives of those
Authorities, joined early in the week by Lancashire and Cheshire
and later by Sheffield and Nottinghamshire, Merseyside Probation


                               6
Service, Mersey Regional Health Authority, and the Emergency
Planning Unit of the Merseyside Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

The first task was to set up a national 24 hour Helpline to
enable those affected by the tragedy to make contact with trained
and experienced counsellors. The IAG were able to get a Helpline
in operation by the Sunday afternoon - within 24 hours of the
disaster. The individual authority representatives then returned
to their departments to make local arrangements for responding to
the needs of those affected in their region. Under the federal
umbrella of the IAG, then, authorities set in motion initiatives
in their own regions. By and large this meant the establishment
in each area of a team of social workers with the sole or major
task of responding to the needs of those affected by the
disaster.

It was also recognised early on that the workers who joined any
of the specialist teams that were being set up would themselves
be put in a position of enormous stress and might require access
to sources of help and support beyond that offered by normal
supervision. Initially, the British Association of Social Workers
(BASW) offered to act as a co-ordinating body for all agencies
offering staff counselling - of which there were many. From the
26 April, an office in Liverpool run by BASW was operating as the
centre of this operation and a staff helpline (Staffline) had
been set up. A co-ordinator was appointed in June, and she worked
on a part-time basis as a staff counsellor for Hillsborough
workers in the two years that the initiative remained in
operation.



The longer-term social services response.


The model of setting up a team dedicated to working with the
bereaved and survivors rather than dispersing the work throughout
a local authority had been taken from a number of other
disasters. Teams of various types were set up in Knowsley,
Sefton, Liverpool, Wirral, Sheffield, St Helens and Lancashire


                               7
and Nottinghamshire. Slightly different arrangements were made in
Cheshire. The Teams were not all set up at the same time, they
did not operate for the same lengths of time, they were not
selected and staffed in the same ways, and their methods of
working varied. Several, however, were put into place within a
week of the disaster.

The Knowsley Team, for example, was set up on 17th April, and
consisted initially of a co-ordinator and six social workers. No
fixed time-period was put on the life of the Team and after the
initial crisis period was over, there were several changes of
personnel. The Team was eventually closed - after discussions
with Team members - towards the end of October 1990. The Team
took approximately 272 referrals in all, of which 168 (62%) were
taken during the first two weeks after the disaster.

The Knowsley experience was that the majority of survivors were
referred within the first month of the aftermath and that there
were a much smaller number thereafter. However, two particular
events afterwards triggered a temporary increase (in referrals
and in distress) - the playing of the Sheffield Wednesday v
Liverpool match at Hillsborough later in the year (November 29th)
and the broadcasting of a documentary programme on the disaster
(First Tuesday) on television on 2nd February 1990.

The Wirral Team was also set up in the week following the
disaster. Late in the week the group of social workers -
initially a team leader and five social workers - were brought
together. This team, which remained in existence until Christmas
1990, took a total of 202 referrals. Again, like Knowsley, the
bulk of referrals came within the first four to six weeks after
the disaster. However, after this period the referrals appeared
to dry up completely. The Wirral team requested a two-year life­
span from the outset, but the original arrangement was that they
would be guaranteed six months and that this would be reviewed.
In October 1989 they were told they could continue for a further
six months, and in March 1990 they were informed that they would
have to close by the end of the month. The low 'community charge*


                               8
rate set by the council led to cuts in services, with the
Hillsborough Support Team due to be among them.

The announcement of the decision less than a month before the
first anniversary of the disaster led to the establishment of a
campaign by service users who lobbied the council, campaigned in
the press and eventually (with intervention from NALGO as well)
earned a reprieve for the team who were told that they could
continue until 25 June 1990. On 18 May the team were approached
by John Moores - Chairman of the locally-based Littlewoods Group
and a supporter of a variety of local initiatives, (the Moores
family being long-standing major shareholders in both Everton and
Liverpool football clubs) who offered to help the team keep going
for up to another year. After fairly tricky negotiations a
solution was found and on 10 September the team, in consultation
with social services management, decided to continue until
Christmas 1990.

The decision to establish a team in Sefton was made on Sunday 16
April 1989. The team, four social workers and a co-ordinator,
were brought together during the first week, and were established
and in situ in premises by Friday 21st. During the first week
staff from Sefton SSD (some future team members, some not) had
made contact with the local bereaved families, and the team
continued the work with them from that point onwards. In all the
Sefton Team took a total of 407 referrals. A decision was taken
to disband the Sefton team - with the agreement of the team
members - at the end of April 1990, one year after Hillsborough.
They were not receiving any new referrals and felt that it was
hard to justify their continued existence. Their view, however,
was not widely shared by colleagues in the other support teams.

Although Liverpool SSD was, at least in the early days, at the
epicentre of post-disaster activity, the Liverpool Hillsborough
Support Team was formed several months later than most of the
other teams. Work in the early months was picked up by area
offices, and in July 1989 a Hillsborough team was established
with an original complement of twelve social workers and two


                               9
senior social workers/team leaders. In August 1989 the Team moved
into a refurbished lodge - which became known as the Hillsborough
Centre - on the corner of Stanley Park near Anfield.

Because of its central location and relatively high profile,
referrals have come from far and wide to the Hillsborough Centre.
It has received a lot of media attention and general publicity.
Thus, for example, between July 1989 and May 1990 it received 359
referrals. In addition to the social workers from Liverpool SSD
at the Centre, there was also a further post funded by the
Children's Society which had as its focus the needs of children
and young people.

As in the other Authorities, a large number of social workers in
Cheshire responded to the immediate crisis after Hillsborough on
a purely voluntary basis, staffing the Helpline and drop-in
centre. In addition, in Cheshire, contact with families and with
some survivors was also made by social workers who were
continuing their normal jobs alongside this new and pressing
demand. In June 1989, the Social Services Committee agreed that a
number of posts should be established to cover the Hillsborough
work. Unlike other areas, however, these did not form the basis
of a core Team but rather worked largely independently of each
other. They received over 100 referrals county-wide.

The county of Lancashire had, in many respects, only a peripheral
involvement in Hillsborough support work. There were, for
example, only two bereaved families from the Lancashire area, and
the team only took 42 referrals in all. The team was set up on
April 17, and eventually comprised a team leader and six social
workers. Unlike most of the other teams, however, these workers
although given the Hillsborough brief, were not excused other
duties. Indeed, almost without exception caseloads were not even
reduced. Because the team operated in this rather unofficial or
informal manner it never officially closed down, but slowly
ceased operating as a Hillsborough team as the amount of work
declined, and as workers moved on to other jobs. In addition to
the team, which was based in Skelmersdale, a number of workers in


                               10
other parts of the County took on cases as and when they were
presented. There were relatively few of these cases, however, and
the workers were themselves isolated from the wider response.

The workers in St Helens also felt very much on the periphery of
the Hillsborough response. There were relatively few St Helens
people at the match, though one was killed and one seriously
injured. The team, which comprised three social workers, took up
their posts on Monday 17th and relinquished their previous
caseloads for a period of a few weeks. Like Lancashire, they took
a small number of referrals early on and made contact with
everyone referred either by letter, telephone or visit. Things
started to tail off fairly soon and this prompted a management
decision to close the Team after four weeks.

The immediate response on the day of the disaster in Sheffield
has already been described. However, in addition to the work that
was done at the football ground, the hospitals, Hammerton Road
Boys' Club and at the Medico-Legal Centre, longer term plans were
put in hand. As was happening in Merseyside, representatives of
the social services departments met on the morning of Sunday 16th
to discuss setting up what they were to call the 'task team'.

As on Merseyside one of the first tasks was to get a report
before elected members in order to convince them that there was
going to be a long-term impact which would require the resourcing
of a semi-permanent response. The task was set out as supporting
what was happening on Merseyside whilst at the same time trying
to address the needs of the people of Sheffield. Once that was
agreed by the Council, social services were able to go ahead and
advertise the posts for what was to become the 'permanent' task
team.

The team was recruited during June and July (at the same time as
the core Team in Liverpool) and was in place by the end of July.
They were based in the public library in Hillsborough park and
continued in existence for approximately nine months, being
officially disbanded on the Friday after the preliminary inquests


                               11
had been held in the city. In all the team took 131 referrals.
When, six months later, the full inquests were organised
(November 1990 onwards) the department approached the workers
with a view to reconstituting the team. Although, individually,
they were keen that there should be cover for the inquests, there
was a reluctance to re-form. In the event, a social work service
was provided with present (including ex-team members) and past
members (on a voluntary basis) of the department attending on a
rota basis during the five months that the inquests ran.

Although the vast majority of the Nottingham Forest supporters
were located at the Kop end of the ground, opposite the Leppings
Lane end, the experience for many Forest fans was profoundly
shocking. There were also, of course, Liverpool supporters at
Hillsborough who lived in Nottinghamshire. Because of events just
a few months previously, the social services department realised
that something needed to be put in place quite quickly. The
experience gained as a result of the Ml air crash, and the
lessons learnt from it, influenced Nottinghamshire's response to
Hillsborough2.

A drop-in and Helpline was set up at the football ground and
contact was made with over 700 people during the time the service
was in operation. Contact was re-established with a voluntary
counselling network that had been established after the Ml
disaster, and anyone for whom it was appropriate and who agreed
could be referred on for further counselling to one of the
agencies involved. Within a week or so the service at the
football ground was transferred to County Hall, and once it
became clear that few were going to come forward to use the
service there, the workers withdrew. The Helpline was kept in
operation for a few further weeks but took few calls.
Nottinghamshire officials quickly made contact with colleagues in
Merseyside and joined the IAG. Although in some senses their
community may be said to have been less seriously affected by
Hillsborough than many in the North-West, Nottinghamshire
continued to participate in and support the work of the IAG right
up until its close some two years after Hillsborough.


                               12
The Hillsborough Helpline

Helplines have become the centrepiece of post-disaster services.
As has been outlined, the Hillsborough Helpline was set up at the
instigation of the IAG on Sunday 16 April, and was initially
located at the headquarters of Liverpool Social Services. During
this time it was staffed by volunteer social services staff from
around the country, and volunteers from other agencies such as
Samaritans, CRUSE, Victim Support, and the Children's Society.

Apparently social services had never intended to keep on the
Helpline indefinitely, and began fairly early on to look for a
group in the voluntary sector that could take over responsibility
for its day to day running. There is an important lesson here for
post-disaster services and, particularly, for the role of social
services within such a response. Although Hillsborough provoked
an enormous reaction from social services departments around the
country, which allowed a 24-hour Helpline to be set up and
staffed almost immediately and at minimal cost, there was a
problem in sustaining such a service. Firstly, it was difficult
for those departments that were geographically distant from the
location of the Helpline to continue to justify the expense and
the logistical problems incurred as a result of allowing staff to
volunteer their services. Secondly, the authorities that were
centrally involved in the disaster tended to concentrate their
resources in establishing and maintaining a support team.
Thirdly, in the early days when a large number of organisations
that were geographically dispersed were involved in providing
staff for the Helpline, organising and arranging rotas and
schedules was extremely difficult and time-consuming. Under such
circumstances, it is perhaps not surprising that the IAG began to
look to the voluntary sector to take over responsibility for the
Helpline.

Whilst all this seems straightforward, such willingness to use
the voluntary sector is nevertheless deserving of comment. A
number of reports3 have noted the existence of professional


                               13
rivalries and jealousies in the aftermath of disaster. Frequently
such rivalries occur between the statutory and voluntary agencies
- the focus often being the "professional's" unwillingness to
recognise the skills of the volunteer. Such conflicts may occur
on both an individual and an organisational level, and
Hillsborough was no exception in this regard. However, the IAG -
made up largely of representatives of social services - did
recognise that the Local Authorities were unlikely to be able to
staff and run the Helpline indefinitely, and further recognised
that the skills and abilities existed within the voluntary sector
to take over the work.

The voluntary sector in Liverpool is highly developed and many
organisations contributed volunteers to the shifts at the
Helpline, and one of these - 'Walton Hospital Relative Support
Group' (RSG) - eventually took over the running of the Helpline.
Consequently, the Helpline was moved on 1 October 1989 to
accommodation at Walton Hospital in Liverpool. The Helpline staff
consisted of a full-time co-ordinator and a part-time advisor. It
was staffed by volunteers from RSG and a small number of other
local organisations. With effect from 1st October 1989 the
day-to-day running of the Hillsborough Helpline was taken over by
RSG. The management - particularly the financial management - of
the Helpline was assumed by the Chief Executive of Liverpool
Council for Voluntary Services.

The Helpline was a 24 hours 7 days a week telephone service,
designed to provide a confidential response to anyone affected by
Hillsborough. Counselling and advice was generally done over the
phone where appropriate, though some callers' names and addresses
or telephone numbers were passed on to the relevant social work
team in other cases. The numbers of calls diminished quite
sharply from about three months onwards, and the Helpline was
officially closed in the July after the second anniversary of the
tragedy.

Figures are not available for the full period that the Helpline
was in operation, but the details that are available allow a


                               14
fairly thorough picture of the work to be presented. The pattern
of calls was fairly predictable, with a very high number being
made in the first few days after the disaster (offering as well
as requesting help), followed by a steady but slowly declining
flow of calls after that. There were occasional peaks around the
times of the anniversaries when there was a short-lived but
significant increase in the number of calls. In the eighteen
months from 1st October 1989 to the end of March 1991, a total of
3, 942 calls were made to the Helpline. Of these, 392 (10%) were
Hillsborough-related calls for help. A further 1,299 (33%) were
for information related to the disaster. The rest were largely
made up of calls of an administrative nature (37.5%),         and
unsuccessful, wrong number or nuisance calls (16.5%). During this
period the Helpline took a further 34 calls that were from people
who had suffered some personal tragedy that was unrelated to
Hillsborough.




Contact with social services departments.


There was considerable variation in terms of the point at which
people affected by Hillsborough came into contact with social
service workers. The primary determining factor appears to have
been their 'relationship' to the disaster: the bereaved, for
example, were almost all contacted by social services within a
week or two of the disaster and most were contacted within 48
hours of Hillsborough. By contrast many of the survivors did not
come into contact with social services within the first year and
many not at all.

Only a small proportion of survivors - based on the referral
figures to the teams the proportion was probably fewer than one
in twenty - were contacted formally by social services. Clearly
much depended on the survivors themselves, for unless they
prompted contact, or someone close to them did, they were likely
to remain unknown to the support teams. Many, of course, will not
have required support, though others might have been quite badly


                               15
affected by Hillsborough but unable or unwilling to seek help.

Contact with survivors from outside Merseyside appears to have
been sporadic and haphazard. Little criticism of the support
teams should be implied from this, for they were not only fully
occupied providing a service for those affected in their own
regions, but none of them appear to have had outreach outside
their region as part of their brief. The fact that some did take
on such work, and even went to considerable lengths to publicise
their existence and to encourage those outside the region to come
forward, is to their credit. It is fair to conclude at this
juncture, however, that most survivors that were contacted lived
in or near Merseyside; that most of those who did get support
from social services were not contacted until some time after the
disaster, and that those who lived outside Merseyside often came
into contact with social services very late after the disaster -
if at all.




First contact.


Two factors appear to have been crucial in determining the
likelihood of the first approach leading to further contact and
to some form of relationship being established. They were the
extent to which and the manner in which workers made clear what
their purpose in calling was and, secondly, the time and the way
in which the first contacts were made. Whilst it is hard to
separate one out from the other - or indeed from other factors
which played a part - it does appear that the workers' ability to
present a straightforward and positive reason for calling was
important in overcoming resistances to social workers.

As well as often being in a state of quite profound shock, the
bereaved families were frequently besieged by the media, and
inundated by offers of help and expressions of sympathy from
relatives and friends. In one important sense, therefore, having
a social worker arrive on the doorstep was a potential recipe for


                               16
further confusion and resentment. It was vital in such
circumstances that social workers should be clear about what they
were there for, what they could offer and how they should behave.
Uncertainty only exacerbated distress.

There were very mixed feelings amongst users about the visits
that were made during the first week or so after the disaster.
Although many seemed only partly aware of it at the time it was,
when they eventually came to accept help, viewed at least as a
positive gesture, and as having been important in the long-run,
though perhaps somewhat intimidating - and occasionally felt to
be intrusive - at the time. In these cases the early visit was of
symbolic rather than direct practical importance. In other cases,
however, respondents approved of there having been some delay in
the approach from social services.

By and large hostility appears to have been avoided, though there
were a few cases in which the particular approach adopted by the
social worker caused some resentment. Timing in these cases does
not appear to have been important, rather the manner of the
worker - 'he had a briefcase on his knee, he was doing his job' -
determined whether or not the person they were visiting felt able
or willing to talk to them about what was happening to them.

                               *^
The nature of the service.

A wide range of activities were undertaken by social workers. So
broad is the range that it is impossible to describe it fully in
the space available here. In essence there were four general
elements that may be isolated: practical support, personal
support and befriending, individual counselling and group
counselling. Generally speaking, the same categories could also
applied to the work undertaken by the staff counsellor. Whilst
these categories are analytically separable, in terms of what was
actually done by workers they are more difficult to distinguish.




                               17
    Practical support.


Early on, practical help may be not only the most useful avenue,
but the most likely to lead to acceptance. This was certainly
the case after Hillsborough. The offer of practical support and
help was much less threatening - not only for the client but also
for the social worker - than any talk of counselling. It
represented something concrete that the worker could do. It
showed that they were prepared to help and that they would
respond to what the individual person wanted. The consequence of
this was that some people were able to overcome their suspicions
of social workers and began to build up a rapport with the
individual worker who was visiting them. The worker was able to
undertake some practical and achievable tasks before beginning to
think about taking on the less concrete and inevitably more
complex and frightening work associated with psychological
trauma.



     Practical and personal support

In a number of cases quite strong personal relationships
developed, often out of the practical support outlined above.
Indeed, in the 'befriending' role adopted by many workers, the
practical tasks undertaken often began to resemble activities
that one might associate with a family member or close friend
rather an outside professional, eg. taking the children for days
out, to the cinema, to play sport, out to eat. They went shopping
and for days out with adult clients and in one case helped finish
some decorating that a survivor had felt unable to complete.
Personal support was in some cases really very extensive
   There are a lot of things that I can talk to P (social
   worker)...that has nothing to do with Hillsborough, even
   private things in the house. (He) is involved in everything
   with me now. There is nothing that goes on that P...doesn't
   know about. If I was not able to, if I were sick or
   something the first person I would think of is P...because
   there are maybe things he would know more about than maybe
   someone in my family... (He) spends a lot of time here and
   I have really gone through everything with him.
   (Mother caring for injured son)


                               18
This type of support - which was very much at one extreme of what
was described by users - raises questions about dependence and
potential over-involvement. Some workers clearly felt that they
went beyond what they would view as 'professional boundaries',
and it is undoubtedly the case that the relationship described
above would be viewed in some circles as 'bad practice'.
Certainly, it is the case that the intensity of such a
relationship underlines the importance of planning the
termination of such involvement well in advance and negotiating
the end of work with all the parties involved.

The friendships, as one might expect, tended to develop over
quite extended periods of time, whereas basic practical
assistance tended to be concentrated towards the earlier stages
when relationships were yet to be established and 'clients' were
some way from being ready to accept other types of support.
Despite this pattern, there is a strong vein of practical support
running through all the social work service at whatever stage
help was being offered. The emphasis upon the practical aspects
of the social work role tended to diminish over time as the
befriending role increased and counselling possibly began, but it
never disappeared entirely. As was suggested above, such tasks
are not only important in themselves, but they are also valuable
because they help facilitate the trust that is important if other
work is to be undertaken. It is all the more ironic therefore
that these aspects of the work are often accorded relatively
little importance in analyses of the social work task after
disaster, if they are discussed at all.

By contrast, 'counselling' is assumed to be so central to the
social work 'task', that the role of the post-disaster social
worker is often described as 'counselling'. The reality is
somewhat different, and many of such worker-client relationships
will involve little long-term counselling, whereas more
generalised forms of personal support were ubiquitous. A large
number of post-disaster activities can be subsumed under this
heading. For example, people were accompanied to a wide variety


                               19
of public and private events. From the funerals in the first week
after the tragedy to memorial services years afterwards, social
workers - amongst very many others of course - have attempted to
provide a supportive and friendly presence. In addition, there
were a number of activities at which survivors and family members
might be escorted by a social worker. For example, some of the
respondents in this study had arranged - or indeed a social
worker may have arranged for them - to revisit Hillsborough at
some stage after the disaster. Visits to Leppings Lane, to
Anfield, attendance at services, at the official inquiry, at the
Inquests, were all occasions at which relationships with social
workers might potentially be cemented, though not all experiences
of the presence of social workers at such events were positive
and there were occasions when it was felt to be intrusive or
unhelpful.



     Personal support and counselling

Whilst one of the central components of the work was listening to
survivors' and relatives' accounts of the tragedy, social workers
also encouraged people to 'record' their experiences. As many of
those affected by the disaster found that their thoughts became
utterly dominated by what they had experienced workers encouraged
them to write accounts of what had happened, to write poetry, to
put together scrapbooks and so on. Many social workers found that
they too were able to control their own 'identification' with the
event in similar ways. Although there was some initial
reluctance, many of the respondents found that such 'creative*
ways of expressing their emotions were much easier than simply
sitting and talking. In the short term it gave them some way of
putting their own story together and, in the longer-term, helped
facilitate communication with someone like a social worker.

Perhaps the most inspired of all the pieces of work undertaken
after the disaster, was the positive use to which the media
coverage of Hillsborough was put. As has been suggested, the
media, and particularly certain sections of the national tabloid


                               20
press, caused considerable upset and anger in the way they
portrayed the Liverpool fans who had been at Hillsborough. The
use of close-up photographs of the dead and dying with apparently
little concern for the effect this might have, caused particular
disquiet.

The newsworthiness of the disaster and the presence of outside
broadcast cameras meant that there was an enormous amount of
material documenting what happened that Saturday afternoon. For
many of those affected, however, what had happened to them or to
their loved ones was uncertain and confused. Relatives were
unsure of where their loved ones had been standing, survivors
often could not remember when or how they had escaped from the
pens. For these people, handled in the right way, the photographs
and especially the video material that was available meant that
they could quite possibly trace where they had been standing and
what had happened to them. This was very important for those for
whom the primary emotion was guilt: guilt that they did not do
more to help others, that they did not save more lives. These
techniques worked as an addition to, a precursor to, and helped
facilitate more formal one-to-one counselling. Although new to
most of the social workers at the start of the Hillsborough work,
it became one of the central planks of the work, and perhaps the
one element where almost all concerned - whether 'worker' or
'client' - felt positive about it:
  I'd blamed myself for a long, long time until I actually
  seen that police video, for the death of that lad, you
  know.
  (Male Survivor)
   I was given access to newspapers, videos and news reports
   on the tragedy, as a means of exorcism if you like. It was
   very helpful to me, as I wanted to see myself on tape/film
   at the Leppings Lane end, morbid though this may seem.
   (Male Survivor)



     Individual counselling

Where something akin to counselling was evident, what actually
took place was, in itself, quite varied and appears to have


                               21
depended very much upon the philosophy and strategy of the
individual worker. Some were quite directive in their approach,
basing their counselling work around models of bereavement or
grieving, whereas others adopted a less structured approach. One
survivor, who had had experience of two social workers with
contrasting styles, described it as follows:
  He just kept saying 'It's a normal reaction', or 'you will
  feel like this'. That's not what I - not what I wanted
  really, but when she come out, it was just completely
  different. She wasn't pushing me or nothing...She listened
  to me feelings more than what I was actually saying.

Although both these workers came from the same social work team
the differences described in this account were in some ways
indicative of what different teams were doing. Another survivor
who had had support on different occasions from social workers
from more than one of the core teams described his experience as
follows:
  Two different schools of thought really on the approach of
  social work in dealing with a disaster...Team A took a view
  that the only people who really knew about the disaster and
  about the effects that it had were the people themselves and
  that they would determine the course of the help that they
  received, in so much as they spoke and the social workers
  responded to that using their experience and their
  training, but in a way which the survivors and the families
  wanted, and it was very much in the hands of the people who
  were receiving the help...whereas Team B had got a
  structured plan as to how they were going to help us and
  that any deviation from that agreed approach was really not
  very helpful. Team A was certainly far more flexible in
  their approach and I would say they were far more down to
  earth as well. I know of a number of people who were quite
  alienated by the formal Team B approach.
  (Male Survivor)

What is being described here with some clarity is the importance
of providing a service that users feel is responsive to their
needs, rather than something that is imposed on them by
•professionals* or 'experts' who, as one survivor described it,
**told you what's wrong with you sort of thing". Both in
individual counselling and in groups it was clear that users
valued different things and different approaches. However, the
ability to be flexible and adaptable appeared to be the key, and


                               22
it was those workers who were perceived to have been trying
rigidly to impose a ’model* (of post-traumatic stress, for
example) or pre-given structure on to the work who drew the most
criticism.



     Group work or counselling

Most of the core teams ran groups at some stage or other, but
some placed far more emphasis on that work than others. The
nature of the groups varied considerably with, for example, the
Hillsborough Centre in Liverpool hosting groups for bereaved
parents, survivors, partners and families, carers (of the badly
injured), young persons, and women’s partners and relatives at
one period. The experience of those who attended groups varied as
well. The majority of the groups were set up by one or more
social workers but, depending on the attitude of the individual
worker and, more importantly, on the approach of the host team,
the social workers tended to withdraw after varying periods of
time:
   We don’t have social workers, but there was a Wednesday
   group...was originally started by two social workers. They
   decided, the group themselves made the decision they didn’t
   want the social workers in it. They wanted to run the group
   themselves, and its happening more and more and more.
   (Female Survivor)

Attitudes towards such groups, and particularly on the presence
of social workers, ranged from the supportive to the hostile.
There were many instances where the attendance of a social worker
was felt to be important and almost invariably the role of these
workers would be described as being facilitative rather than
directive. As was described above in relation to 'individual
counselling*, it appeared to be the case that it was those groups
that were run in a flexible manner and were responsive to users'
needs that were perceived by group members as having been most
successful:

   If the group wanted a social worker to be there they would
   be happy to turn up and we would, we were all happy for T


                                 23
  (social worker) to come along because we all got on pretty
  well with him and he was just adding to the sort of
  conversation, he wasn't sort of dictating the way the
  conversation went.
  (Male Survivor)
  The Team A group, for instance, was certainly far more
  relaxed and it enabled people ...to open up far more than
  anybody at the Team B groups were prepared to do...perhaps
  simply because they were allowed to...At team B they were
  putting up sheets on the wall with lists of your symptoms
  and saying this is what's happening to you isn't it? This
  is what we're all going to go through...you know this is
  normal, this is what we would expect to happen because we
  know.
  (Male Survivor)



Groups were valued because they allowed people to meet and spend
time with others who were in a similar position to themselves.
For many it was in such circumstances that they were first able
to realise that they were not alone in the way they were feeling,
and that perhaps they weren't 'going mad' after all. Social
workers also experienced something similar. For example, the
staff counsellor held a number of 'training days' on which
approximately 4 0 or so workers got together to discuss some
issues of common interest. It was not the 'training' function,
however, that was the key to the success of these days, it was
that they allowed the workers to meet, to talk to each other
about their work, hear about how others were feeling and to find
that they were not alone.




     Other work

The production of a 'newsletter' has become almost a ubiquitous
facet of post-disaster work. It began in this country after the
Bradford Fire. City Link, although set up and funded by Bradford
Social Services, was independent of them and was edited by
bereaved people and survivors from the fire. It served a variety
of purposes from sharing information, thoughts and feelings, to
acting as a forum in which issues which were of continuing



                               24
importance to those affected by the disaster could be pursued.
From the social workers' point of view it was "useful as a means
of working with survivors in a non-obtrusive way, while at the
same time keeping the door to help open should they feel like
taking it up at any future date” (Hodgkinson and Stewart, 1991).
City Link has been followed by Herald Link, Piperline and for a
period of two and a half years, Hillsborough Interlink.

Hillsborough Interlink ran to nine issues overall. The original
impetus for it came from social services and although they
continued to support the publication, control very quickly passed
to people directly involved in the disaster. During its two and a
half years it was transformed from a four-sided black and white
newsletter to a 20 page glossy publication, which ran to 35,000
copies for its anniversary edition in April 1990. Financial
support came primarily from the Hillsborough Fund, from John
Moores4 and from the local authorities. Even though it didn't
bring people face-to-face (apart from the members of the
editorial committee), the newsletter was valued for many of the
same reasons that groups were felt to have been positive:
   I could read people's letters who felt the same way I did.
   I didn’t feel alone or like I was going mad because they
   were feeling the same way. The people who wrote letters and
   compiled the magazine really cared about the readers and it
   helped me get on with life.
   (Female relative of a survivor)
   I have corresponded with Interlink several times and have
   found the magazine and those involved extremely comforting.
   It's really reassuring to know that there are so many
   people still experiencing what you are going through.
   (Male Survivor)




                               25
                 TWOS THE IMPACT OF HILLSBOROUGH




In the aftermath of Hillsborough, social workers and other carers
provided help, support and counselling not only for those who
were bereaved, but also for those who were there and survived,
those relatives who found that the person who returned from the
match that Saturday had been changed - sometimes in subtle ways,
many times profoundly - by what they had seen and what they had
experienced, and to many others who came into contact in some way
with the tragic events that unfolded. In addition to those
bereaved and those who survive there are other groups who may be
affected by disaster. In particular, rescue and recovery
personnel and others who offer help in the aftermath, are
increasingly recognised to be at risk.



The experience of Hillsborough

It is impossible to convey the range and depth of the impact of
something like Hillsborough without first considering the
experience of the event itself. It is only by listening to the
words of those who were bereaved or those who survived or
witnessed the events that unfolded that afternoon that the power
of the experience becomes clear. The following three quotes, one
from a survivor from the Leppings Lane pens and two from
bereaved relatives, give some indication of what people went
through on 15 April 1989 and days that followed. First, the
survivor:
  There was a bloke dying next to me. He was a really big
  bloke, like a docker. His mate was holding him up, trying
  to stop him from falling. The pushing from the back just
  forced you down. I was looking at the ground and thinking
  "if you go down there you're dead". The smell was
  unbelievable I can tell you. I was only at about armpit
  level of most people because of my size. I was trying to
  force my head up in order to breathe...I remember shouting
  at the bloke next to me "move your arm, move your arm,
  you're killing me!". I looked around and it was obvious he
  was dead. His eyes, his tongue, I could tell...I've still


                                 26
  got scars from the fencing. I had a black eye for months
  and criss-cross marks on my back from the wire mesh for
  ages
  (Female Survivor, twenties)

  My son-in-law said he would look at the photos and for an
  hour or more we waited for him to be called...we waited
  with a social worker and clergywoman who were...doing their
  best under dreadful conditions.. .the whole area was one of
  absolute heartache and emotional turmoil...those who were
  not sure if their relatives or friends were dead were
  subjected to the stress of witnessing the awful shock and
  grief of those who knew their loved ones were dead...It was
  in fact absolute chaos...my son-in-law finally came to me
  and said he had looked at the photographs and (my son) was
  among the dead. I ran to the door to run out...I fainted.
  The police did nothing to help, my husband went for the
  social worker and he and my son-in-law eventually found a
  doctor...After an hour or so I went to see (his) body. I
  could hardly recognise him, so I checked his teeth which I
  could identify...and while doing so I noticed his body was
  warm as if he had only just died. The time was 2.30 am.
  (Bereaved Mother)
  On the Monday, we went to Sheffield because as I thought, I
  just wanted to go and hold him and touch him...I had my
  brother and sister-in-law each side of me and I went in,
  and we were in this sort of corridor, and I was saying how
  are we going to get him in here?...I didn't notice at
  first, but there was glass at the side...All I wanted to do
  was get hold of him and kiss him and just hold him...I
  followed the curtain up, and then all of a sudden he, it
  was just as if he was asleep, and I was saying to myself
  I'll wait and see, and when he moves, I'll tell them
  they've made a mistake, that he's breathing...1 know it
  sounds funny but I was saying to myself he really looked
  after his teeth, and look at them, they're black. And he
  loved his teeth...and he was just kind of blue...But then I
  noticed that he'd been cut from here to here, and it was
  like stitched up, but really like ragged, and I didn't know
  then, I thought someone had stood on him, and I just
  started saying they've stood all over him...they had to
  take me out then.
  (Bereaved Wife)



The impact of Hillsborough


There now exists a sizable and growing literature on the •impact*
of disasters. Much of this material developed originally as a
result of investigations of what was known as •shell shock•, and
has later been applied to non-military situations such as natural


                               27
and man-made disasters. The bulk of the literature is American
and Australian - but research interest in the UK has been
steadily growing over the last decade and was, not surprisingly,
given considerable further impetus by the scale and number of
domestic disasters during the late 1980s.

What is presented below is based on the data collected from the
depth-interviews with and questionnaires completed by people
affected by Hillsborough and by the carers. What follows
therefore is an account, presented partly in people's own words
of the problems and the needs that arose after Hillsborough. The
following quote from a young (in her twenties) female survivor
of Hillsborough gives some idea of the range of things that may
happen during the aftermath of such an event:
  On the Monday morning (17th April 1989) I should have been
  at work, but the press were coming round and The Sun were
  camped on the doorstep. In the end I had to go and hide in
  the pub...What had happened was that the police had
  released the names of the injured...After that time things
  went from bad to worse really. I weren't sleeping, I lost
  my job, I near enough had a breakdown. I lost weight, I
  wasn't eating. I couldn't, I still don't go into town on a
  Friday or Saturday, it's too crowded. I went through a
  phase when I didn't give a shit... After (losing my job) I
  just drifted for a while...got involved in a variety of
  criminal activities...1 went on self-destruct. Still now I
  can get very aggressive. I was drinking a lot more. Not
  drugs, though there was the opportunity...Pushed my friends
  away. I wanted everyone to hate me. I hated myself so I
  thought everyone else might as well...I got glandular
  fever, cold after cold after cold...I was still having
  nightmares...

Though such a range of 'problems* might be far from usual, the
individual difficulties described are absolutely typical of what
may beset those affected by disasters. The disaster may be viewed
as having an impact on people's lives in five main ways:
practically, emotionally, on behaviour, on relationships, and on
work.




                               28
     Pracrtically


As the survivor's experience described above suggests, there are
a whole series of problems stemming from the public nature of the
disaster and the practices adopted by the news media - especially
the press. The names and addresses of many of the bereaved
families very soon became public knowledge and finding reporters
camped on the doorstep or attempting to gain interviews using
less than honest means was common. The funerals, for example,
were intensely public events, frequently with television cameras
present, together with the by-that-stage ever-present London
press5.

For some families there may be immediate financial difficulties
after the disaster due, for example, to the loss of the main
wage-earner, problems with returning to work or, more
straightforwardly, with the expenses incurred as a result of
funerals, travel, solicitors and so on. Financial problems may
lead directly and quickly to housing problems. Such difficulties
also arose after Hillsborough because of relationship problems
and, on occasion, due to the death of the named tenant. Finally,
in terms of practical problems, the emotional and psychological
effects of the disaster meant that merely carrying on with the
usual day-to-day activities of shopping, childcare and so on was
more than some were able to manage. A disaster such as
Hillsborough, which did not involve large-scale loss of
residential property, nevertheless brings with it a host of
practical problems and difficulties at a time when those facing
them may be poorly equipped to deal with them.



     Emotionally

The most commonly discussed aspects of post-disaster
•functioning* are the psychological and emotional sequelae of
such tragedies6 . For the survivors of the disaster one of the
most immediate and consistent experiences was a feeling of total
preoccupation with the events and, particularly, with the post-


                               29
disaster reporting of events:

   I had no thoughts for anything other than Hillsborough
   whatsoever. And any activity that I was trying to involve
   myself in was just swamped by images and thoughts about
   what had happened...I just couldn't take myself away from
   Hillsborough and I was only comfortable really, ironically
   if I was talking about Hillsborough, because if I tried
   talking about something else Hillsborough wouldn't let me.
   (Male Survivor)

Although the preoccupation with the disaster diminished over
time, it did not appear to be something that was likely to
disappear. Many survivors continued to be 'drawn' to any
newspaper, television or radio reports of Hillsborough over three
years after the event. Most expressed this as something that they
felt they could not control.

Being preoccupied by the disaster meant, of course, that there
was little time for or interest in other activities. As the
survivor above said even 'if I tried talking about something
else Hillsborough wouldn't let me'. This had a particular impact
upon the families and friends of those who had returned from the
match, for they felt excluded, ignored and alienated:

  ...he wasn't being rational, he did things mechanically. He
  got undressed mechanically, sat down mechanically. He
  didn't respond to people around him, even the children.
  Even (daughter) she said.. I love you Dad and gave him a
  kiss. (She loves you madly doesn't she?) There was nothing
  back, if she said Hello, how are you? It was just blank, so
  he wasn't in a state of mind to do anything that a normal
  person could.
  (Wife of Survivor)

Many of the survivors felt emotionally paralysed by their
experiences and found that they were unable to do much other than
cry. Sleep disturbance is one of the classic reactions associated
with the aftermath of a traumatic event and was evident amongst
many of the Hillsborough survivors and relatives in the long as
well as the short-term. One of the strongest emotions amongst
both the bereaved and the survivors after the disaster was anger.
There was, and for many there remains a burning sense of anger
and injustice. Anger is, of course, closely associated with


                                30
  ,   n
grief' and was very clearly evident amongst those who were
bereaved:
   I couldn't understand what was going on inside me, all
   these feelings and I would just explode for no reason at
   all...I hated everyone. I hated the woman across the road
   for having a husband, and if the woman next door had been
   laughing, I'd be saying 'it's OK for her to laugh, she's
   got a husband.
   (Bereaved Wife)


In addition, however, the survivors also remembered very strong
feelings of anger and, on occasion, this was translated directly
into a variety of aggressive behaviours:


    I ’ve had two or three fights over it...that's been with me
   mates and that, they just trying to tell me things like and
   they haven't got a clue what happened.
   (Male Survivor)

As was mentioned earlier, there was an attempt to 'blame' the
fans after Hillsborough and this, together with a number of other
perceived injustices - the failure to bring any criminal charges
as a result of the disaster; the ending of disciplinary
procedures against the senior officers in charge at Hillsborough
and the 'accidental death' verdicts at the inquests - have
ensured that anger continues to be very strongly felt many years
after the event. Thus, 65% of the Liverpool supporters responding
to the survey conducted three years after Hillsborough said that
they felt that justice had 'not been done at all', and 52% felt
'to a large extent' that they were made to take the blame.

A sense of helplessness, a lack of motivation or confidence and
an inability to concentrate were some of the other major and more
immediate sequelae affecting both the bereaved and the survivors
of Hillsborough. The other emotion that survivors had in common
was guilt. Indeed, 'survival guilt' is a we11-documented part of
the post-disaster experience for those who do not die but who
have confronted the possibility of their own death and who have
been in close proximity to people who did die. Hodgkinson and
Stewart8 divide the guilt that may arise from such an experience
           •   •




                               31
into two main types. The first is 'existential guilt', which is a
general questioning of why they survived and others died:


  It was guilt that I felt... Because it should be you and
  not someone else. Because you’re so close to it and that
  you‘re thinking you should be with them, but you’re not,
  you are not, you are still alive.
  (Male Survivor)

The second was not given a name by the authors but is what might
be termed 'role guilt'. Here survivors question whether or not
they engaged in sufficient or appropriate action to help others.
Survivors may question whether or not the actions they took (or
the absence of particular actions) in an attempt to save their
own lives, had a consequence for the loss of other lives. After
Hillsborough, role guilt concerned both the actions of the
survivor during the disaster (ie on the terraces themselves) and
also in the immediate aftermath:

   I always felt guilty that I could never do enough and had I
   had the right equipment I could have done more. I know I
   could and there would have been more lives saved...1 always
   felt guilty about that.
   (Female Survivor)


Thirdly, there were a few survivors who articulated a slightly
different form of guilt. This was not directly linked to survival
itself or to their role during the disaster, but rather to the
quality of their life after the disaster. In particular, it was
difficult for some survivors to feel that it was reasonable for
them to enjoy their lives when there were others who were either
worse off (they felt) than they were - those who were bereaved
for example - and others who had lost their lives.

Finally, the feeling of being unable to 'cope', felt by many at
different times, was sometimes perceived as a form of madness,
or a precursor to breakdown. For others the problems that faced
them, or the thoughts that beset them seemed either so
intractable or so immovable that they contemplated their own
death as a means of ending their suffering:


                               32
    On Monday I tried to hang myself from the loft. I had a
   rope up there when I tried to kill myself. I felt it's
   harder for me now because I've thought about it a lot and
   like something was telling me to do away with myself would
   save all the problems...I was sitting up in the loft with a
   rope round my neck and that was what I was thinking.
   (Male Survivor)



     On behaviour

There were those who felt at some stage after the disaster that
they were increasingly unable to cope with their lives. Simply
getting through the night or through the next day felt too great
a task to deal with and, occasionally, retreat was the answer.
Getting through the worst days was sometimes achieved through the
use of drink or occasionally tranquillisers. Both men and women
reported increased alcohol use, particularly early on after
Hillsborough, as did over half of the Hillsborough social
workers.

For some there was a significant impact on their social life
because the places in which it tended to meet others publicly
caused them too many difficulties. A few 'victims' experienced
such severe somatic effects that they felt physically unable to
go out. Although such strong phobic reactions appear to have been
relatively uncommon, there was considerable evidence of general
avoidance of activities or situations that might prompt
recollections of the traumatic situation. In the case of
Hillsborough, the places or situations to avoid were those where
there was the potential for large crowds, confined spaces and
crushing.

In addition a certain strain was sometimes placed on social
relationships by the behaviour of those affected by the disaster.
At first, for both survivors and the bereaved, there was the
difficulty of appearing (and quite possibly actually being)
obsessed by their experiences and being consumed by a desire to
talk about it, or about specific elements of it, such as the role



                               33
of the police. Others, as was suggested earlier, found that their
difficulties in communicating with their friends - especially if
the friends had not been at the match - led to anti-social or to
violent behaviour.



     On relationships

It is perhaps not surprising given the catalogue of practical,
psychological and emotional problems facing those affected by
disaster that considerable strain is often placed upon
relationships. Family and personal relationships in particular
frequently came under stress after Hillsborough. There were many
that were quite radically changed and some that simply didn't
survive. For the bereaved in particular this represented a
'double loss'. Negative or problematic consequences were reported
both   between partners and between parents       and   children.



     Parents and children

Relationships between parents and children were affected in four
main ways. Firstly, some parents - more often fathers than
mothers it would seem - felt that they were less tolerant of
their children after the disaster. There was an increased
tendency for parents to withdraw and to appear less interested
in their children. Secondly, having suffered a loss or having
survived the disaster but been brought close to the idea of loss
through the experience, some parents became increasingly
concerned about the welfare of their (remaining) children. This
over-protectiveness put pressure on the relationships.
Alternatively, there was the reverse fear that confrontation with
the children would actually drive them away - and again that
further loss would be stimulated.

Thirdly, there was some evidence of 'numbing' amongst both the
bereaved and survivors. This is an essentially defensive reaction
common amongst 'victims' of traumatic events, particularly in the


                               34
immediate aftermath of the event, which may distance them from
the reality of what they have experienced. In terms of family
relationships, it may have the effect of making the person
concerned seem very withdrawn or distant. The potential
consequences for families and relationships were devastating,
with parents, at least temporarily, apparently ceasing to care
for or love their children. Finally, one element of the guilt
experienced by survivors and referred to above, concerned the
difficulty of returning to the enjoyment of everyday activities
after the disaster. As one woman said of her husband who had been
at Hillsborough and had since become so depressed that he had
attempted suicide "he couldn't get out of his mind, you know,
about the kids who hadn't got any dads, and the dads who hadn't
got any sons". The difficulties that some parents had in coming
to terms with the fact that their children were still alive,
reduced their ability to maintain positive relationships with
these children. It was summed up in a feeling of 'what right do I
have to be happy when so many others are suffering?'



     Partners

Relationships between partners also suffered, and often in
similar ways to the parent-child relationships described above.
For the partners of survivors the central problem most frequently
for them was that the person they were living with after
Hillsborough was not the person they felt they had been living
with prior to the disaster:

  Our whole way of life changed completely. He went there as
  (his name) but he come back - I didn't know him, and that
  was very hard to live with.
  (Wife of Survivor)

Such difficulties were often compounded by difficulties in
communication between partners, particularly over the subject
that was dominating their lives: Hillsborough. One of the very
widely reported consequences of the power of such traumatic
events is that those who survive are left feeling that the only



                               35
people that will be able to understand how they are feeling are
those who have been through the same experience or something
similar, that is, other survivors. This, of course, creates a
problem that carers such as social workers have to overcome, and
this specific problem is returned to in the following chapter.

Family and other close relationships suffered because the
survivor was either unable or unwilling to confide in their
partner or other loved ones. Partners were therefore faced not
only with people who had 'changed' and who they felt they 'no
longer knew', but were denied access to that person's feelings
and with it the most likely means of reconciling themselves to
the changes that had taken place. Furthermore, the inability of
the survivor to talk to their partner about how they were feeling
often went hand in hand with a very strong urge to spend as much
time as possible talking to other survivors - or occasionally
uninvolved friends or acquaintances - and this, perhaps not
surprisingly, led to resentment and misunderstanding.

The consequences may in fact be even more serious for the
relationship, and several partners felt at times that there was
simply no future for their marriage:

  It's very hard living with someone where you know
  something's wrong and they won't talk, 'cos we - we're very
  open with one another. If you've anything on your mind,
  talk about it, get it out into the open, but it was very
  hard to live with that. I don't know how many times I told
  him to get out and leave us alone, you know, we'd be better
  off without him.
  (Wife of Survivor)

In such cases the families often appeared to have 'survived', but
the effects on the relationships were still visible and
partners, despite remaining in the family home, lived more or
less separate lives. Other relationships broke down seemingly
irretrievably, and it was, on occasion, the survivor who made the
decision to leave:

   J come down here and he wasn't here. There was a note in
   the kitchen to say that he'd left, he can't stand what he's
   doing to me and the kids, he was making our life a misery.


                               36
   We'd be better off without him and to let the mortgage
   company know and all this. There was no argument or
   nothing.
   (Wife of Survivor)


In this way, 'loss' was kept very firmly at the centre of
concerns for families affected by the disaster. The bereaved, of
course, suffered loss very directly and tragically and this was
compounded in cases where close personal relationships were
permanently affected by the strains caused by the aftermath of
Hillsborough. This reaffirms the importance of setting up
services that will offer help not only to those who might
obviously be expected to need them, eg. survivors, but their
families as well, for they too are likely to be caught up in the
negative consequences of the tragedy:

   J used to think when something traumatic like that
   happens...big families would stay together, but it doesn't,
   it tears them apart. It just literally tears them apart.
   (Bereaved step-mother)




     Other relationships

In addition to immediate family relationships, there are a
variety of other areas of life that can change or suffer quite
radically after disaster. Firstly, there is the impact upon the
networks of friends, neighbours, colleagues and acquaintances who
may previously have been relied upon for a variety of types of
support. There were a number of cases in this study in which
there was a very significant impact upon lifestyle. In the main
this was visible through work, through life in the community or
neighbourhood and in people's social lives.

Many of the bereaved and the survivors felt that people started
to behave differently toward them after the disaster. The reasons
for this varied, they felt, though one common theme appeared to
be the difficulty of comprehending what had actually happened. In
some senses this was particularly problematic for survivors, for


                               37
although death is difficult it is also ubiquitous. By contrast,
there is no common understanding of what 'survival' means:

  People they just changed to me, people walked across the
  street, they just didn't want to speak to you... They're
  frightened to speak to you and you just feel like screaming
  at that...You can't handle all the looks and the questions,
  and you know people treat me as if I've done something
  wrong...even friends next door, they've moved now, but they
  treated us funny and you know they would see us come and
  they would go in... You wouldn't think they'd been
  friends...they     didn't    know   how   to handle      it
  basically...They would just put their heads down and walk
  on... it was different. I think if it had been through
  natural causes they had died, I think people see them
  differently as it was a tragedy, it wasn't just affecting
  me, it was the way it affected everyone around us, the
  neighbours.
  (Male Survivor)


The development of difficulties with social relationships was by
no means a one-way process. The psychological and emotional
impact of the disaster on the ability of some of those affected
to relate to others was considerable, and the most common
reaction was to withdraw, temporarily, from such contact. The
length of time that this was maintained varied considerably as
did the extent of the withdrawal. For some it was very short­
lived, but others had not picked up their social contacts some
two years after Hillsborough.



    On work

One of the areas in which there were noticeable short and long­
term consequences as a result of the disaster was work. All the
bereaved that were interviewed had taken compassionate leave of
varying lengths in the immediate aftermath. Of the survivors,
those who had physical injuries were obviously unable to return
to work immediately, but many of those who had not required or
sought hospital treatment were also away from work for some
period. On the other hand, some survivors felt it necessary to
return to work in order to occupy their minds or because they
could see no reason for having time off work. For some, the


                              38
consequence of this was relatively lengthy periods of absence at
a later stage where they found that they were no longer able to
cope.

The full range of personal consequences of Hillsborough - the
emotional and psychological, practical, physical and somatic -
all had an effect on people's abilities to continue in their
jobs. One young woman, for example, who had been a nurse prior
to Hillsborough and had been one of the many fans who had been
actively involved in offering first aid at the match, found that
she was unable to return to work at all:
  I've never been able to go into a hospital. Just couldn't
  bear it. The thought of it makes me physically sick, going
  anywhere near it.
  (Female Survivor)

Although there were few others who found that the disaster and
their work were too closely connected in their minds, there were
a number of indirect links between Hillsborough and an inability
to continue at work. The first was the extent to which people's
psychological health interfered with their ability to do their
jobs. The breakup of eating and sleeping patterns had a tendency
to undermine daily routines. Those who managed to get to work
frequently found that their ability to concentrate on the task in
hand was so significantly diminished that they felt unable to
carry on with their jobs. In addition, there was the question of
how to cope with the large number of practical and time-consuming
matters that occur after an event such as Hillsborough. One woman
who lost her husband was forced to give up work because she had
to stay and care for her children who required a lot of time off
school after the disaster. Whilst employers were generally
sympathetic to the need for compassionate leave in the immediate
aftermath of the disaster, memories were short, and requests for
leave at later dates did not necessarily receive a similar
response.

This assumption that because a certain amount of time has passed
that 'Hillsborough must be over' was something that many of the
bereaved, survivors and others affected by the disaster -


                               39
including social workers - came up against time and time again.
Despite the widespread sensitivity over Hillsborough within the
communities particularly affected, there were still those who
remained stubbornly resistant to the requirement for such
sympathy - especially where survivors were concerned. One
described how the attitudes of his work colleagues prompted him
to leave his job for good:
  I heard a few jokes, stupid jokes, even when I went back to
  work someone said to me 'it should have been 96', the bloke
  I work with, which made me feel really bad and a little
  while afterwards I actually broke down in work... I felt
  really stupid when I started crying. I didn't want any of
  the blokes to see me, the boss saw me, I felt stupid when I
  went back in because everyone was looking at me, no-one
  said any more jokes.
  (Male Survivor)

There is an important lesson here which bears continued
repetition: disasters are not simply isolated or one-off events
which recede into the background as the years pass. The disaster
is followed by a series of events - official inquiries,
anniversaries, inquests - which are not only a vivid reminder of
the tragedy but which, because of their nature, may be a form of
'secondary victimisation'9. Hillsborough - no doubt like other
disasters - is an ongoing tragedy for many of its 'victims'.




The impact on professional carers.

Professional carers are affected by the work they undertake in
the aftermath of disasters in a wide variety of ways. They are
affected by the scale of the distress they encounter, are beset
by anxieties about whether they can help and, if so, how. They
experience personal difficulties, frequently find themselves
angry with the way they perceive their organisation is treating
them, and find themselves identifying closely with their client's
suffering. The impact on the staff can be divided roughly into
three categories: the nature of the work, the emotional and



                               40
behavioural consequences of the work, and the organisational
problem and role stresses experienced by social workers.



    The nature of the work.

One of the key aspects of the work undertaken in the aftermath of
disasters is simply the process of listening to relatives' and
survivors' painfully explicit accounts. It was the fact that
this work was so intensive and yet repetitive that many workers
singled out as being the key to separating disaster work from the
mainstream jobs they had done before (and since) . Not
surprisingly, therefore, workers themselves often became somewhat
preoccupied with such accounts and found it difficult to 'switch
off' after this type of work. Of the Hillsborough workers
responding to the questionnaire, almost 90% said that they had at
some time imagined how they would have coped if they had been
one of the victims themselves. A quarter of the workers said that
this occurred 'frequently', and over a half 'sometimes'. Workers
were especially prone to such 'identification' during the first
year after the disaster, and although a significant number
continued to report such feelings up to three years after the
disaster, the proportion doing so had declined to approximately a
quarter. In almost all cases workers imagined either being in the
crush themselves or losing a relative in the disaster:
   I did some work with the sister of a lad who died...my son
   at that time was the same age and he is a football fan, so
   you talk to someone for a couple of hours and on the way
   home your saying "it could've been my son". Because of that
   my husband found it quite difficult. I mean usually I go
   home and he listens... children and death he has trouble
   with, and that made it difficult.



Furthermore, four-fifths of the workers said that they
'sometimes' found themselves preoccupied by their clients'
experiences of the disaster. Such feelings also triggered off a
number of memories or experiences that had occurred at an earlier
stage in the worker's life. In all, three-fifths of the workers
said that the disaster work had reminded them of earlier unhappy


                               41
memories, issues or incidents, though very few suggested that
this had been frequent.



    Emotional and behavioural impact

Workers reported a number of issues that caused them to question
how well they were functioning and, in some cases, actually to
look for help. One significant area raised by workers concerned
aspects of their own life-histories which they had not resolved,
and which their disaster work brought into renewed focus.
Perhaps not surprisingly, the bulk of these personal difficulties
were themselves related in some way to loss. Workers reported
difficulties related to bereavements of their own - particularly
in childhood - separation, divorce and other family problems, and
sexual abuse, both in early childhood and in adolescence. For
such workers it was the stirring up of emotions in relation to
these issues in their lives which either caused them difficulties
or added to the problems they experienced with the work.

Not surprisingly, many of the workers referred to the emotional
character of many aspects of the work and, in particular, to the
impact of the first few weeks of work and then to the incremental
pressure in the following months and years. The following worker
became involved on the weekend of the disaster for a few days and
then joined a team several months later:
   The first week I think I was probably in a state of shock.
   I spent a lot of time crying. I was fortunate in that I'd
   got a very supportive husband who was very protective. The
   crying lasted maybe a few weeks. The feelings, the slight
   depression lasted for longer than that - a few months, by
   which time I was doing Hillsborough work again... I think
   for the whole year there had been experiences that we had
   had where you were constantly putting a lid on your
   feelings and your emotions, and there was one incident at
   the inquests where, in the last week...which...had been
   quite difficult for me. Again, during that day, I'd been
   sort of in control of myself. I'd been supporting other
   people, the police, the family, all the rest of it, and
   driving back (to the office) .. .because I had a meeting...I
   thought how can you be like this? How can you have seen and
   heard, and have done what you've done today?...You should
   be getting out of social work because it's just not


                               42
   touching you...And I got back...and I said 'I'm going
   upstairs'...there was nobody up there, and I sobbed and
   sobbed and sobbed. And that was like the lid was off and I
   thought I could put it back on again but I couldn't...I
   ended up having three weeks off work with nervous
   exhaustion.

Many also reported other significant emotional and somatic
consequences that they felt were associated with this area of the
work, including sleep loss, nightmares, weight loss, difficulties
in concentrating and so on. As was the case with the relatives
and survivors, such effects predictably had a wider impact than
just the individual worker him or herself:
   (My partner) was trying to help all the time and finding it
   really difficult I'm sure, because she was saying to me
   "it's that bloody job, you've got to give it up. It's no
   good for you, it's not doing you any good, and because it's
   not doing you any good, it's not doing me any good." So it
   had like a knock-on effect with our relationship.

Almost two-thirds of the Hillsborough social workers said that
they felt vulnerable 'more than usual' since being involved in
the work and almost half reported an increase in their
consumption of alcohol. Indeed, few of those who had been
involved over an extended period of time did not feel they had
been profoundly affected by the experience, and for some it was
perceived as having been life-changing. Consequently, there were
occasions where the boundaries between 'worker' and 'victim'
became very blurred:
   To be honest I think when I was going along (to the
   inquests) I was going along because I wanted to be (there),
   I wanted to hear what was coming out...Maybe to begin with,
   the first week or two I was...getting stuck in...after that
   I went along for the ride. Part of me wanted to be there,
   but it wasn't as a social worker, it was as someone who had
   been through Hillsborough.



     Organisational pressures and role stresses

Some of the emotional, psychological or personal difficulties
that workers experienced were exacerbated by organisational
problems that they also encountered. The bulk of these


                               43
difficulties related either to the perceived mismanagement of the
worker or the worker's team, or to lack of support for or lack of
acknowledgement of the work by their employer. Many of the
problems related to the 'lives' of the disaster support teams set
up in the aftermath by individual local authorities.10

Especially early on, enormous demands were made upon workers both
emotionally and physically in terms of the numbers of hours they
worked. More than four-fifths of those who responded to the
survey said that they had overworked in the immediate aftermath
of the disaster, and although this proportion declined as time
passed, 70% of workers said that they had overworked at some
period since.    Under such circumstances it is particularly
important that there is someone who can take control and make
sure that some order is maintained, that workers take breaks, for
it is clear that the pressure to work, combined with the desire
to help, will make some continue far beyond the bounds of what is
reasonable or, indeed, professional.




     Beginning the work/ Setting up teams

Considerable role conflict resulted from the very quick
transition from one job to another.     For many Hillsborough
workers this meant dropping, often without warning, their
complete caseload, leaving their previous teams and clients and
hoping that their already busy colleagues would cope with the
extra burden.     For other workers there was at least a
transitionary period where they were expected to maintain their
existing caseload whilst taking on disaster work. Many workers
felt they were breaking commitments to existing clients by
leaving to do Hillsborough work, with no guarantee that their
employers would ensure that their work was seen through.

For others the continued demands of their existing jobs made it
difficult for them to engage with Hillsborough families and
survivors as fully as they desired. These conflicting demands


                               44
were a source of considerable extra stress for social workers,
under circumstances that departments frequently failed to
recognise or respond to. More than one team felt that the amount
of work they were able to do - particularly of a proactive or
outreach nature - was restricted because insufficient space in
their workloads was made available.

For some workers the problems they faced doing such potentially
stressful work were exacerbated by being unsure how long they
were to occupy their new role. Under such circumstances, the
experience of the transfer from one job to another was for many
Hillsborough workers enormously stressful. Staff who were working
very hard, often under very difficult circumstances, felt
frustrated and sometimes bitter about the actions of their
employers.



     The end of the 'honeymoon'11

Just as the disaster workers were settling into their new roles,
almost everyone else in their Departments were attempting to get
things back to normal.    This resulted, in some instances, in
quite strong feelings of isolation amongst disaster workers. Far
from being lauded or praised for the work they were engaged in,
they often felt defensive and under attack. One worker described
it as a 'backlash' and said 'the team you left are asking what
the hell you're still doing engaged in this.' As one senior
manager commented:

   For many people not closely involved, the disaster was soon
   forgotten, and I sometimes felt I was viewed as a nuisance
   or an irritant when I was still pursuing relevant matters
   some time later.

One of the observable consequences of the way in which the social
services response to Hillsborough was managed was that some of
the core teams became increasingly isolated from their
departments. As has been suggested, such is the desire on the
part of the authorities to respond, and to be seen to be



                               45
responding quickly and effectively, that teams are set up,
resourced and housed with little thought to the long-term
consequences for that team and its members. The setting up of
teams and the way that this was managed after Hillsborough were
perfectly acceptable in the short-term (that is, the first few
weeks after the disaster). Sadly, some aspects appeared to have
increasingly negative consequences in the longer-term. Central to
this was the siting of the teams - both physically and
symbolically - outside the everyday structures of the host
department.

The early autonomy that teams required to respond fluidly and
creatively to circumstances as they unfolded quickly turned sour.
As time passed and the disaster work became less newsworthy and
less time-consuming for senior managers, so the teams began to
feel that they were cut off from the day-to-day functioning of
their employing body. Workers and team leaders felt that their
work was not understood, that their efforts were not appreciated
and, in many cases, that their work was not managed.



     Supervision and management

In the early stages, not only does the social services department
have to respond to a crisis, it is more than likely that it will
itself be in crisis - it is faced with a variety of difficulties
that it is inadequately prepared for, has little knowledge about
and yet which demands quick and decisive action. The response
after Hillsborough was, by and large, to set up largely
autonomous teams of social workers under the control of a team
leader. The role of the first line manager in social work is a
multi-faceted one. The job carries a wide variety of
responsibilities,      some of which - for example the
managerial/supervisory and the advisory/supportive elements - do
not always appear to be mutually compatible. In the type of
situation that exists in the aftermath of a disaster these very
specific skills are all the more important. How then did the team
leaders and workers experience 'managing' and being managed.


                                  46
Without wanting to overstate the case, the general impression
given by both groups was an unsatisfactory one. Both main grade
workers and team leaders complained of lack of support from their
line-managers. There was strong criticism from workers in several
teams about the lack of adequate supervision from their team
leaders. The criticism was directed at both the major aspects of
the supervisory role, ie the 'managerial' (including the
'educational') and the 'support' aspects. Thus, with regard to
the managerial aspects of the job, some workers complained that
they received little guidance in their work, and that supervision
did not really appear to involve an evaluation of their practice:

   I want to be challenged...1 don't feel as if in supervision
   I've been challenged...Because I've been around social work
   a long time, I think people make assumptions that...I know
   more than I do...To not question my judgment, actions,
   decisions because I've been around a long time, it's not
   good enough.

There was a feeling that some managers shied away from some
aspects of supervision because of the nature of the work. In
particular, the fact that what was being done was perceived as
'not having been done before' meant that the normal rules were
not applied and that workers were trusted to simply get on with
it. Such an attitude was all the more explicit in those
authorities in which workers took on disaster work alongside
their normal caseload and were not brought together as a disaster
team. In some of these cases the complaint from workers was not
that supervision was inadequate, but that it was non-existent:

   My team manager, in supervision, a couple of times...he'd
   say "of course we won't talk about the Hillsborough work
   because that's sort of different"... I think he found it
   difficult. I remember him saying he couldn't do it, which
   doesn't exactly fill you with confidence.

Under these circumstances the responsibility for supervising what
was acknowledged to be potentially difficult and traumatic work
was completely abdicated. The 'hands-off' approach that
departments took in relation to the teams was, by and large,
mirrored in the relationship between team leaders and team


                               47
members. Communication between teams and their departments was
frequently poor and the usual departmental line-structures
appeared not to be in operation for much of the time. In addition
to poor supervision, workers were also critical of the lack of
support that they received from line-managers. With some
exceptions, there was a widespread feeling that one could not
turn to one's team leader for help or support. Significantly for
the issue of staff care the majority of workers were absolutely
clear that they would not admit to 'not coping* to a line
manager:

   It was useful to have (the Staffline co-ordinator) so that
   we could talk about the personal things. It felt as if you
   could talk about things that were going on within the
   department that were very difficult, and know that it
   wasn’t going to go to management.

This was confirmed by several of the team leaders who recognised
that because of their position in the management structure their
workers were unlikely to feel that they - or anyone in a
managerial position - could be trusted with personal information.
Not only did the workers feel that they were insufficiently
supported by their line managers, but many suggested that they
felt that this was partly the result of the inadequate support
and supervision available to the team leaders. There was
widespread recognition - and this was confirmed by some of the
team leaders - that supervision of the teams and their managers
was inadequate. The end result was the potential for a greater
number of personal and professional problems than would otherwise
have been the case. Many social workers carried out their duties
with less than full supervision from line managers who, in some
cases, also felt that they were struggling to keep things going
without adequate support from their senior managers.

In summary then, there appear to have been a number of problems
in relation to the supervision of staff at most levels in
relation to disaster work. Firstly, staff tended to feel they
were not able to talk to their line managers about any severe
difficulties they might have experienced, either because they
thought that it was possible that it might be used against them


                               48
in the future, or because they didn't feel that their line-
manager had the skills or expertise to provide the necessary
advice or support. Secondly, there was a widespread assumption
that the work being undertaken in the aftermath of disaster was
sufficiently 'different' to mean that the usual rules about
supervision and management no longer applied. Consequently, line
managers tended to allow social workers (and team leaders) a
degree of autonomy and self-management that would tend not to
exist in day-to-day social work.

There appears to be a danger in 'disaster social work' that as a
result of the pressure of work, both in terms of numbers and
emotion, managers and workers will simply immerse themselves in
the work without taking the time to stand back and examine
exactly what is being done. Indeed, such is the degree of
autonomy available that general procedures are often held not to
apply to the work at all.




Closing down support teams

When to close down a core team after a disaster is a difficult
decision to make, though one that for a number of reasons it is
important that workers have some input into. After Hillsborough,
for example, some teams were able to fit their closing date into
a convenient point in the chronology of the disaster aftermath:
after the first or second anniversary, after the end of the
inquests and so on.     Secondly, knowing in advance when the
closing date was to be allowed the team members to plan the way
they wished to finish. This involved not only the extremely
difficult job of bringing to a close the work they were still
doing with families and survivors, but also planning how they
would cope with the termination of disaster work and re-entry
into mainstream social work.

In terms of the pressures placed upon workers by their
organisations, it was the difficulties that surrounded the


                              49
closure of teams that caused the greatest resentment and
distress. Whilst it is difficult for departments, particularly in
these times of severe economic restraint, to commit resources for
lengthy periods of time, clear thought needs to be given in the
future to ensuring that staff who take on the disaster work are
given some indication of how the service will be kept in
operation. Many of those interviewed said that without a written
contract they would not consider, and they would advise any
colleagues not to consider, taking on work of this sort in the
future. Indeed, 40% of those involved in providing support over
an extended period of time after the disaster said that they
would not want to become involved in support work if another
disaster occurred in their locality.



     Returning to mainstream work

Of the disaster workers who had been involved full-time in the
work and who had returned to mainstream work by the time of the
survey, just over two-fifths said that they had found the
transition back difficult. The majority of these felt that little
had been done to help smooth this transition and that little
support had been forthcoming - particularly from their new
colleagues and line-manager. Some workers simply found that they
were still so affected by the Hillsborough experience that moving
back into mainstream work was problematic on both an emotional
and practical level. Finally, there was a widespread feeling that
colleagues who had not been involved either did not understand or
did not wish to hear about what 'disaster workers' had been
doing. This was communicated in a variety of ways, but the end
result was generally that workers felt that did not have
permission to talk about the disaster work. Not only did this
make them feel isolated, but the isolation and the silence
compounded feelings that the work had gone largely unacknowledged
by colleagues at all levels.




                               50
                      THREE: USING THE SERVICES



Recognising *need' and accepting help

We live in a society in which there are strong cultural barriers
to requesting professional help in relation to feelings and
emotions. Disasters are no exception to this and the data from
this research suggest that there were five general reasons that
underlay people's reluctance to seek or to accept help after
disaster.



     'Recognition'.

For many of those affected by Hillsborough, the period
immediately after was characterised by an emotional numbness
which not only blotted out much of the pain they were feeling but
much of what was going around them - referred to above as
'numbing'. Words like 'dazed', 'shocked', 'stunned', 'calm', were
common descriptions that both the bereaved and survivors gave of
themselves at this time. As a consequence, they did not take on
board the full impact of what was happening to them, were not
necessarily aware of how they were behaving and, in many cases,
attempted to carry on with their lives as if unaffected.



     *Acceptance'

Whilst there were some, particularly in the immediate aftermath,
who appeared largely unaware of their predicament, there were
others who, whilst recognising that the disaster was having an
impact upon them, did not accept that this meant that they needed
some help with it. This was particularly the case amongst the men
and was in many cases a reflection of their self-perception or
self-image. Thus, 36% of the male survey respondents said they
had not sought help since Hillsborough, compared with 16% of
female respondents. More specifically, for men it was a pre-


                                 51
Hillsborough self-image that often prevented them from seeking
support and, when and if help was eventually accepted, this
tended to result from or in a changed perception of themselves.

Central to the difficulty with 'acceptance' was a strong self-
image, someone with the ability to cope without the help of
others. This is far from being a particularly new or surprising
finding but it is, nevertheless, of considerable importance.
There is a small but growing literature on masculinity and
although little of it considers male victimisation, much of the
literature touches on emotions, feelings and rationality. Reduced
to its simplest message, what much of this literature suggests is
that there are a variety of problems that men experience in
relation to their feelings and emotions and that contemporary
masculinity and machismo emphasise strength, control, rationality
       •   •   •   1   p
and objectivity. * Feelings, especially strong and explicit
feelings, are not accorded legitimacy:
  I ’ve never admitted weakness...I've always got on with the
  job and I've always looked at myself as a strong person.
  (Male Survivor)
  Me own sort of counselling, just forgetting it, well people
  saying it's bad for you and that, suppose it is but you
  forget, well you try to forget.
  (Male Survivor)

This is not to say that there weren't elements of such denial
amongst the women in the study, rather that they were less common
amongst the women and on the whole rather less successful. The
problem for many of those people affected by Hillsborough was
that they continued to behave as if they were unchanged by the
disaster and, more particularly, to believe that because they had
'coped' before, they would cope now. This presented a number of
challenges for social work. Firstly, it meant that workers were
frequently confronted with people who were very resistant to the
idea of professional support and, indeed, others who saw
themselves as quite unaffected despiteevidence tothe contrary.
Secondly, it meant attempting to present a service that would
understand the nature of these resistances, would acknowledge
them and yet would, in as unintrusive a way as possible, continue


                               52
to be offered. As a consequence, thirdly, the service had to
continue to be available until such time - and there was no way
of judging when this would be - that it was perceived to be
required and to be acceptable.

The same pattern was found amongst social work staff. The co­
ordinator who ran the counselling service for staff during the
two years after the disaster found that male workers were
considerably less likely than women to acknowledge that they were
not coping well and to come forward for help. Furthermore, male
users of the service tended to be 'in a much worse state than the
women (were) before they came for help'.



     *Worthiness'.

This was related to the individual's perception of whether they
were deserving of help or not. What is interesting here is the
method by which individuals judged 'worth' or 'legitimacy'. By
and large, the key was some sort of hierarchy of worthiness -
the closer one was to the top of the hierarchy, the more
deserving of help and support. Amongst the 'victims' of
Hillsborough, there was some evidence of an implicit hierarchy in
operation. The survivors, in particular, frequently viewed
themselves as being less deserving than the bereaved. Similarly,
relatives of survivors sometimes felt guilty that they were
feeling bad when there were others 'much worse off'.
Significantly, of course, the social workers often felt
themselves to be the least deserving of support as a result of
the disaster. On occasion such feelings were reinforced by the
attitudes or the behaviour of others who failed to recognise the
legitimacy of other's needs. The idea that there was some sort of
'pecking order' was widespread:
  I thought social services were for next of kin I know we
  were bereaved but not sort of, we were simply too far, you
  know, we weren't sort of direct line for social services,
  they were for people who had lost children or husbands not
  us. Or people that were injured.
  (Bereaved Sister-in-law)



                               53
   I felt like my problem was just minor compared to
   (friend1s) and compared to people who had lost relatives,
   friends um...I just felt like there were people who needed
   help more than me, and I felt if I went I was thinking of
   meself rather than people who really need it.
   (Male Survivor)



     'Information‘

Fourthly, there was the importance of access to information about
the availability of help. Outreach work is time-consuming and
labour-intensive and therefore has to be targeted. The decision
after Hillsborough, like most disasters, was that first of all an
attempt would be made to visit all the bereaved families. Making
contact with relatives other than immediate family was more
problematic and outreach to survivors was done by visiting places
of work, schools, through the football club and so on. In
addition to such work, leaflets were distributed as widely as
possible, announcements were made through the media, and some
networking was undertaken.

Inevitably, given the scale of the disaster, there remained many
survivors who were largely unaware of what was available and for
whom a decision about seeking or accepting formal help from
social services was not an issue.Thus, of the survivors
responding to the survey, only 10% had been in touch with social
services since Hillsborough. In relation to 'information', there
were also the difficulties attached to the idea of 'counselling'.
Some felt that there was something vaguely shameful about it,
something to be avoided, others found the idea intimidating,
frightening or confusing:
   I didn't know what counselling was, I didn't even, I had no
   idea, I hadn't the foggiest, and I just thought it was
   people just trying to tell me I should pull myself
   together.
   (Female Survivor)




                               54
     *Stigma‘

Finally, there was a barrier to the take-up of help that was
linked directly to the source of that help: the stigma attached
to social work. Very few of those interviewed had any previous
first hand experience of social work, yet there were quite strong
and widely held views about social work and social workers.
Perhaps not surprisingly given the general tenor of the media
portrayal of social work in the past few years, the
preconceptions held about social workers were largely negative.
As was suggested above, little of this appears to have been based
on direct experience, and it is probably fair to conclude
therefore that the views of those interviewed had been quite
significantly influenced by the widely-held public image of
social workers framed by successive child care tragedies and
media investigations of social services' 'failures'.

There is something of a quandary here for social workers. They
are faced with a situation in which there is a need for them to
work proactively, to offer help, and yet many of those they
approach will assume that their purpose is not to help but to
investigate and, if necessary, to remove children. One solution
to the problem was to avoid the term social worker completely
and find some alternative description of the job, or the work.
Some workers described themselves as 'counsellors' or said they
were from the Local Authority when first visiting families after
the disaster, only at a later stage when some rapport had
developed letting it be known that they were social workers.

Where the stigma attached to asking for help from a professional
was most vivid was amongst the professionals themselves. Indeed,
it was in some senses 'professionalism' that was the key to the
barrier here. There was a widely-held assumption amongst social
workers that it was not possible to be an effective professional
'carer' unless they 'could cope' with all the emotion that they
had to confront. Needing support was taken to be an indication of
professional failure or personal inadequacy. The role of the
staff counsellor therefore tended to mirror almost exactly the


                               55
work of post-disaster social worker: there was a lot of outreach
work as workers wouldn't come forward of their own accord;
practical tasks tended to precede other work as they was more
likely to be viewed as acceptable and non-threatening; though
counselling may take place, the work will tend not to be
announced as counselling for fear of frightening off potential
clients, and so on.

*Recognition•, ‘a c c e p t a n c e ‘worthiness’ ‘information' and
•stigma1 , then,     all act as major barriers - even to
'professionals' - to fuller use of the types of services that are
set up in the aftermath of disaster. It is not enough therefore
to put services in place and to publicise them. One of the keys
is to 'sell' the services, to present the 'service to the client
in a certain way so that they understand what is being offered
and they can make an informed choice'(Hodgkinson and Stewart,
1991).

The barriers to asking for and accepting help - with the
consequence that services need to be proactive - also apply to
staff care. Social workers were equally, if not more reluctant to
ask for help, and the vast majority of those who did receive
support from the staff counsellor would not have done so had it
not been for the proactive character of the staff care service.
Perhaps more important still was the fact that the service was
independent of any of the authorities. Workers feared that
admitting to experiencing difficulties to someone within their
department would be likely to have repercussions on their future
careers. As one team leader commented:
   Social workers...were very suspicious of relating to
   somebody within the authority. What's going to go down on
   paper? What would happen in the future? They'd apply for
   another job...it would've been difficult for social workers
   to use anyone appointed (by the authority)




                                56
    Other ‘triggers’

Without in any way undermining the argument about the need to
'sell' services, it is also clear that a considerable number of
people who do not seek help early on, do do so at a later stage,
and some do so for reasons other than face-to-face outreach. One
of the more common triggers was a public event which led,
directly or otherwise, to the receipt of support. Again, there
were a number of reasons for this. Firstly, some of these events
such as the memorial services, the inquests or events to mark one
of the anniversaries, provoked feelings and emotions so strong
that they broke some of the barriers. Secondly, on some of these
occasions there were social workers and others present, and
contact was made then and followed up later. Similarly, social
workers sometimes took up offers of support themselves, having
met and spoken to the staff counsellor in some other setting.

For others it was a question of time. Many were unable or unready
to accept help immediately after the disaster. Indeed, as has
been suggested, there were those who did not recognise that they
had been badly affected by the disaster. However, for a few, the
passage of time led to the emerging realisation - or just the
opportunity to realise - that there were things that it might be
helpful to talk to someone about. As far as the practical
constraints on emotional issues were concerned, the carers of the
long-term injured are a good example of the importance of the
timing and the continued availability of support. These parents
were overtaken by the calamitous impact of the disaster on their
children. It was only at a later stage that they began to have
the time, the space and the energy to consider themselves.

Finally, and centrally in this regard, there is the role of
relatives and friends in the process of seeking or accepting
help. For many of those affected by traumatic events such as
disaster, including the carers, it is often family, friends or
others in close contact, who recognise the need for help or
support before they do themselves. Most commonly this involved


                               57
some element of persuasion by the relative or friend, varying
from encouragement to 'threats':
  Mum organised (contact with a social worker) cos my mum had
  been in contact with her, talking to her for a while
  because my mum noticed a lot of changes in me because I got
  violent when I drank and I used to drink, I just wasn't
  happy at all...it's not until now that I really look back
  and my mum said she saw these changes in me and that is why
  she wanted me to get help.
  (Male Survivor)

It is no coincidence that in the quote above it is a reluctant
man being persuaded or forced to seek help by his female
relatives. Many of the young men in the study who had survived
Hillsborough described their resistance to seeking help and the
role their mothers played in making them overcome this. The women
interviewed exhibited far less reticence and far fewer problems
in relation to making an approach to social services or other
agencies offering help and support. They frequently found
themselves living with men who found it difficult to talk about
their feelings in relation to the disaster, who they felt were
slow to realise that Hillsborough was having a significant impact
on their lives and were often reluctant to consider looking for
help with any problems that had been identified. The woman's role
- either as mother or partner - was under such circumstances a
traditional one of support, facilitation and sharing, even at
significant personal cost:
  No, he (husband) won't talk to me about it. It's taken me
  nearly two years to get him to go to the (Hillsborough)
  Centre and go to a group. Just over 18 months to go to a
  group and I mean eventually, I had to start going with him,
  and I didn't want to go because well, I go to a group on my
  own. I have space and I know what I want to talk about and
  what I want to get rid of. But to go with him... because I
  always got the feeling that he wanted to say something but
  couldn't because he felt he was going to upset me...
  (Survivor)

In summary then, there appear to be a variety of barriers which
lie between the caring agencies and those whom they seek to help.
The general ones discussed above concerned the ability of those
touched by disaster to recognise that they needed help, the
difficulties they - particularly men - had in accepting help, the


                               58
impact of the widespread perception that some were more deserving
than others, and the importance of information; it is not only
necessary to know that help exists and where it can be obtained,
but that the help that will be offered is open to all and that it
is a safe and non-threatening process. In addition to these
general barriers social work and social workers face other
problems stemming from the less than perfect public image of the
profession, and the stigma that is attached to admitting such
need to a professional. Crucially, the implications of these
findings apply just as much to 'workers' as they do to 'clients'.



User’s views of the service.

A number of factors influenced users' views of the service they
were offered. In particular, a number of personal and
interpersonal factors and skills were mentioned by respondents.
The skill that was mentioned more than any other was being able
to 'listen'. This meant different things to different people, but
was described as 'not interrupting', 'listening to what I was
really saying', 'listened to me feelings more than what I was
actually saying', 'good at letting me talk and talk and talk'.
Indeed, 'listening' and the skills that go with that - empathy,
marginality, respect13 - appear to have been not only the central
activity at almost all stages of the social work task, but also,
therefore, the crucial skills necessary for undertaking such work
successfully.

Being sensitive and caring, 'gentle', 'soft-spoken' and being
calm or confident were also mentioned with some frequency. The
absence, or particularly the reverse of any of these attributes
diminished the chances of success. For example, social workers
who were perceived to be nervous, timid, or ill at ease by their
client - and not surprisingly this was most likely to occur at
the first meeting - tended to make the client feel nervous and
unsure and consequently unlikely to feel willing to talk openly.
Crucially, workers perceived not to be 'really listening' were
unlikely to be invited back.


                               59
Central to success was the notion of ‘credibility’. Users
mentioned a variety of personal attributes that they felt were an
indication that their particular worker possessed the ability to
'understand'. Sometimes this might be age or gender - generally
being the same age and gender as themselves - or some aspect of
their personal histories that coincided: having been bereaved
themselves being a key one. More general tests might come in the
shape of practical tasks to be achieved: to see whether the
worker could be relied upon to do something useful when it was
asked for. The workers themselves reported feeling that there was
a time early on when their credibility was being tested, and that
it had been important to 'deliver'. The same experience was true
for the staff counsellor, who felt that it was only as a result
of a number of practical achievements - say, advice about how to
proceed with a client - that some of the workers began to trust
her and, eventually, use the service.

One of the major sources of criticism focussed upon the ending of
the social work service, though occasionally the social worker
became the scapegoat for the shortcomings of the service. Some
problems came when decisions were made to close down the team
that had been providing support. As has been suggested, so strong
were the feelings of users when the announcement came that the
Wirral team was to close, that a campaign was started and the
team eventually saved. There were criticisms from respondents
about the closure of specific teams, and although there was no
consistent message about how long they felt teams should be kept
going, the impression was that there remained quite a number of
people who felt unprepared for the withdrawal of the service when
that finally happened in their area. Eighteen months - which was
about the 'average life' of the major teams on Merseyside - would
appear to be too short. Although the staff counselling service
outlived many of the core teams, its closure was also viewed by
staff as having come too soon.

The other major source of criticism came from those who lived
outside the areas where the core services were provided. They


                               60
felt particularly resentful of the amount of help they believed
was available for those living in Merseyside, especially when
contrasted with what was available to them. Isolation was a key
problem, and it is not difficult to understand how problematic
this might be given how important being with others experiencing
similar problems and feelings has been found to be. This is not
to suggest that those living away from Merseyside did not receive
any help or support, merely that there were clearly far greater
numbers of people 'falling through the net' in areas where core
services - including staff care services - were not set up in
response to Hillsborough.

Although, as has been illustrated above, there were certainly
critical comments made both about the role or approach of
individual social workers and of social services departments more
generally, none of the respondents who had lengthy contact
suggested that, overall, social workers had been unhelpful or
that social services were unimportant in the aftermath of
disaster. Those who had been in contact with social workers for
briefer period of time were, however, somewhat less fulsome in
their assessment of the service. Whilst the majority of those who
had had very little or no contact with social services generally
presented this as having been of their own choosing, there were
some - particularly those living outside the core service regions
- who felt resentful or angry that they had not been offered a
similar service.

In their evaluation of the social work service the respondents in
this study divided their comments into what they saw to be the
qualities of the service, and how they felt the service had
affected them. There was appreciation of the wide variety of
tasks that had been undertaken in the name of social work, from
the mundane and practical to the longer-term counselling that
many received. As was highlighted above, it was the listening
skills, allied to the role of the social worker as 'outsider',
that was felt to be most helpful. Outsider, in this case, does
not imply a neutral or impartial role - except that the social
worker was perceived as being outside family jealousies,


                               61
squabbles and so on - but rather someone who did not know their
prior history and who they felt they did not have to take any
responsibility for.

One of the central problems that many people faced was the
feeling that they were placing too great a burden on other family
members, or that they were boring them or upsetting them. By
contrast, social workers were there to listen to their
experiences however often they felt the need to repeat them:
   I realised I had to try to see somebody else who was
   prepared to listen over and over and over again and who I
   wasn't going to subject to the same, urn, distress that I
   was actually going through myself. Because there was a
   danger that they would get drawn into what I was going
   through really.
   (Male Survivor)

Feeling that the social worker could 'cope' with what they heard
was vital in allowing people to unburden themselves of their
feelings and emotions in relation to the disaster. It is
important therefore that there are support mechanisms in place
for welfare staff, for if they begin to find that they are unable
to cope and communicate this to their client, then the whole
basis of the social work role is undermined.

The elements of the social work role that were identified by
users as having been positive fell broadly into the following
six categories: advice, support, validatation, reconstruction,
facilitation and mitigation. Users particularly valued:

   the provision of advice and support at difficult times. Many
   respondents felt that it had been important to have          an
   'extra' person to turn to at especially difficult times. Such
   times included the funeral and other events early, all the way
   through to later anniversaries, legal proceedings and so on.

   help with validating their feelings or in helping make sense
   of feelings and emotions.   Crucial for those affected was
   finding some way of normalising the very strong emotions they
   experienced; help in finding out that what was happening to


                               62
them was not the first sign of impending breakdown, but rather
a normal response to a powerful and traumatic event.

help in piecing together the experience of the disaster. One
of the key activities undertaken by social workers was to help
those affected piece together what happened to them, what
happened to their friends or relatives and what their role in
it all had been. By allowing them to talk, often at great
length and on many occasions, and through using materials like
the video recordings produced by the BBC and by the police,
personal accounts of the tragedy could be constructed. However
awful the experience, feeling sure rather than unsure about
what happened was important in enabling those affected to move
on psychologically and emotionally and was, almost without
exception, appreciated by them.

the facilitation of self-help. This was viewed as having been
most useful when it was simply supportive and non-directive.
The most successful means of facilitating self-help was via
the mutual support of some of the groups that were set up.
Many felt that they alone had such experiences, and many
described the importance of discovering (sometimes as a result
of contact with a social worker, or through a group set up by
social services - though in many other ways as well) that they
were one of many feeling the way they did, or that there was a
reason for the way in which they or their relatives or friends
were behaving.

Finally, many of the respondents referred to what they took to
be the vital impact of social work intervention on their long­
term functioning. Short-term benefits were mentioned by the
majority of users, and over a third of those interviewed who
had had lengthy contact with a social worker suggested that
this had helped mitigate some long-term and potentially
serious consequences of the disaster. These ranged from the
purely individual (emotional or psychological problems) to
wider questions of relationships and employment. The following
quotes are indicative of how important many of the respondents


                            63
   in this study felt the support provided by social services had
   been:
   I just dread to think because as I said we didn't know. We
   didn't know nothing, we had never been in that position...1
   think we would have cracked up completely.
   (Female Survivor)
   I don't think I'd have been, well I wouldn't be like
   sitting here now talking to you. I think if it had gone on,
   if I hadn't of seen anyone, I'm not saying I would have
   topped myself, but I might have got into serious trouble,
   through either like fighting or...through drinking too much
   (Male Survivor)
  When I think back, if I hadn't sorted that out with (social
  worker), I don't know what I would have done...she pointed
  the danger things out, the warnings, so that when I would
  be like that (angry with the children), although no matter
  how angry I was or whatever, I would kind of see what (was
  happening).
  (Bereaved Wife)

In a similar vein, social workers who had used the staff support
service also identified significant long-term benefits for
themselves, those they were working with and their organisations:

  Somewhere to offload a lot of emotion. An opportunity to
  begin to stand back and to look in a more objective,
  detached way at the issues that were affecting me.
  Something that challenged me to face up to some realities,
  some of which were about Hillsborough, and some that were
  about things that had been triggered by Hillsborough. A lot
  of growth and a lot of personal development, and a more
  realistic expectation of myself.
  (Hillsborough social worker)




                               64
          CONCLUSIONS: SOME LESSONS FROM HILLSBOROUGH.




The central role of social services in the 'caring response' to
disasters has recently been confirmed by the CRUSE/Department of
Health Working Party Report14. The report - for the first time in
this country - provides a coherent framework within which such
services can be planned. The Hillsborough research has looked in
some detail at the nuts and bolts of the social services response
to a disaster, with a view to learning further lessons about the
practicalities of providing social and psychological support in
the aftermath of such a tragedy.



THE IMPACT OF DISASTER

The disaster had an impact on people's lives in five main ways:
practically, emotionally, on behaviour, on relationships and on
work. It is the emotional consequences of disaster that are most
usually discussed but, given the catalogue of practical,
psychological and emotional problems facing those affected by
disaster, it is perhaps not surprising that considerable strain
is often placed upon relationships. Family and personal
relationships in particular frequently came under stress after
Hillsborough. There were many that were quite radically changed
and some that simply didn't survive. For the bereaved in
particular this represented a ’double loss’. Negative or
problematic consequences were reported both between partners and
between parents and children.

     - Post-disaster social work services need to consider if and
bow they can intervene in ways that support relationships as well
as individuals.

     - Relatives and partners often need as much support as those
directly involved for two reasons. Firstly, just as 'professional
carers' require supervision and support, so too do non—


                               65
professionals and, secondly, because they are *victims' in their
own right.

     - Engaging in practical support early on is of crucial
significance, not only because it can be of significant value to
families and survivors at particularly difficult times, but also
because it may enable the worker to establish some credibility
and trust.

Many of those affected by the disaster found that their working
lives were disrupted. Whilst employers were generally sympathetic
to the need for compassionate leave in the immediate aftermath of
the disaster. memories were short, and requests for leave at
later dates did not necessarily receive a similar response. There
is an important lesson here which runs throughout the study and
which cannot be repeated too often: disasters are not simply
isolated or one-off events which recede into the background as
the years pass. Disasters are followed by a series of events -
official inquiries. inquests and so on - which are not only a
vivid reminder of the tragedy but which, because they are not
geared to the •needs' of those affected by disasters, may
exacerbate rather than mitigate suffering. Hillsborough - like
other disasters - is an ongoing tragedy for many of its
•victims1.

     - special provision needs to be made (including training) to
enable social workers to provide support for families through the
difficult and often extensive legal processes following disaster,

     - intervention at the point of crisis may avert the longer-
term consequences of broken relationships, and reduce the chances
that those who are vulnerable will get into negative work and
behaviour patterns.




                               66
THE ORGANISATIONAL RESPONSE

The 'Hillsborough model' - a 'federal' response from a region,
with individual teams placed in each of the authorities - worked
well in many important respects, but had certain shortcomings.
Firstly, all the authorities only pulled together during the
'honeymoon' period lust after the disaster. After that, a few
started going their own ways, with the consequence that services
were not maintained for comparable periods across the region.
Although, in a region like Merseyside, there would have been some
logic in slowly closing down teams as demand decreased, whilst
directing any future referrals to those teams that remained, this
was not the basis upon which the decisions were taken. Rather,
individual authorities, managers, teams decided their own futures
largely without reference to what was happening in other
authorities. Regional inter-agency co-operation may be hard to
organise. but it is even harder to maintain. Despite the
difficulties, this must continue to be the aim of any senior
managers involved in disaster response work.

The maintenance of the response over an extended period of time
is one of the most crucial objectives, yet one of the hardest to
achieve. The good intentions expressed by senior managers caught
up in the emotion of the tragedy, that are visible at the outset,
either soon disappear, or are undermined by changes in the local
political climate. Long-term strategic decisions need to be taken
in the early weeks - for example, what sort of team will be set
up and how long it will operate for - and these need to be
adhered to. The stresses experienced by workers can easily be
exacerbated by organisational problems affecting the work.
Crucially. although some flexibility is necessary, workers need
some indication of how long the service will be maintained and
that the work is supported and valued by their department.
Failure to provide a secure environment for the work is likely to
undermine the extent to which staff feel they can work
effectively.




                               67
  - Long-term commitments need not only to be made but adhered to

     - Social services should be prepared to maintain a response
for upwards of two years.



Generally speaking, under the federal structure, the North-West,
together with Sheffield and Nottingham - the regions deemed to
be primarily affected - were served well. Unintentionally,
however, this structure served to reinforce the view that they
were the only regions affected. Many Liverpool supporters living
outside these regions, unless they chose to travel considerable
distances - and many did - were not offered a service. Unless
specific measures are taken to set up an 'away' team15 as was
done after Piper Alpha and the Herald disasters, it is likely
that large numbers of those affected but who live outside the
main areas will 'fall through the net'. As was the case after
Hillsborough, and no doubt other disasters, local authorities
that have few bereaved or only survivors in their area will tend
to perceive themselves to be largely unaffected and will do
little in response.



     - Authorities that are not located near the •epicentre* of a
disaster have the same responsibility to provide a service to
survivors in their locality as those more obviously affected.

Part of the logic of setting up a 'dedicated' disaster support
team under the supervision of a team leader must lie in the
assumption that the work will be more effectively managed in this
way. Unfortunately, the experience of some of the Hillsborough
teams did not bear this out. Many workers felt both inadequately
managed and poorly supported bv their team leaders. There were a
number of problems in relation to the supervision of staff at
most levels in relation to disaster work. Firstly, staff tended
to feel they were not able to talk to their line managers about
any severe difficulties they might have experienced, either
because they thought that it was possible that it might be used


                               68
against them in the future, or because they didn't feel that
their team leader had the skills or expertise to provide the
necessary advice or support. Secondly, there was a widespread
assumption that the work being undertaken in the aftermath of
disaster was sufficiently 'different' to mean that the usual
rules about supervision and management no longer applied.
Consequently, line managers tended to allow social workers (and
team leaders) a degree of autonomy and self-management that would
tend not to exist in day-to-day social work.

The alternative model evident after Hillsborough - staying in
post and taking on disaster work as and when it arose alongside
the usual caseload - if anything, led to even greater problems in
relation to management and supervision, with some workers simply
not being managed at all. The solution to this problem is not
necessarily to be found in the search for an alternative model,
but in rethinking the nature of the supervisor's role. The
assumption that a team leader can provide the degree of
managerial oversight. administrative control and professional
supervision and support that social workers require is. at least
in post-disaster work. a mistaken one.

     - The role of the Team Leader as manager, professional
supervisor and major source of support for workers needs to be
radically rethought.

     - It remains open to question whether setting up 'dedicated'
teams is the most effective and efficient way to respond to a
disaster. Whilst having a team helps avoid certain problems, it
should not be assumed that this is the only model that could be
successfully adopted.




                               69
THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR

Any local authority (or group of authorities). however well
resourced it is. will find very quicklv that it simply cannot
take on complete responsibility for the 'care1 response to a
disaster. Close co-operative links need to be established with
the voluntary sector, with a view to involving voluntary groups
in the response as quickly and thoroughly as possible. As one
example, albeit the major long-term one,       the Hillsborough
Helpline was run very effectively for a period of eighteen months
by the voluntary sector in Liverpool. It would have been
enormously burdensome for social services to have attempted to
maintain the organisation and staffing of the Helpline.

     -      Social services and voluntary groups must establish and
maintain good relationships and lines of communication prior to a
disaster if they are to work collaboratively in the aftermath.




THE NATURE OF THE DISASTER SERVICE

The key aspect of the work undertaken in the aftermath of the
disaster is simply the process of listening to relatives' and
survivors' painfully explicit accounts. It was the fact that
this work was so intensive and yet repetitive that many workers
singled out as being the key to separating disaster work from the
mainstream jobs they had done before (and since).

Not everybody sought out or accepted professional help. The five
major barriers to accepting or requesting help - recognition,
acceptance, worthiness, information, stigma - have important
implications for the organisation and running of a post-disaster
service. Self-evidently, given the above, services need to reach
out to those affected by the disaster. The majority will not seek
help without being prompted. Services need to be provided by
staff who feel confident about what it is they are offering.


                               70
Services need to be available over an extended period of time -
at least two years - . and it needs to be clear at the outset to
all concerned - staff and potential users - that this will be the
case.

The next of kin of those who die in disasters are likely to be
relatively easy to trace, as will be many other relatives. The
outreach task in such cases is therefore - at least in terms of
making contact - relatively straightforward. However, with a
disaster like Hillsborough, there will be many thousands of
survivors who cannot be traced. Offering a service is somewhat
more problematic here. This was borne out in the research which
found that only about 10% of survivors appeared to have been in
contact with social services since Hillsborough. There are a
number of lessons from this. Firstly, it confirms the importance
of having 24-hour, 7 days a week Helpline as the major back-up to
a proactive counselling service. Secondly, it suggests that those
responsible for the organisation, management and provision of
services after disaster need to review how such services are
brought to people's attention. Hillsborough workers were
generally of the view that much more 'outreach' work could have
been undertaken, for example,        in schools and places of
employment - two sites where considerable resistance was often
encountered. One particular area where help might have been
expected to have been forthcoming was from General Practitioners.
However, although a small number of respondents mentioned having
had positive support from their GP, this did not appear to have
been the case in the vast majority of cases and, indeed, was
mentioned as having been particularly unhelpful by some.

     -      Considerable efforts need to be made to make GPs more
aware of the impact of stressful events such as disasters, and to
encourage them to consider referring patients to social services
or other organisations rather than relying on medical
intervention alone.

Two factors were identified as having been crucial in determining
whether the first approach made by a social worker would be


                               71
likely to lead to further contact and to some form of
relationship being established. They were, firstly, the extent to
which and the manner in which workers made clear what their
purpose in calling was and, secondly, the time and the way in
which the first contacts were made. Workers' ability to present a
straightforward and positive reason for calling was central in
overcoming resistances to social workers.

The work that is undertaken in the aftermath of disaster is not
adequately described by using the term 'counselling'. In some
cases very little counselling will actually occur, and in the
vast majority a variety of activities in addition to
'counselling' will take place. Practical support is likely to
dominate in the early stages, together with or followed by a
strong element of 'personal support': accompanying people to a
wide variety of public and private events and adopting a
befriending role - essentially 'being there' for people, not just
in early days, but later on when other sources of support have
disappeared or when particularly stressful occasions arise. Early
on, practical help tended to be not only the most useful avenue,
but the most likely to lead to acceptance. The offer of
practical support and help was much less threatening - not only
for the client but also for the social worker - than any talk of
counselling. It represented something concrete that the worker
could do. It showed that they were prepared to help and that they
would respond to what the individual person wanted. As was
suggested above, such tasks are not only important in themselves.
but they are also valuable because they help facilitate the trust
that is important if other work is to be undertaken. It is ironic
therefore that these aspects of the work are often accorded
relatively little importance in analyses of the social work task
after disaster.

Counselling - individually or in groups - does and will take
place. Absolutely central to the work undertaken after
Hillsborough was the use of video and newspaper material. The
published records of a disaster - newspaper and television
coverage - can be vital in helping people to piece together what


                               72
happened to them, and as a to encourage them to talk about their
experiences.

In a similar way, groups were valued because they allowed people
to meet and spend time with others who were in a similar position
to themselves. For many it was in such circumstances that they
were first able to realise that they were not alone in the wav
they were feeling, and that perhaps they weren't 'going mad'
after all.

     - Social workers must be clear about what they can offer to
people affected by disasters.

     - Crucially, social workers require good *listening skills'

     - Providing practical support is at least as important a
function in the aftermath of disaster as *counselling*




CARING FOR THE CARERS

The impact on the staff can be divided roughly into three
categories: the nature of the work, the emotional and behavioural
consequences of the work, and the organisational problems and
role stresses experienced by social workers. Disaster work is
highly stressful and staff therefore need to be closely and
sympathetically managed, as well as having access to support
outside their organisation. Social workers appear to be just as
reluctant as anyone else to admit that they need help, especially
if their employers are involved. Consequently, services need to
be:

     proactive, - The 'Helpline' model is not one that is
appropriate for a staff care system. It places the onus on the
caller to recognise that they might benefit from support at any
given time, and requires them to make the first contact. The


                               73
outreach model that is employed by social workers for use with
their 'clients' is the one that needs to be utilised by those
attempting to care for professional staff.



     extra-departmental - social workers are unlikely to trust
any counselling service that is linked to their own organisation
and particularly to line-management structures. Because of the
association of looking for support with the idea of having
'failed' in some way, workers assume that if it were known within
their organisation that they had sought help, this would be
likely to affect their future career prospects. As a consequence,
unless there is some radical cultural change within social
services departments, supervision from a line-manager is unlikely
to be able to fulfil this function.

     available - Again, directly mirroring any service that is
provided for bereaved families and survivors of a disaster, a
staff care service needs to be accessible both geographically,
and in terms of the length of time that it remains available. It
needs to be local and available for at least as long as the
disaster social work service continues to operate. Similarly,
there needs to be some agreement amongst all the involved parties
as to how long this should be, with the ending of the service
being negotiated long in advance of closure.

As a direct consequence of their negative experiences of disaster
work, many social workers said that without a written contract
they would not consider, and they would advise any colleagues not
to consider, taking on work of this sort in the future. Indeed,
40% of those involved in providing support over an extended
period of time after the disaster said that they would not want
to become involved in support work if another disaster occurred
in their locality.

     compulsory, - Whilst any service will, nevertheless, be
dependent on potential users recognising 'need', early on after
the disaster it is important that some form of compulsory


                               74
debriefing16 is agreed to in the initial contact between workers
and their managers, and that senior managers ensure that both
sides keep to the agreement. At this stage - at the height of the
crisis stage after the disaster - staff are most likely to
overwork. Unless all workers are 'compelled' to talk to a
counsellor, the majority will simply avoid doing so. This initial
debriefing meeting will help break down some of the barriers that
exist, and may facilitate later work.



     - Social workers view looking for support for themselves as
evidence of *failure *

     - Counselling services for staff must be outside of the
line-management structure and, preferably, extra-departmental

     - The closure of *dedicated• teams should be properly
negotiated, with consultation taking place amongst all interested
parties (including users)




TRAINING AND SKILLS

There were a variety of different practices in evidence in the
procedures used for the selection of staff for disaster work.
Consequently, there was little consistency in the criteria
employed in deciding which workers should become members of the
core teams, in deciding what the appropriate skills were, in
identifying whether or not individual workers had the emotional
capacity to cope with the work and in attempting to establish
their willingness to participate in appropriate support and
debriefing.

There was a widespread feeling amongst the disaster workers that
the professional training that they had received had not prepared
them for what they had encountered in the aftermath of the
disaster. Consequently, the social workers felt they had


                               75
benefited from the 'orientation' training that they received
immediately after the Hillsborough Disaster - training which gave
them some idea of what to expect, and which carried the message
that their basic social work skills were the ones they should
r e l y on.   Nevertheless,   bh&   m a n o irity   o f   w orkers   fe lt:   fchafc f u r t h e r

training would have been valuable. and there was agreement that
it was counselling skills that should form the focus of this.
These should be developed in the context of providing practical
help and working with relationships.

Both workers and users confirmed that •listening skills’.
'empathy• and 'flexibility' were the keys to building up a
successful working relationship. Users made direct reference to
the importance of services taking account of what they wanted,
and what they felt they would benefit from. Comparisons of
different practices between teams suggested that workers who
presented themselves as experts or who insisted on a highly
structured approach to the work were, as far as the users were
concerned, likely to be less successful. Thus, one of the most
novel areas of work undertaken by Hillsborough social workers,
was the use of video and other photographic material with
survivors and others affected by the disaster. There never
appeared to be a set pattern to when and how this would take
place, but rather it tended to be geared to what the user, in
collaboration with the worker, determined was appropriate.
Watching the video material, although frequently harrowing and
extremely distressing, was almost universally agreed to have been
a positive thing to have undertaken.

     - There is an urgent need to review the process by which
workers are *selected* for disaster work.

     - There is insufficient emphasis on listening skills/
counselling skills in professional social work education and
training

     - The *skills* used by disaster workers are appropriate in
all areas of social work


                                         76
NOTES

1. Home Office (1989) The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. An
Interim report by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor. CM 765

2. On January 8th 1989, just three months prior to Hillsborough,
British Midland Flight BD 092, a Boeing 737-400 en route from
Heathrow to Belfast crash-landed on the Ml motorway, close to the
East Midlands airport and to the cities of Derby, Leicester and
Nottingham. Many of the most serious casualties were taken to
hospital in Nottingham, where the Social Work department in
tandem with the hospital chaplaincy set up services for the
relatives of the injured. For a more complete description of what
took place see Whitham, D. and Newburn, T. (1992) Coping with
Tragedy: Managing the Response to Two Disasters. Nottinghamshire
County Council.

3. cf. inter alia: Harrison, W. (1987a) The Bradford City Fire
Disaster: Social Services Response Information Pack. City of
Bradford Metropolitan Council; Walker-Smith, A. (1990) The Kings
Cross Disaster Report: Assessing two Years of Co-ordinated
Support. London Borough of Camden.

4. John Moores - Chairman of the locally-based Littlewoods Group
and a supporter of a variety of local initiatives, (the Moores
family being long-standing major shareholders in both Everton and
Liverpool football clubs)

5. A fuller discussion of the role of the media in the aftermath
of disaster is contained in Shearer, A. (1991) Survivors and the
Media. John Libbey and Co. Ltd/Broadcasting Standards Council. On
the case of Hillsborough in particular, see:        Coleman, S.,
Jemphrey, A., Scraton, P and Skidmore, P. (1990) Hillsborough and
After: The Liverpool Experience Edge Hill College of Higher
Education.

6. cf. inter alia: McFarlane, A.C. and Raphael, B. (1984) Ash
Wednesday: The Effects of a Fire. Australian and New Zealand


                               77
Journal of Psychiatry 18: 341-53; Taylor, A.J.W. and Frazer,
A.G. (1981) Psychological Sequelae of Operation Overdue following
the DC10 Aircrash in Antarctica. Victoria University: Wellington
Publications in Psychology No.27. For a comparison with the
literature on the impact of other events see, Newburn, T. (1992,
forthcoming) The Effects of Crime and the Long-term Needs of
Victims: A Review of Literature Research and Planning Unit Paper.
HMSO.

7. Murray Parkes, C. (1975) Bereavement: Studies of Grief in
Adult Life Harmondsworth: Penguin

8. Hodgkinson, P. and Stewart, M. (1991) Coping with Catastrophe:
A Handbook of Disaster Management. London: Routledge.

9. For a fuller explanation of this term see: Shapland, J,
Willmore, J. and Duff, P. (1985) Victims in the Criminal Justice
System Aldershot: Gower.

10. Further thoughts on this issue are contained in Newburn, T.
(1991) Organisational Pressures and Role Stresses in the 'Lives
of the Hillsborough Social Work Teams. Disaster Management vol.3
no. 4

11. 'Honeymoon' is used here, following Erikson, to refer to
that period after a disaster - often referred to as the 'impact
phase' - when considerable goodwill is present, 'arousal' is high
and 'heroic' activities are undertaken. Erikson, K.T. (1979) In
the Wake of the Flood. London: George Allen and Unwin. See also
Powell, J.W. (1975) An Introduction to the Natural History of
Disaster.   (unpublished) , in R.L. Wettenhall, Bushfire Disaster:
An Australian Community in Crisis. Sydney: Angus and Robertson;

12. For a further discussion of these issues see: Morgan, D.H.J.
(1992) Discovering Men Routledge; Segal, L. (1990) Slow Motion:
Changing Masculinities, Changing Men. Virago. Seidler, V. (1991)
Recreating Sexual Politics: Men, Feminism and Politics.
Routledge.


                               78
13. cf. Smale, G.G. and Tuson, G. (1988) Learning for Change:
Developing Staff and Practice in Social Work Teams National
Institute for Social Work; Smale, G.G., Tuson, G., Cooper, M.,
Wardle, M. a n d C r o s b i e , D. (1988) C o m m u n i t y S o c i a l W o r k : A
Paradigm for Change National Institute for Social Work.

14. Disasters Working Party (1991) Disasters: Planning for a
Caring Response London: HMSO

15. For a fuller description of these teams see: Hodgkinson, P.
(1990) The Zeebrugge Disaster III: Psychosocial Care in the UK.
Disaster Management. 2, 123-27

16. Quintyn, L., De Winne, J. and Hodgkinson, P.E. (1990) The
Zeebrugge Disaster III: The Disaster Victim Identification Team -
Procedures and Psychological Support. Disaster Management 2, 128-
30.




                                        79
<   HILLSBOROUGH INTER-AGENCY GROUP
                     AND
#
    NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK




MANAGING THE RESPONSE TO A DISASTER:

     LESSONS FROM HILLSBOROUGH




              Two day conference


                      on


            20th - 21st October 1992



                       at


          Britannia Hotel Manchester
                 PROGRAMME


                     DAY ONE




Chair:   Pauline Farrell,
         ex Director o f Social Services Sefton, and
         Chair of the Planning Sub-Group.

10.00    Registration and refreshments

10.30    Herbert Laming, Chief Inspector (invited)
         Department of Health.

11.15    Refreshments

11.45    Workshops

12.45    Lunch

2.00     Workshops repeated

3.00     Refreshments

3.30     Workshops repeated

4.30     Free time

7.00     Reception

7.30     Dinner: speaker, David Blunkett MP
                            PROGRAMME



                               DAY TWO




       Chair:      Councillor Steinke, ex Chair, Sheffield City
                   Council Social Services Committee.

       9.30        Tony Allen, Chief Executive Berkshire
                   Chairman National Working Party on Disaster
                   Response.

       10.30       Refreshments

       11.00       Workshops repeated

       12.30       Lunch

       2.00        Tim Newbum, Co-ordinator, NISW research
                   project on "Social Work After Hillsborough"

       3.00        Refreshments

       3.30        Final presentation - Panel comprising: Pauline
                   Farrell, David Mason, Tim Newbum and
                   David Whitham

       4.30        Close


The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group comprises representatives from
the nine local authorities that have been centrally involved in the social
services response to the Hillsborough Disaster. The purpose of the
conference is to share our experiences in the belief that this will enable
those authorities who are faced with future disasters to manage a more
effective response.

There will be a total of eight workshops. (Listed overleaf). These will be
repeated so that each delegate w ill be able to attend a total o f four
workshops during the two day period.
                 WORKSHOPS

Managing the early days
John P illin g D eputy D irector F am ily & Community
Services, Sheffield (retired).
David Mason Director Warwickshire Social Services
Rev. Stephen Lowe Archdeacon of Sheffield

Setting up administrative support systems
Paddy M arley A ssista n t D irecto r L iv erp o o l S ocial
Services
             jx Cheshire Social Services

Managing a response to two disasters
The H onourable Joan Taylor (C hair S o cia l S erv ices
Committee, Nottinghamshire)
David Whitham Nottinghamshire Social Services

Establishing a social work response
                  jiowsley Social Services
              ex Cheshire Social Services
           Sheffield Family & Community Services

Memorials, Inquests and Anniversaries
Gerry Flanagan Liverpool Social Services
Russell McSweeney Sheffield Family & Community
Services

Managing and Sustaining the Social Work Response
                Liverpool Social Services
             Liverpool Social Services

Inter-Agency and Inter-departmental Support/Liaison
Councillor Keva Coombes (Liverpool City Council)
Wilf Twist ex Lancashire Social Services

       fnr gr>gial work staff.
___________ Staffline Co-ordinator after Hillsborough
Tim Newbum National Institute for Social Work
                                         4
                                              SOCIAL SERVICES INSPECTORATE
                                              DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH         W       i   c    *
                                              Richmond House
                                              79 Whitehall
                                              London SW1A2NS
                                              Telephone 071-210 5569

Pauline Farrell OBE
National Institute for Social Work
London Office
5 Tavistock Place
LONDON
WC1H 9SS                                10 July 1992



Dear Pauline

Thank you for your letter of the 26th of June and for the kind invitation to speak at the
Hillborough Inter-Agency Management Group. Owning to an oversight on my part I
should have known right away that I would not be able to accept your invitation because I
am committed to an event in Northern Ireland on those two dates. I do apologise that I
did not let you have this information earlier. I hope the Conference is a great success.

Best wishes

Yours sincerely




HERBERT LAMING CBE
Chief Inspector
Social Services Inspectorate
                             "*r< fA*

                 T j^ r ^ A iu .   {* * * * * *       f r -
                 j f 1*-                                      v
(u,          u                     c ^ r ^ - 1


.V       .
     A-*-^           '
                              ^'     j-^K
                                                  .
                                                  tj

Lav

                                      ^           'L ( \ .
                     NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK


Mr H Laming
Department of Health                                                                                                                                 CTV
Richmond House                                                                                                                                       Q O s X s la c ^            .

Whitehall
London SW1A 2NS


26th June 1992
Dear Mr Laming

We are writing to see whether you would be willing to speak at a conference that
NISW are organising in conjunction with the "H illsborough Inter-Agency
Management Group".

The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group comprises representatives from the nine
local authorities that have been involved in the social services response to the
H illsborough Stadium D isaster (The authorities are: Cheshire, Knowsley,
Lancashire, Liverpool, Nottingham, Sefton, Sheffield, St. Helens and Wirral).

The group is organising a conference for Chairs of Social Services Committees
and D irectors of Social Services to be held on 20th and 21st October 1992 in
Manchester. The purpose of the conference is to share our experiences in the
belief that this will enable those authorities who are faced with future disasters to
manage a more effective response.

We would be grateful if you would be prepared to open the proceedings on the
first day of the conference. I have attached a draft programme to give you more
idea of the nature and content of the conference.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




Pauline Farrell OBE                                                                 E^JVf^ewbum
Chair of the Hillsborough                                                            Hillsborough Project Co-ordinator
Inter-Agency Group



Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group c/o Practice and Development Exchange
L O N D O N OFFICE 5 T a v isto ck Place, London W C 1 H 9SS. Tel: 0 7 1 -3 8 7 9681 Fax: 0 71-387 7968
                                                                                                                    .
DIRECTOR: Daphne Statham CHAIRMAN: Sir W illiam Utting. Registered Charity N o. 313402, VAT Reg. N o. 41 7 6759 22 C om pany Limited by G uarantee, Registered N o. 726022, England
                                                          'TllU

                        I   •C'fjl&ofc' (AJJi.   Oi

                        (j^u4t       1 ^ <-

PSOB INV N6

                                                                             Richmond House
                                                                                  79 Whitehall

Pauline Farrell OBE                                                         London SW1A 2NS
Chair of the Hillsborough                                             Telephone 071 210 3000
  Inter-Agency Group
c/o Practice and Development Exchange                         From the Parliamentary Under
National Institute for Social Work                              Secretary o f State
5 Tavistock Place
LONDON
WC1H 9SS




Dear Miss Farrell

Mrs Bottomley has asked me to thank you for your letter of 15 May
and for the invitation to attend the Hillsborough Inter Agency
Conference in October.    Since Mrs Bottomley's diary is fully
committed for October she asked Mr Yeo if he might be free to
attend.

I'm afraid that Mr Yeo, also, has prior engagements for the time
of the Conference and will therefore be unable to attend.

Both Ministers have, however, asked me to pass on to you their
best wishes for a successful conference. They would be grateful
to receive any report of the event that may be produced.



Yours sincerely



Diary Secretary


                                                 TV o-




C   A   R   I   N   G            F    O   R       T   H   E             1    9    9   0   s
                                                             From:
Diary Secretary PS(C)                                                CS1C

                                                             Date: 12 June 1992

                                                             Copies:

                                                                                      HC(A)3B
                                                                                      :a -iu
                                                                       File/Float



       P.S.O.B.INV N6. HILLSBOROUGH INTER AGENCY CONFERENCE.



1. We do not regard this event is appropriate for attendance by the Secretary of State. Neither
do we advise attendance by any other DH Minister.

BACKGROUND

2. The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group was set up after the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster to
coordinate the various Social Services Departments response to the tragedy. The Group comprises
representatives from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire, Liverpool, Nottingham, Sefton, Sheffield,
St Helens and Wirral. This is a local authority group with no input or involvement from the
Department.

3. Following the disaster the Leader of the Liverpool City Council wrote to Ministers requesting
additional financial support for direct social service provision and for the establishment of a
Regional Unit that was then being proposed to provide and coordinate continuing care to survivors
and relatives. The then Secretary of State, Kenneth Clarke, responded by explaining that this
Department has no powers to make additional resources available to LAs for such purposes.

4. During 1990 the Joseph Rowntree Foundation agreed to fund a 2 year research project, under
the auspices of NISW, the central aim of which has been to evaluate the effectiveness and impact
of the services provided by Social Services and other organisations in the aftermath of the
Hillsborough Disaster. The research is due to be completed in July, and we understand that
NISW considers that the results will have a "significant bearing on many areas of contemporary
social work organisation and practice". We don’t yet know when the Final Report is likely to be
published or what recommendations it is likely to make. Ministers and the Department will no
doubt be asked for their views and comments. It will be interesting to see the extent to which this
study complements and/or advances advice given in the report of the Departmentally sponsored
Disasters Working Party, which was published last year and which was generally welcomed by
Local Authorities as a useful and practical guide to the planning of appropriate social and
psychological responses to disasters. The Report was, however given a "cool" reception by both
DH and Home Office Ministers because of its references to the need for additional Government
funding for LAs for disaster response (something which we viewed as being outside the Working
Party’s terms of reference), and because some recommendations were not appropriately based on
arguments made in the main report and therefore lacked evidence and conviction.
5. The Conference being planned by the Inter Agency Group is not directly associated with the
NISW research project, although we understand that NISW propose to enter into a partnership
with the Group to make it a joint conference. The Conference will attempt to draw together some
of the lessons that were leamt by those at a senior management level during the aftermath of the
disaster. The conference will therefore be aimed at Directors of Social Services and Chairman of
Social Services Committees.

6. This conference will, we understand, be the first of a series of Conferences planned on this
subject via NISW’s Practice and Development Exchange. The aim being to disseminate the
research findings and to produce practical training/educational materials.

7. Until the final report of the NISW research study is published we cannot judge the extent to
which pressure may again be put on the Department to provide additional funding to SSDs to
prepare for and respond to major disasters. Nor can we know how far reaching the proposals
might be in relation to social work practice and Social Services delivery generally. Ministers and
officials will need to carefully consider the findings of the research project before deciding on an
appropriate response.

CONCLUSION

8. Until Ministers have had a chance to study the findings of the NISW research project we feel
that it would be prudent for them to avoid this Conference. There may be implications in the
findings and recommendations which will impact on other departments -notably Home Office-
which is itself currently preparing publication of guidance to Local authorities on dealing with
disasters. We would need to ensure that there was no conflict of interest between Departments.
A conference in October might be too soon to ensure our adequate consideration of all these
aspects.

9. A draft reply for your signature is enclosed.




CS1C
243 WEL
EXT 24041
'   »



        DRAFT REPLY FOR PS(C) DIARY SECRETARY



        Pauline Farrell OBE
        Chair of the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group
        c/o Practice and Development Exchange
        National Institute for Social Work
        5 Tavistock Place
        London
        WC1H 9SS




        Dear Miss Farrell


        Mrs Bottomley has asked me to thank you for your letter of 15th May and for the
        invitation to attend the Hillsborough Inter Agency conference in October. Since
        Mrs Bottomley’s diary is fully committed for October she asked Mr Yeo if he
        might be free to attend.

        I’m afraid though that Mr Yeo, also, has prior engagements for the time of the
        conference and will therefore be unable to attend.

        Both Ministers have, however, asked me to pass on to you their best wishes for a
        successful conference. They would be grateful to receive any report of the event
        that may be produced.
                                                                                                                                                                     18 MAY1992

                      NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK


                                                                                                                                                         # cl: ( c* ? v /
The Rt. Hon Virginia Bottomley
Secretary of State                                                                                                                                                f P \f o \
Department of Health
Richmond House
Whitehall
London SW1A 2NS

                                                                                                                                                                15 May 1992

Dear Secretary of State

The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group comprises representatives from the nine
local authorities that have been involved in the social services response to the
H illsborough Stadium D isaster (The authorities are: Cheshire, Knowsley,
Lancashire, Liverpool, Nottingham, Sefton, Sheffield, St. Helens and Wirral).

The group is organising a conference for Chairs of Social Services Committees
and D irectors of Social Services to be held on 20th and 21st October 1992 in
Manchester. The purpose of the conference is to share our experiences in the
belief that this will enable those authorities who are faced with future disasters to
manage a more effective response. In view of the national and international
attention such events inevitably attract we would welcome a keynote address by
the Secretary of State with responsibility for the personal social services.

I should be grateful therefore if you would be prepared to open the proceedings
on the second day of the conference. After speaking to your secretary we realise
there are many demands on your time but hope that you will feel able to make a
favourable response to the request.

Yours sincerely




Pauline Farrell OBE
Chair of the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group




Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group c/o Practice and Development Exchange
L O N D O N OFFICE 5 T avis tock Place, London WC1 H 9SS. Tel: 07 1-3 8 7 9681 Fax: 0 7 1 -3 8 7 7968
DIRECTOR: D aphne Statham CHAIRMAN: Sir W illiam Utting. Registered Charity No. 313402, VAT Reg. No. 417 6759 22, C om pany Limited by G uarartee, R egiaered No. 726022, England
V                   SI                       From:                    SSI
                                             Date:     11 June 1992
                                             Copies:                  SSI
                                                                      HC (A)3B
                                                                      SSI




                     INV TO SECRETARY OF STATE: PO INV N6
    1.    Thank you for letting me see your draft reply.
    2.    I should like to add your penultimate sentence of paragraph 4
          "and because some recoramendatians were not appropriately based on
          arguments made in the main report and therefore lacked evidence
          and conviction".
    3.    Otherwise, it seems fine although I should like to get back to
          paragraph 6 of my 3 June 1992 minute at some point!




    Social Services Inspectorate
    Room 626 WEL
    Ext 24265/24269




    Jiye.jur^jdl
                 r^y
     -
         <t/e.
b>
                                                             From:
SSI                                                                  CS1C

                                                              Date: 9th June 1992

                                                              Copies:                 HC(A)3B
                                                                        File/Float




INVITATION TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE. PO INV N6



1. Thank you for your minute of 3rd June.

2. The papers you enclosed with your minute were most informative and helpful. On the
basis of the information they contained I have drafted a reply to Private Office as
attached. Do you regard the arguments I am advancing for non attendance by Ministers
are valid (and convincing)? I have deliberately not made mention of officials attending
the Conference. Invites are certain to issue - especially to SSI - and we should be free to
consider them free from any previous Ministerial commitments.

3. I was most interested to see the reference in the NISW papers to the Disasters
Working Party, and to learn of the aim to produce documents that would complement that
Report, and which would begin to flesh out some of its more general recommendations.

4. If you, or               , have any comments on the line I propose to offer to Private
Office, I would be pleased to know by close tomorrow if at all possible.




CS1C
243 WEL
EXT 24041




                                                                                     lo j
    A:9.6JW                        /isc       /.//  ,,
•   ________
                                          j   <7n %*>.
                 CS1C                     From:                   HC(A)3B
                                          Date:     9 June 1992
                                          Copies:                  SSI
                                                                   SSI
                                                                     HC(M)3


    INVITATION TO S OF S:   PO INV N6




    1.   I refer to your minute of 2 June which I have discussed with
    Miss           I agree it is difficult to decide quite what signal
    the Department/Ministers should be giving on disaster response by
    SSDs. SSDs appear to see themselves as having a major role and it
    is difficult to argue against this or against their desire to pool
    experience, disseminate good practice and generally ensure
    preparedness for the next significant disaster.     I imagine your
    disquiet arises partly from thoughts about the level of resources
    that SSDs might be committing in their 'enthusiasm' for disaster
    response in relation to their many other pressing priorities.
    There is also, of course, the question of the SSD/NHS interface.
    2.   The policy/priority question is one that only CS can answer
    but on the other issues I do not think you should be too much
    influenced by what happened recently over the 'Human Shield'
    hostages and PTSD. There were pressing political considerations in
    that situation which more or less swamped a rational consideration
    of service needs.    We (ie HC) were not in that context arguing
    against SSDs having post-disaster counselling functions and
    capabilities (particularly in the early aftermath) but against the
    idea that the Department needed to put in place some duplicate
    professional resource to meet the needs of those hostages showing
    symptoms of PTSD, who felt let down by the services they had
    approached. Hence our emphasis on the importance of GPs as sources
    of help either directly (through the primary care team) or,
    probably more importantly, as controlling access to secondary and
    tertiary levels of psychiatric/psychological services.     As I see
    it, SSDs have a legitimate role in providing or co-ordinating early
    support and counselling in response to the inevitable psychological
    traumas experienced by victims, relatives, relief workers etc and
    this may have a significant preventative effect in relation to the
    otherwise possible later development of PTSD.         There is, of
    course, a risk that some social work staff may continue counselling
    beyond the point where it would have been more sensible, and
    ultimately more beneficial, to pass the case over for psychiatric
    assessment.    This is a bit of a grey area where resource
    implications for SSDs may be significant and a cautionary word
    would not be out of place.
       3.   However, to return to the specific question of Ministerial
       involvement in the HIAG conference, I agree that it would not be
       appropriate to send S of S. In fact, given that there are several
       uncertainties about the conference (as indicated by Mrs      , it
       would probably be wiser to advise against any Ministerial
       involvement, given also that the criterion is 'only where
       essential' and in October Ministerial time will be at a premium.
       Would a senior SSI official be a possible alternative?     If the
       invitation is accepted, I think we could manage to present the
       Department's line on disaster response (Cruse Working Party, Gulf
       hostages and alii) reasonably coherently.




P P   I________________
       Room 102 WEL
       Ext 24496
                                                             From)
SSI                                                                  CS1C

                                                             Date: 9th June 1992

                                                             Copies:                HC(A)3B
                                                                       File/Float



INVITATION TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE. PO INV N6



1. Thank you for your minute of 3rd June.

2. The papers you enclosed with your minute were most informative and helpful. On the
basis of the information they contained I have drafted a reply to Private Office as
attached. Do you regard the arguments I am advancing for non attendance by Ministers
are valid (and convincing)? I have deliberately not made mention of officials attending
the Conference. Invites are certain to issue - especially to SSI - and we should be free to
consider them free from any previous Ministerial commitments.

3. I was most interested to see the reference in the NISW papers to the Disasters
Working Party, and to learn of the aim to produce documents that would complement that
Report, and which would begin to flesh out some of its more general recommendations.

4. If you, or                have any comments on the line I propose to offer to Private
Office, I would be pleased to know by close tomorrow if at all possible.




CS1C
243 WEL
EXT 24041
                                        PfiA^r

                                                             From:
Diary Secretary PS(H)                                                  CS1C

                                                             Date: 9 June 1992

                                                             Copies:                 CS1
                                                                                      SSI
                                                                                     HC(A)3B
                                                                                     CA-IU
                                                                       File/Float


       P.S.O .B.IN V N6. HILLSBOROUGH INTER AGENCY CONFERENCE.


1. We do not regard this event is appropriate for attendance by the Secretary of State. Neither
do we advise attendance by any other DH Minister.

BACKGROUND

2. The Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group was set up after the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster to
coordinate the various Social Services Departments response to the tragedy. The Group comprises
representatives from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire, Liverpool, Nottingham, Sefton, Sheffield,
St Helens and Wirral. This is a local authority group with no input or involvement from the
Department.

3. Following the disaster the Leader of the Liverpool City Council wrote to Ministers requesting
additional financial support for direct social service provision and for the establishment of a
Regional Unit that was then being proposed to provide and coordinate continuing care to survivors
and relatives. The then Secretary of State, Kenneth Clarice, responded by explaining that this
Department has no powers to make additional resources available to LAs for such purposes.

4. During 1990 the Joseph Rowntree Foundation agreed to fund a 2 year research project, under
the auspices of NISW, the central aim of which has been to evaluate the effectiveness and impact
of the services provided by Social Services and other organisations in the aftermath of the
Hillsborough Disaster. The research is due to be completed in July, and we understand that
NISW considers that the results will have a "significant bearing on many areas of contemporary
social work organisation and practice". We don’t yet know when the Final Report is likely to be
published or what recommendations it is likely to make. Ministers and the Department will no
doubt be asked for their views and comments. It will be interesting to see the extent to which this
study complements and/or advances advice given in the report of the Departmentally sponsored
Disasters Working Party, which was published last year and which was generally welcomed by
Local Authorities as a useful and practical guide to the planning of appropriate social and
psychological responses to disasters. The Report was, however given a "cool" reception by both
DH and Home Office Ministers because of its references to the need for additional Government
funding for LAs for disaster response (something which we viewed as being outside the Working
Party’s terms of reference.)

5. The Conference being planned by the Inter Agency Group is not directly associated with the
NISW research project, although we understand that NISW propose to enter into a partnership
with the Group to make it a joint conference. The Conference will attempt to draw together some
of the lessons that were learnt by those at a senior management level during the aftermath of the
disaster. The conference will therefore be aimed at Directors of Social Services and Chairman of
Social Services Committees.


6. This conference will, we understand, be the first of a series of Conferences planned on this
subject via NISW’s Practice and Development Exchange. The aim being to disseminate the
research findings and to produce practical training/educational materials.

7. Until the final report of the NISW research study is published we cannot judge the extent to
which pressure may again be put on the Department to provide additional funding to SSDs to
prepare for and respond to major disasters. Nor can we know how far reaching the proposals
might be in relation to social work practice and Social Services delivery generally. Ministers and
officials will need to carefully consider the findings of the research project before deciding on an
appropriate response.

CONCLUSION

8. Until Ministers have had a chance to study the findings of the NISW research project we feel
that it would be prudent for them to avoid this Conference. There may be implications in the
findings and recommendations which will impact on other departments -notably Home Office-
which is itself currently preparing publication of guidance to Local authorities on dealing with
disasters. We would need to ensure that there was no conflict of interest between Departments.
A conference in October might be too soon to ensure our adequate consideration of all these
aspects.

9. A draft reply for your signature is enclosed.




CS1C
243 WEL
EXT 24041
DRAFT REPLY FOR PS(H) DIARY SECRETARY.



Pauline Farrell OBE
Chair of the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group
c/o Practice and Development Exchange
National Institute for Social Work
5 Tavistock Place
London
WC1H 9SS




Dear Miss Farrell


Mrs Bottomley has asked me to thank you for your letter of 15th May and for
the invitation to attend the Hillsborough Inter Agency conference in October.
Since Mrs Bottomley’s diary is fully committed for October she asked Mr Yeo
if he might be free to attend.

I’m afraid though that Mr Yeo, also, has prior engagements for the time of
the conference and will therefore be unable to attend.

Both Ministers have, however, asked me to pass on to you their best wishes for
a successful conference. They would be grateful to receive any report of the
event that may be produced.
TO                CS1C                      From:                 SSI
                                            Date:   3 June 1992
                                            cc      Mr         SSI
                                                    Mr         , SSI
                                                    Mr          HC(A)3B


INVITATION TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE : PO INV N6
1. I agree with your first paragraph. It may also be prudent to wait to
see the programme and speeches, and the response to the invitation in the
field before committing Ministers to appear.
2. As far as I can gather, the Hillsborough Inter-Agency Group is simply
an informal association of representatives of those SSDs who were involved
in the post-Hillsborough 'response1, as stated in the letter. It is rather
the research that is connected to the group than the other way round, I
suspect

3. I enclose a copy of the minute and report of the October meeting of the
Hillsborough Advisory Group (page 1 of the minutes, last paragraph may help
illuminate the background). As you will see from the papers on dissemination
etc, it seems that the research project is now coming to an end.
4.   In relation to      the questions you raise in your      paragraph 3,itseems
clear that Ministers will need to be presented with the questions and the
evidence in order that they can decide on the tone of our response, given the
recent charges, eg, in funding the 'new' units and the heightened interest in
this area from many      departments (excluding the Home      Office here).
5.   I suspect that      there may well also be pressure     for there tobesame
senior SSI representation, or even presentation, at this event which will
raise all the same issues.
6. It is also perhaps time to discuss with those involved in both CS1, SSI
and elsewhere whether we in DoH have yet resolved our differences on what may
be the appropriate response for SSDs and how best to approach these issues in
a more strategic fashion.
7. Your last paragraph is tempting and attractive, but it does not and
cannot provide the answers, and anyone who attends from this Department will
have to confront and respond to the questions you raise in paragraphs
3 and 4.
8. The research will presumably be published around the time of the
conference and Ministerial statements and responses will be needed to PQs,
etc, whenever it appears. Sorry not to be more helpful!



SSI/GFG
628 WEL
Ext 24265/24269
PS. The latest set of minutes (dated 19 February 1992) is also now attached.
                               lim ited by guarantee: Registered No: 726022 England
                               Registered Charity No. T.31933Z/2


                               NATIONAL INSTITUTE
                               FOR SOCIAL WORK
                               Registered Office:

                               5-7 TAVISTOCK PLACE
                               LONDON WC1H 9SS                         V A T. Registration No. 417 6759 22

                               Telephone:   071-387 9681
                               Fax: 071-387 7968

7th February, 1992

Social Services Inspectorate
Department of Health
Room 628, Wellington House
133-155 Waterloo Road
London, SE1 8UG

Dear Judy Downey
Re:   Hillsborough Advisory Group Meeting
      Wednesday, 19th February at 11.30 am

I enclose the material for the above meeting which will take
place at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation's offices at The
Homestead, 40 Water End, York.
We look forward to seeing you on the 19th.
Yours sincerely


                                                                                          y'
                                                                                      J
Administrative Secretary                                                         ""A
Practice and Development Exchange
Minutes of a Meeting of the Hillsborough Project Advisory Committee held on 3rd October
1991 at the National Institute for Social Work, 5-7 Tavistock Place, London, WC1

Present:                                                                Tim Is ewbum,



Apologies:


Introduction

              welcomed everyone and introduced                     from SCPR. There were
no amendments to the Minutes of the Meeting of 16th May.            ]wondered whether there
had been any opportunity of contact with the Sheffield police, He felt they were a small
group who might be worth looking at. TN said he would have liked to have done so but
this hadn't been part of the original proposal and there hadn't been time to do it. Also, he
felt it would have complicated matters with the families. □ □ said he had some contact
with the Chief Constable and felt he could get some basic information. TN said he would
be grateful for any help.         mentioned that at a Royal College of Physicians meeting
there had been a presentation on the police and the Clapham rail disaster.

Progress Report

The field work is almost completed. The User's Survey is still to be done but it should be
finished by Christmas. Some interviews with 'victims' outside Merseyside are still to be
completed. Interviews with mainstream social workers involved with the teams are by and
large completed. Following this, interviews with senior managers in social services are
due to take place. These were deliberately left to the end. The writing up is going on at
the same time.

   tasked if there would be a number o f different reports or one which covers all aspects.
TN said he would like to write one central report which would put the two studies together
in order to draw comparisons between them, but would also aim to produce a number o f
shroter, more specific pieces of work.

Staff Care

There are two parts o f the Staff Care Study: a small evaluation o f the BASW Staffline
initiative, which was a major staff care initiative after Hillsborough and continued in
operation until the end o f July last year. TN has taken on writing up an evaluation of
Staffline. He is planning to do 25-30 interviews with staff who used the service. This
will then be located within a study of staff care more generally, e.g. other forms o f care
which have been in existence in the last two years, from standard supervision and training
to basic organisational care.

Other Activities

The Writers' Workshop had been set up for the benefit o f the social workers involved after
Hillsborough. TN felt it was hard to predict what the end product might be at this stage,
although he had high hopes for it in the future.

A sub-grouj) of The Inter-Agency Committee has asked the North West Regional Training
Unit to administer a conference. This conference would focus on the managerial lessons to


                                             l
be leam t from the Hillsborough response. It is proposed that there should be a second
conference which would focus on practice, using the experience of workers involved in the
teams.       felt that if the conference was used to bring workers involved in Hillsborough
together, the feedback from it might be incorporated in the final report.

SCPR Report

                 from SCPR spoke about their report which was part of the User Study. Its
particular aims were to look at the sort o f problems people experienced following the
disaster, from their own perspective, and how they perceived the help they received. She
gave some background information about the 37 interviews they had conducted. There
were an equal number of bereaved and survivors in the sample, as well as a few carers and
other relatives, and they had tried to include a cross section o f age and gender. The
interviews were carried out by experienced interviewers. They had used a topic guide but
it had been necessary to be very flexible and to judge each interview individually. It had
been the interviews with the survivors, somewhat unexpectedly, that they had found the
most difficult, not those with the bereaved.      then went through the chapter headings of
the Report, a copy of the contents sheet having been circulated to the Group.

It w as noted that the major group which had been missed in terms o f help was young
people. When approached, schools had felt there was no need for any help.

The report is in essence a briefing report for TN to use in writing the main report and as a
guide to the material, i.e. the transcripts.

The meeting then went on to discuss the dissemination issues which had arisen from the
work done so far. These included internal administrative issues such as staff development/
training; the question of selection of staff to work in disaster situations; coping strategies
within different kinds o f sub-cultures and by gender; planning for disasters and whose
responsibility this is.   commented that there was an enormous amount of material which
warranted further dissemination and suggested that a proposal should be put in to the
Foundation by December.

             thanked                  for attending the meeting.

Next Meeting: Wednesday, 19th February at 11.30 am at the Joseph Rowntree Foundation
in York.




                                               2
NISW HILLSBOROOGH PROJECT: BRIEF PROGRESS REPORT

Staff Care

The interviews with social workers (and the members of the
voluntary organisations) that have been involved in Hillsborough
work are almost complete. All that remains to be done in this
area are interviews with the Directors (or Assistants) of some of
the key authorities i n v o l v e d i n t h e r e s p o n s e .

The survey of social workers is also almost complete. 116
questionnaires were sent out and so far 71 have been returned.
The response rate is reasonable, though I had hoped that it would
be somewhat higher. The occasional questionnaire is still coming
in and I anticipate that the number of returns will eventually
be about 80. More importantly, the quality of the information
elicited has been very high. The questionnaire was 17 pages (55
questions) long, and in almost all cases has been comprehensively
completed.

A revised, shortened, version of the questionnaire was also sent
to a small number of voluntary workers. Twenty questionnaires
were sent to the volunteers from the Hillsborough Helpline at
Walton hospital. There seems every possibility that almost all
will be returned. Questionnaires were also sent to the co­
ordinators of the twelve victim support schemes that were
identifiable as having had significant involvement with
Hillsborough. Again the response has been good.

The evaluation of Staffline is complete. Interviews were
conducted with twenty five social workers who had used the
service, and also with the co-ordinator and administrator of the
initiative. In return for access to all the records of the work
of Staffline I promised to produce a report for BASW outlining
the history of the initiative and the results of the evaluation.
A draft report has been completed, though a little ’tidying-up'
work is still required.
User Study


As was reported at the last meeting the fieldwork undertaken for
us by SCPR was successfully completed. The briefing report has
been received, together with transcripts of all the interviews
that were conducted, and the charts that were produced for
analysis. I have continued to conduct the occasional extra depth-
interview for this part of the study - paying particular
attention to survivors and others based outside Merseyside. The
timing of these interviews has also provided another contrast
with those conducted by SCPR, in that they have been undertaken
since the end of the Inquests in Sheffield. As a result they have
tended to focus much more on the issue of 'justice' (or, indeed,
injustice) and the continuing anger that a very large number of
people still feel.

Part of the planned postal survey of "user's" took place just
before Christmas. Although ideally it might have been better to
avoid Christmas, the timing was determined by date for the
mailing of the final edition of Hillsborough Interlink. In the
event, however, the response (in terms of numbers) has been poor.
Approximately 400 were sent out and only just over 40 have been
returned. Whilst this is disappointing, the quality of the
responses that have been received is very high, eliciting a great
deal of extremely useful information. Despite this, I feel sure
that the response would have been even lower had the survey not
been associated with Interlink. I am still hoping to distribute
more questionnaires via the Football Supporter's Association and
plans for this should be in hand by the time of the Advisory
Group meeting.



Other Activities

The report that was written in conjunction with a Social Work
manager from Notts SSD about his experience of managing his
Department's responses to both the Kegworth/Mi and Hillsborough
Disasters has been completed. It was sent to his Director and to
his Chairman of Social Services Committee for comments. Both
responded very favourably, the Chairman saying that she found it
"moving, interesting, gripping and informative"! They were
slightly worried that some of the criticisms of Nottingham Forest
FC that were contained in the original draft would attract undue
attention, but both she and the Director said that they hoped
that the County Council would publish the report once we had an
agreed text. An amended draft was sent early in January.

The work with the Hillsborough writers' workshop continues, as
does that with the 'Disaster Workers' Network'. The conference
being organised by a sub-group of the Inter-Agency Committee is
stalled at the moment, though there are hopes that it will still
be possible to organise something for the autumn of this year.
The possibility of a parallel event, focussing on practice issues
and lessons for mainstream social work, is being discussed in a
small working party which currently meets at the Hillsborough
Centre.

At the last Advisory Group meeting it was agreed that there was a
considerable amount of development and dissemination work that
could be undertaken as a result of the research. After that
discussion we drafted a proposal which we then circulated to
Group members. We were most grateful for all the constructive and
supportive comments that we received, and as a result of this we
made an application to the Joseph Rowntree Foundation for funding
for a further year's work. A copy of the proposal and a summary
are attached with this report. We anticipate that we will know
the outcome of the application by the time of the next meeting.




Tim Newburn
6 February 1992
                                              <A *A/
                                             cs   /
                                                   V4'            '/ f



Minutes of a Meeting of the Hillsborough Project Advisory
Committee held on 19th February 1992 at the Joseph Rowntree
Foundation, The Homestead, Water End, York.

Present   •
                                         . Tim Newburn.



Apologies:


            welcomed everyone to the meeting.    There were no
amendments to the minutes of the last meeting.
The meeting began with an exchange of information concerning
articles, etc. which had appeared elsewhere about
Hillsborough. In addition TN said that the report he had
written in conjunction with the Social Services Manager from
Nottinghamshire had been submitted to their Director and Chair
of Social Services and had received a very positive response.

Progress Report
TN reported that with the exception of some slight delay in
one or two areas, the work was very much up to the timetable
drawn up at the start of the project.   There were a couple of
interviews still to do with survivors, and the interviews with
senior social work managers which were being left till the
end. There had been about a 70% response to the survey of
social workers and the forms are still coming in.           The
quality of information was very good.      The survey of users
was also underway. The questionnaires had been sent out with
the Hillsborough Interlink magazine which went out just before
Christmas. The response so far was low, though returns were
still coming in.    However they had been very well completed.
People who had spoken to TN had said they were very difficult
to do.    It was also the intention to send out another batch
through the Football Supporters' Association.    There had been
a delay because of a problem with their computer but they
would be likely to go out soon.   Nottingham Forest supporters
would also be covered in this mailout.       wondered if it was
still worth sending out the next lot of forms.       TN said he
was trying to include Nottingham Forest supporters who had had
difficulties and that the FSA had a national membership list
organised by local branches and they would be able to pick out
Nottingham Forest and Liverpool supporters.     They would also
reach people outside Liverpool.
The evaluation of the Staffline is finished and the report
drafted and awaiting re-draft.




                               1
»
    The Writers Workshop continues.       It had been a bit of a
    struggle to get people together over Christinas.    Members of
    the group are largely workers from Hillsborough Advice Centre,
    which is in a period of transition.       There has been some
    tension between the roles.     TN is not quite so optimistic
    about what will come out of the workshop.
    Disaster Network:   This has been quite successful. There’s a
    network of people who h a v e p a i d u p a n d j o i n e d and a newsletter
    has been produced.
       asked if the experiences of people who witnessed what was
    happening but were not directly affected had been included.
    TN said that they were.       Of these interviews there was
    approximately a two-thirds to one-third split between
    survivors/witnesses and people who were bereaved. The
    witnesses would be divided into two fairly even groups of
    those who were survivors and those who were more removed.
    TN reported that the interviews had been transcribed, analysed
    and indexed.    The social workers' and carers' questionnaires
    had been coded but as they are still coming in they haven't
    been analysed yet.    It is hoped this will take place within
    the next few weeks, depending on the response from the FSA
    mailing.

    Publication of the Findings
       said that the Joseph Rowntree Foundation did not directly
    support the publication of books.     They published four page
    summaries of Findings and would expect to do one for this
    project.   The Foundation also publishes a number of special
    reports of 15-20,000 words aimed at informed practitioners,
    the aim being to get the messages which can be legitimately
    drawn from the work to the people who can use them.        The
    Foundation is also about to start a joint series of
    publications with Community Care, in a similar form to the
    special reports, promoted and distributed by the Foundation
    but also promoted by Community Care.     They will be aimed at
    social work team leaders but probably read by directors
    downwards and will cover the Foundation's interest in
    community care and social care.   The special reports have had
    more to do with housing than community care, therefore for
    this project perhaps the joint series with Community Care
    might provide a better outlet.    Another possibility would be
    for the Foundation to provide some sort of back up and funding
    assistance to help NISW publish a report.     The Foundation's
    view is that one type of publication is not enough, a variety
    of products are needed, e.g. training books, guidance notes,
    etc.




                                          2
Possible Themes for the Report

TN suggested:
1) The nature of the impact of a disaster: psychological and
emotional:
This would cover practical everyday personal changes:  the
impact on families - break-up, strain on relationships, on
children and between partners; problems of work; emerging
difficulties over time.

2) The issues surrounding being offered, or seeking help:
This would cover the problems in identifying 'need' and the
difficulties in seeking help - the social and cultural hurdles
to be overcome - both for 'clients' and 'workers'; how
services were set up and offered - by and for social workers;
the different ways in which men and women respond to trauma.
   felt this would be very interesting reading and very
relevant to those engaged in planning and organising services.
   felt the report should finish with certain challenges, e.g.
the challenge for management, harnessing resources so that
they are available at the right time, and the challenge for
inter-service collaboration.
It was suggested that a third theme could centre around the
skills people have to possess and the way they apply these
skills.     A sub-heading might be about the place of
counselling in social work practice.        Very few of those
involved had had any counselling training before the disaster.
It was also suggested that the introduction to the report
should be a straightforward description of the disaster and
how people in Liverpool reacted and the sorts of help which
were available, with reference to someone else's work only if
it helped to inform the analysis.
It was agreed that the report was for a social work audience.
Regarding the timing,         reported that once it was agreed
which series and a drart     was received, it didn't take very
long.   It would be edited   by a professional editor.   A draft
findings and report should   be ready by the end of the project.
Development and Dissemination Proposal
    reported that the Foundations's Community Care Feasibility
Committee had considered the Proposal for further work and
would make their recommendations to the Trustees. It was felt
that it was important that further work was carried out to
follow up what had been accomplished, although they weren't
sure what the carry over was from disaster work into general
social work.       They weren't in favour of a consensus
conference.     In respect of the oral history, they were
concerned that issues of confidentiality were treated in a
real sense so that the people involved could not be
identified.      The reaction to this point was that those
involved felt that it wasn't generally understood what they
had gone through and unless their story was told, nobody would
ever understand.
   went on to say that the Committee would like to recommend
that further work was carried out and recommended a limit of
funding of £50,000 and the work to be done over as short a
time as possible.     She felt it would be helpful to have a
revised proposal at some point very soon which laid out how
the £50,000 might be spent.
The meeting went on to discuss the Proposalunder its various
headings:
A) Exchange Conferences:
It was felt that (i) and (ii) should go ahead as they were the
feedback to the people who had participated.     With (iii) the
possibility of sharing the cost with the nine Local
Authorities or ADSS might be explored.    It was suggested that
CCETSW should be approached regarding (iv) as it concerned
education and training which was their responsibility.
B)   Exchange Workshops
   felt these should be left intact and carried out as fully
as possible.
C)   Oral History
The purpose and nature of the oral history was discussed.
Using some of the material collected at the conferences was
suggested.    It was decided that this issue could be further
discussed at the next meeting.
It was agreed that the final decision regarding dissemination
work could be agreed towards the end of the project.
Date of the Next Meeting:   Friday, 3rd July. 12.30 lunch for
1.15 meeting at NISW.




                               4
-   •
                   NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK

                  PRACTICE AND DEVELOPMENT EXCHANGE




                  THE HILLSBOROUGH PROJECT PHASE TWO

             A DEVELOPMENT AND DISSEMINATION PROPOSAL




                               SUMMARY




        December, 1991
:   •

        5 AIMS: to maximise the value of the research findings of the
        Hillsborough Project by identifying      and disseminating the
        lessons and implications for social work practice and Social
        Services delivery. Specifically we will identify:
             1) the ’counselling* skills required for handling the crises
        and losses, including bereavement, that are endemic in disaster
        work and a fundamental part of much social work practice;
             2) the education and training requirements for social
        workers handling crises, including disasters;
             3) the support needs of social workers involved in
        emotionally demanding work;
             4) the management and supervision needs of social workers,
        particularly ’specialists* and ’experts’;
             5) the ways in which Local Authorities work together, and
        the ways in which different agencies within Local Authorities
        work together, in the aftermath of major tragedies;
             6) the most appropriate role for social workers: direct
        counsellors or 'brokers’ between clients, other agencies and
        individuals?

        5 BACKGROUND:  The research is evaluating the effectiveness and
        impact of help provided by Social Services and other
        organisations in the aftermath of the Hillsborough Disaster. The
        study is divided into two main parts:-
             a ’User Study’ focusing on the ’needs’ of those affected by
        Hillsborough and evaluating the services they were offered or
        have used;
             a ’Staff Care Study’ focusing on the nature of the work
        undertaken after Hillsborough, the impact this has had on the
        staff involved, and the nature and effectiveness of the
        supervision and support offered to them.
        The research will be completed by the end of July 1992. It is
        already clear that the results will have a significant bearing on
        many areas of contemporary social work organisation and practice.
        The reports of the Disasters Working Party (DoH 1991) identify
        the justification for planning service responses and how to do
        it.   The development work proposed here will focus more
        specifically on the practice, staff development and management
        issues identified above.
        This work comes at a time of great change in services to both
        adults and children.    This is directing attention toward new
        procedures and modes of service delivery, and causing the
        reorganisation of departments.   With all these changes there is
        a danger of overlooking the need for social workers and other
        staff to be able to offer appropriate and skilled counselling to
        those experiencing personal crisis, loss and tragedy. Likewise,
        Social Work education is in a state of flux and these research


                                       1
findings and their implications will contribute to the rebuilding
of curricula for the new Diploma in Social Work.

5 METHODS: We have proposed a series of four interlinked research
into practice exchange conferences and two exchange workshops.
Drawing on the experience of the Practice and Development
Exchange, these workshops will be structured to enable the
different groups of participants to compare and contrast their
professional experience with the research findings and work on
how logical conclusions can be applied in practice.           The
proceedings will be recorded and summarised, and draft reports
circulated for comment before final publication.
An ’oral history* will be based on writers groups engaging in
peer support and comment, direct support of authors from the
development staff and, where necessary, ’ghost* writing with
participants.
The consensus development conference will be based on the format
used in the USA, and in this country by the Kings Fund College,
in which a series of expert ’witnesses’ present evidence to a
panel of independent experts, a broad-based audience, and the
media.

5 THE PROPOSER:.               will have overall responsibility
for the project.     He has been director of the Practice and
Development Exchange at the National Institute for Social Work
since it was initiated with support from the Joseph Rowntree
Memorial Trust in 1982. Dr Tim Newburn, the researcher on the
Hillsborough project, will participate in the research into
practice exchanges and the consensus development conference. He
is on secondment from the Home Office Research and Planning Unit
and the extent of his involvement in the oral history work will
be negotiated.

5 COSTS: The estimated costs for this one year project are
£78,852.

5 EXPECTED OUTPUTS: This work will have two levels of output:
     1 - Disseminating information to the participants in a way
designed to help them relate research findings to their own
management and practice;
     2 - Reports will be published from the exchange workshop
series and the consensus development conference and form the
bases for articles for professional journals and the press. We
also expect to produce training materials in the style of other
NISW and Practice Exchange publications.      We expect the oral
history to be published as a book or monograph.
Finally, we expect the conclusions of this work to contribute to
the consultancy, staff and organisational development work of all
NISW staff in their future work throughout the UK.


                               2
*


                      NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL WORK


                      PRACTICE AND DEVELOPMENT EXCHANGE




                           THE HILLSBOROUGH PROJECT:
                   A DEVELOPMENT AND DISSEMINATION PROPOSAL




    The Hillsborough Project
    During 1990, the Joseph Rovmtree Foundation agreed to fund a two-
    year research project the central aim of which has been to
    evaluate the effectiveness and impact of the services provided by
    Social Services and other organisations in the aftermath of the
    Hillsborough Disaster. The study, which began in August 1990, is
    divided into two main parts. The first, a 'user study', focuses
    on the 'needs' of those affected by Hillsborough, and evaluates
    the services they were offered or have used. The second, a 'staff
    care' study, focuses on the nature of the work undertaken after
    Hillsborough, the impact this has had on the staff involved, and
    the nature and effectiveness of the supervision and support
    offered to them. (Appendix A contains further details of the work
    undertaken together with some of the preliminary results of the
    research).
    The research has proceeded as planned and will be completed as
    envisaged by the end of July 1992. We have thought for some time,
    and this has been confirmed by the Project's Advisory Group, that
    the results of the project will have a significant bearing on
    many areas of contemporary social work organisation and practice.
    Whilst the final report and any other publications resulting from
    the two-year project will undoubtedly point up many of these
    implications, the richness of the material being collected
    justifies further development and dissemination work.


    Overall Aims

    The central purposes of such development and dissemination
    activity are twofold. Firstly, the aim is to distil and pass on
    the lessons from the research about disaster preparedness and
    disaster response to Social Services Departments and to other
    agencies that are generally involved in caring for the victims of
    such tragedies. The second aim is to draw out the lessons and


                                      1



                      r'"""
                       i(f !
implications from the research for social work practice and
Social Services delivery generally.

Specific areas for further work

There are six main areas in which further developmental work
would maximise the value of the original project. Specifically,
we suggest that the research has implications for:
     1) The preparation of social workers for handling crises
(including disasters): The significance of the findings for
social work education.
     2) The management and supervision of social workers,
particularly 'specialists' and 'experts'.
     3) The support needs of social workers involved in
emotionally demanding work; the relationship between the needs
expressed by Hillsborough workers and the common phenomena of
'stress and burn-out' amongst practitioners and managers.
     4) The ways in which Local Authorities work together, and
the ways in which different agencies within Local Authorities
work together in the aftermath of major tragedies.
     5) The skills of social workers: What 'counselling' skills
do they/should they have for handling the crises and losses (inc.
bereavement) that are a fundamental part of much of social work
practice, eg. in the areas inter alia of child care, work with
the elderly and HIV/AIDS
     6) The role of social workers: should they be direct
counsellors or 'brokers' between clients, other agencies and
individuals?



Development and Dissemination Methods

Typically, dissemination is viewed as taking place in two major
ways: either standard publication of findings; through the
presentation of results at academic and professional conferences
and seminars. It would be easy for us to suggest, for example, a
series of regional meetings to disseminate the results of this
research. However, we feel, this would be likely to be expensive,
would clash with other 'events' that are already planned, and
would not necessarily have the impact that is required. Our
Practice and Development Exchange experience and research on the
diffusion of innovation demonstrates that research findings need
to be developed into specific guides for practice if they are to
be readily usable by professionals and their managers. Although
the findings of the Hillsborough research will undoubtedly be


                                  2
made public in the usual ways, we anticipate that the variety of
activities outlined below will be a more effective way of
building upon the lessons that are already being learnt.



(A) Exchange Conferences

Firstly, we propose a development process through four linked
exchange conferences, each of which has a very specific focus:

     (i) The lessons for social work practice after Hillsborough.
This conference will focus solely on Hillsborough. It will be run
with and, primarily, for those social workers that were involved
in the response to the Disaster. Organised in the main around
small workshops, it will be a forum for social workers to talk in
detail about the work they did with 'victims' (including
counselling, group work, advisory work, liaison and advocacy
work, outreach and so on), and to reflect on the implications of
the research findings and of workers' experiences for
'mainstream' social work. This event will also lay the groundwork
for the oral history component suggested below.

     (ii) The experience of Hillsborough and other disasters
This event will use a distillation of the findings of both the
research and the Hillsborough 'practice' conference to make
explicit comparisons between the experience of Hillsborough and
the experiences of workers in other disasters. Whilst there is
much of general application that can be learnt from
Hillsborough, it is also clear that these lessons can be built
upon substantially by using the experiences of those who have
been involved in other disasters, often in very different
circumstances (we are thinking here, for example, of the work
that Dr Newburn has done with the Social Services manager from
Nottinghamshire who was involved with both Hillsborough and the
Ml aircrash). This will be organised in partnership with the
newly-formed Disaster Staff Network to which Dr Newburn has been
acting as an advisor.

     (iii) Inter-agency co-operation and the •care’ response to
            disaster.
A sub-group of the Inter-Agency Group of Social Services managers
set up after Hillsborough - (Dr Newburn is a member of the sub­
group) - are currently in the early planning stages of a
conference that will attempt to draw together some of the lessons
that were learnt by those at a senior management level during the
aftermath of the disaster. The conference would aim to attract
Directors of Social Services and Chairmen of Social Services


                                3
Committees, and would be a high profile forum which would aim to
influence Departmental awareness around the country.
We propose to enter into a partnership with the nine Social
Services Departments who were part of the original inter-agency
forum to make this a joint conference. This will help ensure that
not only is it a multi-agency event, but that it will have a
national focus and the management and practice implications drawn
out in the proceedings are recorded in the reports that we will
produce.

     (iv) Lessons for social work education and training
The conclusions of the research and the development process
described in (i)-(iii) all have implications for social work
education and post-experience training. Early analysis suggests
that many workers felt they had insufficient grounding in crisis
work or in helping people with the longer-term consequences of
bereavement and loss, to tackle the specific issues involved in
working with those affected by disaster. This exchange conference
will look at the implications of these findings and will
culminate in a report with recommendations to training bodies and
organisations.

Outcome
The exchange conference series will have two levels of output.
First, disseminating information to the participants in a way
designed to help them use research findings in practice and,
secondly, the production of practical training/education
materials for use by Social Services Departments, by other care
agencies and within higher education for social work training,
and for NVQs. These materials would focus on inter-agency co­
operation and management; working with those bereaved by
disaster, those who survive disaster and caring for those who
care for disaster 'victims'. Comprehensive general guidelines
have recently been published by the 'Disasters Working Party' set
up under the auspices of CRUSE and the Department of Health, and
our aim would be to produce documents that would complement that
Report, and which would begin to flesh out some of its more
general recommendations.




                                4
(B) Exchange Workshops
We propose to run two 'exchange workshops' which would look at
the implications of other areas of the Hillsborough Project for
management and practice. Initially, these would be two days
workshops. They would involve a small number of 'disaster
workers' and a roughly equivalent number of social workers or
managers from areas of work where similar 'problems' or
experiences might be expected to occur.

(i)   'The management of stressi the lessons from Hillsborough'.
In this workshop, in addition to the 'disaster specialists' there
would a small number of, for example, child abuse specialists who
are involved in (often undiluted) 'heavy end' child protection
work. In such an exchange, explicit comparison could be made
between groups of workers involved in consistently stressful work
- drawing out the lessons about Team organisation, social work
practice, training, supervision, staff care, 'stress and burn­
out' and the organisation of staff counselling and so on.
It has been recognised that stress and 'burnout' are significant
issues in the management of staff in the helping professions, and
there is a growing body of predominantly North American
literature on the subject. We anticipate that the implications of
the Hillsborough research for management and staff care in
disaster situations will have a significant bearing for social
work and Social Services staff in a variety of stressful and
often seemingly hopeless situations where workers and clients
alike have been left feeling powerless by events. Until now,
however, there has been little hard evidence in this country on
the needs of workers, and the effectiveness of strategies adopted
to support them.
Outcome
We aim to produce a report on the basis of the conclusions of the
workshop together with articles in the professional press. We
anticipate that the conclusions from this work will make a
significant contribution to the consultancy and development work
in this area that NISW staff have been involved in for some time.

(ii) 'The management of specialist workers'
The second exchange would involve the managers of social work
'specialists' and 'experts' - in addition to managers of
'disaster work' the workshop might include, for example, HIV/AIDS
workers, family therapists working with sexual abuse problems and
other specialists and their managers. The Hillsborough Project
has pointed to a number of problems in relation to the management
of specialist workers ie. disaster workers, by managers who were
unfamiliar with the nature of the work being done. In many cases
this led to an avoidance of managerial responsibilities, poor


                                 5
•
    supervision and the 'disablement' of workers who experienced
    difficulties with clients, and were unable to get advice or
    support to help them progress. From NISWs experience of work on
    the diffusion of innovations and management, and staff and
    organisational development work there are indications that this a
    general and growing problem. There is an obvious need to consider
    best practice in relation to the supervision and management of
    •specialist' workers and we believe such a workshop would allow
    some of these lessons to be learnt.
    Outcome
    The conclusions of this workshop will be published in a paper on
    management issues and articles in the management and social work
    press. The results will also be used to develop training
    materials for publication and for use on the Institute's
    management and staff development and consultancy programmes.

    (C) Oral History
    Many of the Hillsborough social workers interviewed as part of
    the project have stressed the sense of unpreparedness or
    inadequacy they felt in the early stages of the response. They
    have consistently said that it would have helped to have had
    material that would have given them some idea or indication of
    what working in the aftermath of disaster was like. As a result
    of his involvement in the Hillsborough research Dr Newburn has
    worked with a Social Services manager in Nottinghamshire to
    produce a first-person account of his involvement in both the
    Kegworth and Hillsborough disasters. This report has been well
    received initially by the County Council and it seems likely that
    they will wish to publish it. In addition, Dr Newburn has set up
    a "writers' group" for Hillsborough workers on Merseyside.
    Through such activities he has encouraged the workers to 'tell
    their stories'. It has not been possible, however, for him to
    become involved in more of this type of activity (the work has
    been partly funded by NISW and much of it has been undertaken in
    Dr Newburn's own time) , but we are convinced that a longer volume
    of 'stories' - an 'oral history' - would be of great value. A
    variety of methods would be used in the compilation of such a set
    of histories. These would include the setting up of further
    "writers' groups", a series of life-history type interviews with
    carers and users and, where possible, some collaborative writing
    along the lines of that undertaken in Nottinghamshire. This work
    would include the experiences of 'carers': from senior managers
    to main grade workers, administrators and volunteers, together
    with the stories of 'service users', in a number of different
    areas of social work.
    Outcome
    Material would be put together in the form of an accessible and
    readable document which would have a wide appeal. We envisage it
    being published as a book or monograph which would be of


                                     6
•
    particular interest and value to Local Authority staff, social
    work students (pre- and post-qualification), emergency services
    staff, Health Service staff and others involved in counselling or
    care work with 'victims of trauma' .



    (D) Consensus development conference

    Finally, we propose a one-off 'consensus development conference'.
    Such conferences were pioneered in the United States and
    developed in this country by the King's Fund. The aim in this
    context would be to organise a conference around the questions:
    'What resources need to be made available to support victims of
    disaster? Who should provide them and who should pay'? A panel of
    professional and lay people would be invited, together with a
    broad-based audience which includes policy makers, senior
    managers, leading social work educators and the media. A series
    of 'expert' witnesses (amongst whom it is assumed there will a
    considerable measure of disagreement) would then present their
    evidence to the participants, at the end of which the panel would
    retire to consider their 'verdict'. Similar conferences, with
    different themes, have been found in the past to foreshorten the
    dissemination process considerably, and the aim of this event
    would be to highlight the disaster-related and general social
    work issues raised by the research.
    Outcome
    A wide audience will benefit from direct participation in this
    event through the opportunity to review all the evidence and
    expert opinion presented. The presence of the media will make
    this a high profile event through which major dimensions of the
    research findings and the conclusions of the development work can
    be publicised. The conclusions of the panel will also be
    published and summarised for articles in the professional press.




                                    7
t
    Staffing and Budget
    Organising the activities described and producing the documents
    that result from them will require a considerable investment of
    time, skill and energy. We envisage therefore employing up to the
    equivalent of one and a quarter full-time development/research
    staff and part-time secretarial and administrative support staff.
    It may also be necessary to recruit group facilitators for some
    of the events - though this will depend on the specific skills of
    the development worker(s) .
    Dr Tim Newburn, the project researcher, is on secondment from the
    Home Office Research and Planning Unit, and is due to return
    there in August 1992. He is keen to be involved in the
    development and dissemination work, though we cannot be precise
    about the extent of this until we determine his availability
    during 1992/3. In our current calculations, we would hope that he
    would be involved in the work for a maximum of twelve weeks
    spread over the year - enough time for him to prepare for and be
    present at each of the workshops and conferences and to cover
    time spent in the writing that would result from the events. If
    it is possible for him to be involved half time, then he rather
    than the development worker would take primary responsibility for
    the oral history work.
    In addition to Dr Newburn then, we would be looking to appoint a
    development worker who would be responsible for the planning, the
    organisation and, in the main, for the running of the events that
    we have planned. This person would also need to be involved in
    the writing-up process, and should therefore be involved with the
    work throughout the twelve months that we estimate that it will
    take to complete. Unless the oral history component can be
    undertaken by Dr Newburn, this will need to be a full-time
    appointment.
    The development work will also require some secretarial and
    general administrative support, and we have also included the
    temporary employment of a facilitator in our calculations. We
    must re-emphasise at this stage, however, that the breakdown of
    costs at this moment is a tentative one, though the overall
    budget that we have attached is accurate.




                                    8
                                    JOSEPH ROWNTREE FOUNDATION

                                                   BUDGET FORM

                                    (see attached notes for details required)


 Expected Start Date of Project:             Your        First            Second         Third        Total
                                             Notes     12 mths            12 mths       12 mths
                                                           £                 £             £           £

 Staff Costs (2)
 Staff (specify)
                  e^opA4e-«.it. \Aio                     , ®100                                   SCa, 'lo o
  '£x \Tft\             (^Qw-eaJcs)                    5 )^ 2 -                                    5 ’) 9 S-Z-
            irtc-Vor (J2cJ<xljs?Cm^                                                                 3»b41-
                   (jH'S’Vwa ptrv^cajc)                 c \, \ '7                                       a7

 Total Staff Costs                                    4 S ,b 3 l                                  -4'5'j &>3l

 Fieldwork (3)

 Consultants etc (4)                                        2 .i <2 oc?                             2 ,^ 0 0

 Equipment (5)

 Travel & Subsistence (6)                                   S , 2.00                                6 ", 2.00


  Computing i. In-house
         ii. External

 Staff Recruitment                                            Ij Ooo                                  l_, o o o

 D irect administration/office                               3 ,l o o                                 a,loo
 expenses (7) >

 Books and documents                                           .   io O                                    200

 Others (specify) (8)



 Indirect Project Costs                                     ^,071-                                   % 07i
 eg Overheads (9)




 Printing/Publication costs (10)                            *4^,000                                  >4', o o o

 Dissemination costs (10)                                   <2 , 25-0                                 g,aso
   C&o'nSescjza. -t Vvio/fcSVop


 TOTAL


                                                                                  a. Q. <=\l
Budget prepared by:
                                          (S*fburt-Cl l-o                     )

T e l : - ______________
Mrs         SSI                      From:
Mr \        HC(A)3B                        CS1C
                                     Date: 2 June 1992

                                       cc: File/Float


        INVITATION TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE: PO INV N6

I would be grateful for your comments and advice on the
attached invitation to the Sec of State. I don't think we
would want to advise the Sec of State to attend but I am
presently unsure as to whether we might suggest the event to
be appropriate for a junior Minister - perhaps Mr Yeo if he is
free.

I don't know anything about the Hillsborough Inter-Agency
Group but since this has come via NISW I assume that it is
connected in some way to the research project being funded by
the Rowntree Foundation.   Could Mrs        bonfirm this
please and, if possible, let me know what stage that project
has reached.

The main problem I have in deciding on advice to Ministers
here is that I am unsure about our policy in the area of SSD
response to Disasters; it has never satisfactorily been spelt
out. We would therefore have difficulty in providing
Ministers with a constructive speech. We know, of course,
that LA SSDs play a very important role in post disaster
situations and DH Ministers have given recognition to this in
the past. DH funded the Disasters Working Party which
resulted in guidance to LAs on disaster reponse. However we
do have doubts about the scale of some LA reponses, the need
for long term counselling services and the pro active approach
adopted in some recent post disaster situations etc etc. I
have in mind also the policy statement made by previous
Ministers that the GP has the prime role in rehabilitating
"victims".

We should also recall the resource pressures that are likely
to reappear with any fresh debate on the Local Authority
response to disasters. DH Ministers declined to provide
additional funding for the SSD response to the Hillsborough
disaster.

Given all this I think I would advise against Ministerial
attendance. What do you think? Are you able to provide
additional arguments against attendance? Should anyone else
attend? Might it be an appropriate occassion for SSI
representation ?




243 WEL
EXT 24041
                     O rp s ~o j (
                     C^pP                 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                          ALEXANDER FLEMING HOUSE
                 3 ) c^rv7 ^ L j S        ELEPHANT AND CASTLE LONDON SE1 6BY
                                          TELEPHONE01-4075522EXT   2 4030


                                                                              ccf*1                   due
 Yourreference                                                          PdL
 Ourreference                                                                     JvilS
Mrs Daphne Statham
Director
National Institute for Social Work                                                              'ft
5-7 Tavistock Place
LONDON
WC1H 9SS                                                              21 March 1991


Dear Daphne

GOLF CRISIS

__________ has   passed to me your letter of  28 January about the
Institute's interests in the social services response to the
Hillsborough disaster and the gulf crisis, because thequestion  of
follow-up of major disasters falls to my branch.

As you will know the Department arranged and funded the working
party on follow-up of major disasters which is hosted by CRUSE and
which will wehope report before too long.      You will understand
that we would like to study their report before considering how to
proceed.    So   it is difficult to say at    present whether the
Department will want to pursue with the Institute the suggestions
in your letter.

Can we leave it that we will get in touch with youagain                               when we
have studied the working party report?

I am copying this           letter to Carolyn Hey in the Social Services
Inspectorate.

Best wishes.
                                                            Yours sincerely




   Copy to: Miss Carolyn Hey SSI
   and silent copies to:
                          SSI
                          SSI /
                                     CSIC*^
Ms Hey DCI                             From                      CS1
                                       Date: 7 March 1991
                                       Copies: Mr L Harrison SSI
                                               Mrs J Downey SSI
                                               Mr M Harrison csicy
GULF CRISIS
1.   Thank you for your minute of 6 March and enclosed letter
from Daphne Statham.
2.   We might be interested at some stage in pursuing
Daphne Statham's ideas but we will need first to receive and
study the CRUSE working party report on the follow-up of major
disasters.
3.   Would you like me to respond to Daphne Statham's letter
direct?




CS1
Room B1602A AFH
Ext 24030




                           &                                             W H O - om*
                            ir t k     C( u c ty tfu.    H r h k K tL s r *   J to tG r.
                                            I /U k >    s lh   a* &     s le tM Y C & s .)   0/a
                                             t                                Ot c W ''6

                                     p/ohrt'Sl . ^             jou.
      <L     Uf
                            /                    k r , 7W*         p CLf lA ^
       /fctiSlU*
\




    IMMEDIATE
    To:   Mr                              From:   CAROLYN IIEY
          cs                                      DCI SSI

                                          Date:   6 March 1991

                                          Copy                    3SI
                                                                  3SJ
                                                                  <5s
    GULF CRISIS

    I have received the enclosed letter* from Daphne        Statham,
    Director of the National Institute for Social Work.

    2.   Would you be interested in discussing Miss         Statham's
    proposal further? I would welcome your comments.




    Carolyn Hey
    Deputy Chief Inspector
    Social Services Inspectorate
    B413 AFH
    Ext 24243
                                                      L i m i t e d by g u a r a n t e e : R e g i s t e r e d No. 7 2 6 0 2 2 E n g l a n d



                                                      NATIONAL INSTITUTE
                                                      FOR SOCIAL WORK
                                                      R e gister e d Office:

                                                      5-7 TAVISTOCK PLACE
                                                      LONDON W C3H9SS
                                                      T elephone:         071-387 9681

D e p a r t m e n t of H e a l t h
Al exa nde r Fle ming House
E leph a nt an d C a s t l e
London            SE1 6B Y

28.01.91

DS/AM

Dear

                                                   Gu1f_Crisis

 As yo u k n o w we a r e u n d e r t a k i n g a s t u d y of the s o c i a l s e r v i c e s
 r e s p o n s e to H i l l s b o r o u g h . A n u m b e r of p e o p l e h a v e b e e n in t o u c h                                        ,
..with us about what they ar e doing.                       Th e I n s t i t u t e c o u l d o f f e r

1.     Information Service

       W h o is d o i n g what to p r o v i d e s o c i a l / p s y c h o l o g i c a l support, and
       whaI w o u l d be i n v o l v e d in d o i n g t hat . T o i n c l u d e S o c i a l
       S e r v i c e s D e p a r t m e n t s , N a t i o n a l H e a l t h Serv ic e , v o l u n t a r y
       organisations, and military.                            An i n f o r m a t i o n s e r v i c e w o u l d
       p r o v i d e b i b l i o g r a p h i c i n f o r m a t i o n an d p o s s i b l y d o c u m e n t d e l i v e r y
       an d a l s o m a i n t a i n d a t a b a s e s of p r o j e c t s , t r a i n e r s and courses.
       A n e w s l e t t e r w o u l d be th e p r i n c i p a l m e a n s of d i s s e m i n a t i o n and
       w o u l d be m a i l e d w idely.

  2. Organisational Study

       C o m m u n i t y c a r e l e g i s l a t i o n r e q u i r e s S S Ds to be r e s p o n s i v e to the
       n e e d s of t h e i r c u s t o m e r s .        .How is t h is i n t e r p r e t e d in the light
       of w a r ?        E x p e r i e n c e of the H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r d e m o n s t r a t e s
       that S S D s e x p e r i e n c e d o r g a n i s a t i o n a l p r o b l e m s in m o b i l i s i n g
       them sel ve s and'others.                   T h e o r g a n i s a t i o n a l s t u d y a s p e c t of our
       H i l l s b o r o u g h r e s e a r c h p r o p o s a l w a s not funded"              We b e l i e v e that
       e x a c t l y the s am e p r o b l e m s a r e b e i n g c o n f r o n t e d n o w an d it w o u l d
       be u s e f u l to m o n i t o r the p r o c e s s e s s e n i o r m a n a g e r s ar e g o i n g
       through.

3.     Disast erSt a ffNct work

       An e m b r y o n i c n e t w o r k e x i s t s of p e o p l e w h o re.c.ognise the rieed to
       p r o v i d e s u pp o rt for p r o f e s s i o n a l s an d h e l p e r s in t i m e of
       d i s a s t e r and m o s t of w h o m h a v e a l r e a d y g a i n e d e x p e r i e n c e . ‘ A
       t r a i n i n g c o u r s e ha s been held.           T h e n e t w o r k is u r g e n t l y
       r e v i e w i n g h o w best to r e s p o n d to th e e m e r g e n c y .          They will
       s h o r t l y be p u b l i c i s e d by a n a t i o n a l n e w s p a p e r w h i c h is l i k e l y to
       p r o d u c e a gr'eat d e m a n d for t h e i r s e r vi c es . " W e are d i s c u s s i n g           ,
       w i t h t h e m h o w we might c o l l a b o r a t e and what they w i l l n e e d in
       t e r m s of s e c r e t a r i a l and a d m i n i s t r a t i v e s u p p o r t , d e v e l o p m e n t
       off i c e r , et c .
                                                         -   2    -




4-     Building on Current Research

       R e s e a r c h is in p r o g r e s s on the r e s p o n s e s 10 the Hillsborough-.
       Disaster.             C a n - a s p e c t s be d u p l i c a t e d , eg. c o m p a r i n g s a m p l e s of
       b e r e a v e d / i n j u r e d / s u p p o r t o r s as c o m p a r i s o n s w i t h H i l l s b o r o u g h
       populations?

If y o u    think      the D e p a r t m e n t   would       be       interested,     who     should      I talk
to?

Best     w ishes.                                                                                  ,

.Yours     s i nc e re l y,




Daphne St at ham
Director
                  fcirbko'MSw                      r.n-<TOj /oj2~- i
Q arP^7^/2^\                                                      v~ 'U>jl   iq   ^   /
( y cs t P l^ lJ % )
 — Jtorthern office. Her work programme includes contributing to the CCETSW
   Curriculum Development Project, the North West Black Workers Co-ordinating
   Group, the National Black Caucus and the Black and In Care Group.      She
   works with the Black Perspectives Ccntnunity Social Work Exchange which is
   currently focussing on identifying good practice in relation to clients,
   carers and staff.

   The Caimunity Care Bill and the Children Act acknowledge that Black people
   have the right to have their needs met within mainstream services.    Black
   workers and Cotimunity groups will need information, tools, skills and
   strategies if they are to make an impact on changes which are occuring and
   ensure that appropriate care and provision is available to Black and
   ethnic minority users, carers and groups. A steering group has been
   established and funding is currently being sought for a project which
   contributes to this process.

    4.5 ttillsfoaraugfa Disaster
    A research .project funded by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation          will
    evaluate, services provided.by the,.social, service departments to the
    beretv^^’"krid survivors. This is seen as the first stage in setting up a
    PADE exercise, \!irtiich brings together people who have been involved in
              work in recent years, in order ^to produce good practice
                  TSie Institute has already published a report on the work of
    the team in Hungerford.

    Contacts have been established with the Department of Health, CRUSE and
    BASW to ensure that the different initiatives complement each other.

    5.    SOCIAL CARE UNIT
    5.1 Department of Health Caring in Hanes Initiative
          Training of Care Workers Development Programme
    The 3-year project on the training of care workers will complete its first
    year in July 1990. The overall objective is to develop, test and evaluate
    cost effective training packages that can be used primarily on an
    'in-house1 basis by homes managers, taking into account

         - national training developments such as NVQ;

         - the need to promote anti-discriminatory practice, equal opportunities
         and to ensure that the needs of people from minority ethnic groups are
         being met.

    A number of demonstration projects have been established in different
    parts of the country in the public and independent sectors.

   Demonstration projects, covering a range of client groups and sectors, are
   in the process of being established in different parts ofthe country, ie.
   Suffolk, Tameside,    Warwickshire,   Leicesterhsire, Hampshire, Walsall,
   Hertfordshire, London, the North East and South Wales.

   The work in Leicestershire includes a project aimed to identify the
   training needs of staff working in private and voluntary homes for Black
   elders.

                                             -7-
                                           Reference




Mrs                                    From:
CS1
SSI—GP
Room B509 AFH                         Date: 13 December 1990

                                         cc: Mr       CS1
                                             File CTP42/8
                                             Float




Disasters

1. At the EPI Seminar earlier this week you introduced me to
Dr Newburn (?) who is undertaking a research project to
evaluate the services provided by SSDs to the bereaved and
survivors of the Hillsborough Disaster.   The project is, I
understand, funded by the Joseph Rowntree Foundation, and is
based at NISW.   You said you were a member of the Steering
Group.
2. I was previously unaware that a project of this nature was
underway, and that there was some Departmental involvement in
it. It seems to me that this is potentially a very important
project, and could well go a long way to help the Department
develop a policy line on SSD's roles in post disaster
situations.
3.   I would like to be kept informed about progress on the
project, please.  Do you have a copy of the of the research
protocol that I might see?




                                    Room B1604A
                                    Ext. 24041
 NEWS


           PEOPLE
                                                        ANNIVERSARY OF TRAGEDY
                                                         BOOSTS CALLS FOR HELP
                                           T H E R E C E N T first anniversary of        “A common factor is that people     could do — are also com m on,” he
                                           th e H illsb o ro u g h d is a ste r has   who have been trying to cope on        added.
                                           brought a resurgence in the n um ­         their own are in a m uch worse state       Ted Knowles, a mem ber of the
                                           ber of new cases being referred to         than those who were referred to us     W irral team , said another feature of
                                           the specialist teams of social work­       before,” he said.                      more recent referrals was that in­
                                           ers dealing w ith the emotional                “W e went to see a lad last week   stead of coming through the H elp­
                                           after-effects.                             who has been trying to cope on his     line, they have been urged by
                                                                                      own, and then at Christmas it all      wives, mothers or girlfriends.
                                                   B y B rendan M artin               began to fall in on him.                   “ People w hose partners have
                                                                                         “H e was in a very crowded pub      been drinking heavily, losing their
                                              Knowsley’s six-strong team, set         when he started having a panic         tem pers easily or sleeping badly tell
                                           up immediately after the tragedy in        attack, and he has been having         us: ‘We thought it would go away,
                                           April last year, was still receiving       attacks and suffering from agor­       but it hasn’t ’.”
Greenwich council has continued            one or two new referrals a week            aphobia since th en .”                     Seven local authorities set up
its policy of appointing women to          before the anniversary.                       People who were not in the crush    s p e c ia l te a m s f o llo w in g th e
top management posts by giving                Since then, however, the rate has       in which 95 died b u t who witnessed   tragedy. O f these, the one in St
the directorship of social services to     gone up to an average o f about one a      it, have also sometimes been reluc­    Helens has been wound up, Sef-
CeliaPyke-Lees(pictured) currently         day, and in neighbouring W irral,          tant to seek help, feeling under­      ton’s is due to be disbanded this
assistant director, central services.      where the team is due to be dis­           serving of it, despite experiencing    week, and W irral has been re­
   She takes over from Martin Man-         banded next m onth, there has been         “flashbacks of sights and sounds,      prieved only until 25 June follow­
by this m onth as he moves north to        the same experience.                       and images of dead bodies” as a        ing an outcry when it was sche­
become D irector of social services          Survivors coming forward more            result o f their traum a, said M r     duled for closure in A pril.
for Sheffield.                             recently tend to have m ore serious        Mullen.                                   W irral councillors had decided
   Three other women are depart­           problems than those who sought                “Great feelings of guilt, about     that the team, which was costing
m ent directors at Greenwich.              help earlier, according to John            having stepped on people, or not       £100,000 a year, would have to be
   Ms Pyke-Lees was previously a           M ullen, the Knowsley team’s co­           having done enough — when in           disbanded to meet cuts in the de­
manager of priority needs with             ordinator.                                 reality there was nothing more they    partm ent’s budget o f £750,000.
Lewisham and N orth Southwark
H ealth A uthority. She has also
w orked as a social services officer
for the Comm unity Relations Com­
mission, which preceded the Com­
                                                                                                                                 ACTINVOLVES
mission for Racial Equality.
                                                                                                                                   LEARNING
        OBITUARY                                                                                                             H E A L T H M IN IS T E R Virginia
                                                                                                                             Bottomley has warned that the im ­
 Sue Lea a trainee conductor with                                                                                            plementation of the Children Act in
 the Birmingham-based Foundation                                                                                             O ctober 1991 will involve a massive
 for Conductive Education, was kil­                                                                                          learning exercise.
 led in a car crash in South Amercia                                                                                            She said there was a lot to be
 over the Easter holiday.                                                                                                    learned by those involved in day to
    She was in her second of a four-                                                                                         day practice and by senior child
 year training course at the Peto                                                                                            care managers.
 Institue in H ungary and was due to                                                                                            T he m inister, who was addres­
 join the project at the end of her                                                                                          sing the first-ever conference for
 training period.                                                                                                            chairs and vice-chairs of Area Child
    Fellow student Sarah Bartlett,                                                                                           Protection Com m ittees, w arned
 who was also involved in the acci­                                                                                          that the provision o f effective child
 dent, is recovering in hospital.                                                                                            protection would remain a con­
    T he Foundation said M s Lea was                                                                                         siderable challenge in the 1990s.
 an excellent stud en t, dedicated to                                                                                            She revealed th a t later th is
 transform ing the lives of disabled                                                                                         m onth her departm ent is issuing a
 people. It sent sympathy to her                                                                                             docum ent entitled T h e Care of
 family and friends.                                                                                                         Children: Principles and Practice
                                                                                                                             in Regulations and Guidance.
 Herbert Burstyn a form er social                                                                                                T h e NSPCC will conduct a re­
 w o rk e r w ith K e n s in g to n an d                                                                                     view of the 18 major child care
                                              A trainee learns roofing skills at Scotland’s first Enterprise Centre for
 Chelsea social services departm ent,                                                                                        inquiry reports since 1982, she
                                              people with mental health problems and social difficulties, which has
 died in M arch.                                                                                                             added. Two projects on participa­
                                              opened in Bathgate, West Lothian, with the help o f £31,000, one-year
    M r B urstyn had to give up work                                                                                         tion and prevention are being car­
                                              fundingfrom the Training Agency.
 with the departm ent in 1985 after a                                                                                        ried out by the N ational C hildren’s
                                                 R un by the Scottish Association for Mental Health, the centre trains
 stroke, b ut later w orked on a volun­                                                                                      Bureau while N C H is studying
                                              people in welding, building and landscaping and provides work units
 tary basis with other stroke victims                                                                                        existing facilities for the treatm ent
                                              and shopsfo r self-employed people.
 at St M ary’s Hospital, London.                                                                                              of abused children and abusers.


8 /S O C IA L W O R K T O D A Y
                                                                                                                                                             IM'
                D epartm ent o f Health
                Alexander Fleming House Elephant and Castle London SE1 6BY

                Telex 883 66 9           Telephone 01 -4 0 7 5 522 ext    7563
                                                                          Room B1602A

        Mr A J Allen                                                     Your reference

        Chief Executive
        Berkshire County Council                                         Our reference    CTP4 2/2
        Shire Hall                                                                I
        Shinfield Park                                                   Date   T*April 1990
        READING
        RG2 9XD




        Dear Mr Allen
        DISASTER WORKING PARTY
        We recently spotted the attached short article in the 15th March
        edition of "Community Care".
        I feel sure that Christine Mead has either been misquoted or, at
        the very least, her comments have been used out of context.    It
        is, nevertheless, unfortunate that both this Department and the
        Working Party have been associated with an apparent judgement on
        local authority service provision in this most sensitive area.
        I wonder if you might want to consider alerting Working Party
        members generally to the potential dangers of approaches from the
        media.
        Yours sincerely




        Community Services
        Division 1

c-c..              11
    »*•



»

          EXTRACT FROM COMMUNITY CARE - 15 MARCH 1990




                         Hillsborough
                         team cut
                         A        cost-cu ttin g   poll    tax
                         budget has forced Wirral
                         SSD to disb and its H ills ­
                         borough d isaster co u n sellin g
                         team ju st on e year after the
                         tragedy.
                             T h e social services budget
                         has been cut by £ 7 50.000 next
                         \ e a r , a n d as a result, th e d e ­
                         p a rtm e n t is un a b le to meet
                         th e £100.000 cost o f m a in ­
                         taining the team.
                             Experts have expressed
                         do u b ts over the team's abol­
                         ition shortly before the first
                         anniversary o f the disaster.
                             While Wirral has pledged
                         that the six social workers e m ­
                         ployed on the team will c o n ­
                         tin ue counselling w hen tliev
                         r e tu rn to their offices, C h ris­
                         tine Mead, a research assist­
                         ant in the DoH's disasters
                         working partv. .said this provi­
                         sion was in ad e qua te .
                                                           Reference




               Mr       CS1                     From:
                                                        CS1C
               Mrs        SSI
                                                Date : 2 April 1990

                                                   cc: Files CTP 42/2
                                                             CTP 42/$/'
                                                       Float



               DISASTER WORKING PARTY
               1. I have just spotted the     attached article in the 15thMarch
               edition of "Community Care".

               2.   I am assuming that Christine Mead has been          misquoted or
               that   her  comments   have   been  taken   out         of   context.
               Nevertheless, I think it important that she             should avoid
               putting herself in a position where she runs this       risk.

               3.   I would welcome your views on whether we need take any
               action.   I have it in mind to write     to Tony Allen alongthe
               following lines (Mr Stone to sign?). What do you think?

                      "We recently spotted the attached short article in
                       the 15th March edition of "Community Care".

                       I feel sure that Christine Mead has either been
                       misquoted or, at the very least, her comments have
                       been used out of context. It is, nevertheless,
                       unfortunate that both this Department and the
                       Working Party have been associated with an
                       apparent judgement on local authority service
                       provision in this most sensitive area.
                       I wonder if you might want to consider alerting
                       Working Party members generally to the potential
                       dangers of approaches from the media."




                                                Room B1604A AFH
                                                Ext 6431




CODE   18-77
#
    C o m m u m try   c/yit - /r Avvt<^-f7ffo




                       Hillsborough
                       team cut
                       A       cost-cu ttin g  poll    tax
                       bu dget has forced W irral
                       SSD to disb and its H ills ­
                       borough disaster c o u n sellin g
                       team ju s t on e year after the
                       tragedy.
                           T h e social services b u dg e t
                       lias b een cut by £ 750 .00 0 next
                       year, a n d as a result, th e d e ­
                       p a rtm e n t is unable to meet
                       the £100,000 cost o f m a in ­
                       taining th e team.
                           E xperts have e xpressed
                       d o u b ts ov e r the team 's abol­
                       ition shortly before th e first
                       anniversary o f the disaster.
                           While Wirral has pledged
                       that the six social workers e m ­
                       ployed o n the team will c o n ­
                       tin ue c ounselling w h e n they
                       r e tu rn to their offices, C hris­
                       tine Mead, a research assist­
                       ant in the D oH 's disasters
                       working parts1, said this provi­
                       sion svas inade q ua te .
                                         Reference



Mr         MED MPO           From:
                                     CS1C
Mr        PHS3
                             Date: 27 March 1990
Mrs        SSI
                               cc minute only:
                                                     :sic
                               cc: Files: CTP42/2(page 16)
                                          CTP42/4(page 17)
                                          CTP42/8(pages 4,5)
                                          CTP43(pagesl4,15,20)
                                          CTP46
                                   Float


"CIVIL PROTECTION"
1. You may not be aware of this Home Office publication and I
attach a copy of the latest quarterly issue (No 14) for your
information. Mr         and Mrs        may find the article on
the Cruse Working Party on page 16 of particular interest.
2.    Should you wish to obtain future issues of "Civil
Protection", these can be ordered from the Public Relations
Department of the Home Office, Room 137, Queen Anne's Gate,
SW1H 9AT.




                               Room B1607 AFH
                               Ext 6384
i                          ,t : <           I...WluilliililwllillS.lulillillkillitlii,




                                                               C (\J \L                      p ilo Y tc rlo ^   ^ J y £ /x * ^ l i ^ C - A / o l ^ e j




                                                                                                          t                  sfadii
    disaster                               The Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry

    T HE final report of
      Stadium disaster
                           Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough
                          was published on 29 January. Unlike the Interim
    report, which dealt solely with the circumstances of the disaster itself,
                                                                                                                           The report
                                                                                                                                 Part I of the report is an overview of British
                                                                                                                           football. Chapter 1 paints a sad picture of the
    the final report is a wide ranging review of the state of British football                                             state of professional football. It criticises clubs for
                                                                                                                           complacency about safety and facilities for fans
    leading to a number of specific recommendations intended to improve
                                                                                                                           and considers the extent to which these poor
    crowd behaviour, public order and safety. The report also contains Lord                                                conditions have contributed to bad behaviour.
    Justice Taylor's views on the viability of proposed arrangements for a                                                 Chapter 2 concludes that the future must be in
    national Football Membership Scheme.                                                                                   the direction of all seated accommodation at
                                                                                                                           football grounds and massive improvements in
                                                                                                                           standards and facilities for spectators both on
                                                                                                                           grounds of safety and of encouraging improved
                                                                                                                           crowd behaviour. Lord Justice Taylor points to
                                                                                                                           ways in which the football industry can finance
                                                                                                                           these improvements itself but mentions, without
                                                                                                                           recommendations, one or two aspects of taxation
                                                                                                                           which the Government will at least need to
                                                                                                                           consider.


                                                                                                                           Part II
                                                                                                                                  Chapters 3 and 4 of the report are
                                          m m ft                                                                           concerned with detailed matters relating to
                                           ▼aw                                                                             spectator safety, building on the recommenda­
                                         •u m c u                                                                          tions of the Interim report. Many of them are
                                                                                                                           uncontroversial and can be dealt with without
                                         nmm                                                                               primary legislation. There is one obvious

                                                        ins                                                                exception: Taylor proposes the setting up of an
                                                                                                                           independent body to supervise the respon­
                                                                                                                           sibilities of local authorities for safety at sports
                                                                                                                           grounds which goes beyond the powers available
                                                                                                                           to the proposed Football Licensing Authority to
                                                                                                                           be set up under section 13 of the Football
                                                                                                                           Spectators Act 1989. The proposal is that the
                                                                                                                           supervisory responsibilities should be extended
                                                                                                                           to sports other than football (some grounds at
                                                                                                                           which rugby union, rugby league and cricket are
                                                                                                                           played would be subject to the Taylor
                                                                                                                           recommendations) as well as to indoor sports
                                                                                                                           facilities which are currently dealt with by district
                                                                                                                           authorities under entertainments legislation.


                                                                                         m                                 Part III
                                                                                                                                 This part of the report is concerned with
                                                                                                                           crowd control and hooliganism. It contains
                                                                                                                           recommendations addressed to the police,
                                                                                                                           proposals for some new offences (throwing

                                    0*                                                                                     missiles, obscene or racist chanting, and going on
                                                                                                                           to the pitch without lawful reason) and for other
                                                                                                                           possible measures against hooliganism.
                                    I#1",,race!
                                                                                                                           Part IV
                                                                                                                                 In part IV of his report, Lord Justice Taylor
                                                                                                                           provides a detailed analysis of the possible
                                                                                                                           effects of the national Football Membership
                                                                                                                           Scheme based on his examination of the
                                                                                                                           specifications contained in the invitations to
                                                                                                                           tender issued by the football authorities to
                                                                                                                           possible contractors. He concludes that he has
                                                                                                                           grave doubts about the feasibility of a Scheme

                                    \                                                                                      based on the invitation and serious misgivings
                                                                                                                           about its likely impact on safety.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT**f£ Z/g
i . , ^: . : ..!, ;lii
;
,i
:                     .
. . . . . . . . .i,:t . .




                                                                                                                                                                                                        vehicles. There are some minor but nevertheless
                                                       Fhe Government's
j




                                                                                                                                                                                                        significant changes to his recommendations on
                                                       response
.
.




                                                                                                                                                                                                        first aid, medical facilities and ambulances
i
,




                                                            The Government's initial response to the                                                                                                    including a relaxation of his earlier recommenda­
. t :;. h




                                                       report was given by the Home Secretary, Mr                                                                                                       tion on the need for a doctor to be present in the
                                                       David Waddington, in a statement in the House of                                                                                                 case of smaller matches, and permitting the use
. ,L.h




                                                       Commons on the day the report was published.                                                                                                     of non-ambulance authority ambulances with the
                                                       He made it clear that the Government accepted                                                                                                    approval of the ambulance authority. A new
                                                       the report's analysis that the main responsibility                                                                                               recommendation, which the Government has
.




                                                                                                                                                                                                        said will need further discussion, is that there
.




                                                       for improving conditions at football grounds and
a




                                                       encouraging better behaviour by fans fell to the                                                                                                 should be a "major incident equipment vehicle"
.




                                                       football industry itself. He accepted the report's                                                                                               designed and equipped to deal with up to 50
.




                                                                                                                                                                                                        casualties deployed in addition to other
.: u




                                                       main recommendation that there should be an
^: ,...ii:,




                                                       enforced move towards all seated accommoda­                                                                                                      ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd
                                                       tion. Taylor recommended that there should be                                                                                                    in excess of 25,000 is expected.
                                                        no standing spectators at matches defined under
                                                       UEFA regulations as high risk matches from the                                                                                                   Offences and penalties
                                                       beginning of the 1993/4 season (this includes all      agreed, as a matter of urgency, to undertake a                                                 The Home Secretary has said that he will
                                                       UEFA final and semi-final ties; final tournament       revision of the "Green Guide". This is a                                                 give urgent attention to the recommendations for
                                                       matches of the European football champion­             publication issued jointly by the Home Office and                                        new offences and to other recommendations
                                                       ship; when visiting team supporters exceed 10%         the Scottish Education Department on safety in                                           made by Taylor, for example to the wider use of
, i . ; . l . l, .s , , ; , „ . !.,,^,J. ! , , lj




                                                       of stadium capacity or more than 3,000 persons;        sports grounds. The Guide was first produced by                                          attendance centres to those convicted of football
                                                       when the full capacity stadium is expected of          a technical working group at the time of Lord                                            related offences.
                                                       more than 50,000 spectators or when a match is         Wheatley's Inquiry into crowd safety at sports                                                 The Taylor recommendations have been
                                                       likely to attract a large number of foreign visitors   grounds in 1972. It hasstoodthe test oftime well.                                        widely reported in the press and they were
                                                       or supporters.) For first and second division          It has been amended on a number of occasions in                                          discussed in the three hour debate in the House of
^U:




                                                       matches, and those of the Scottish premier             the light of experience. It has no statutory force                                       Commons on Tuesday 30 January which had been
,„. . . . :




                                                        league, Taylor recommends a reduction of 20% in       but it is widely recognised that if its                                                  sought by the opposition. The main areas of
                                                                                                              recommendations had been compiled with at
-




                                                        standing capacity before the beginning of the                                                                                                  concern appear to be the effect of the
I




                                                        next football season and further reductions of        Hillsborough then the accident could not have                                            requirements for the removal of standing
^ .. -




                                                        2 0 % to secure the abolition of standing             happened.                                                                                accommodation for third and fourth division
                                                        accommodation by the beginning of the 1994/                 Lord Justice Taylor has built on his                                               clubs - but the Government has pointed out that
, o , . .,. ,, ,, . 1 .^ ,




                                                         1995 season. For third and fourth division           recommendations in the Interim report on police                                          the Taylor recommendation does not require
                                                         matches he recommends reductions of 10% to           planning including the nomination of a Chief                                             them to provide more seated accommodation
                                                        secure all seated accommodation by 1999. To           Officer (ie an officer of ACPO rank) for football                                        than the number of spectators which they can
                                                                                                              liaison, and effective pre-match briefing and
.




                                                         bring this about the Government intends to create                                                                                             reasonably expect to attend.
                                                         the new Football Licensing Authority and direct it   operational orders. He makes specific recom­                                                   Concern has also been expressed about the
j . t . Jl,.11J: !, !.Jl!i ii; J i..,.:.:.M i:,j „ .




                                                         to implement the Taylor recommendations in the       mendations for police control room facilities, and                                       possible effect of the recommendations on other
                                                         tetms and conditions of licences. The new            for adequate means of communication, including                                           sports, in particular rugby union and rugby
                                                         Authority will also supervise the local authority    CCTV and the provision of one radio channel                                              league and cricket. In this instance the
                                                         responsibilities for safety at sports grounds as     reserved for police match commanders.                                                    Government has indicated that since new
                                                         fffommended by Taylor.                                                                                                                        legislation would undoubtedly be necessary to
                                                               The Government has also accepted the wide      Emergency services                                                                       extend all seated accommodation by law to
                                                       i.imje of technical recommendations contained in             The final report repeats the recommenda­                                           sports other than football, it will discuss the
                                                       the Taylor report on safety, including the removal     tions of the Interim report on the co-ordination of                                      position with the sports authorities concerned
                                                       ‘.it spikes from peiimeter fences and"reducing the     emergency services, pre-match briefing and on                                            before judging whether the Taylor proposals are
                                                        maximum h e ig h t of fences to 2.2 metres, and has   arrangements for the arrival of the emergency                                            appropriate to other sports.                   ®




                                                                                                                    ...... .                      ■itiMVif'dii'iiffrinFHiin1^ ri’iii,r!i   if!ifvi ^FnFi"H1’»:.1 ■ . . . . . . . . . . . . .         ’   1 ,n   *' 1   ’   "
                                                          ta




To: Mr                         From: W B Utting
    Mrs                              Chief Inspector
    Mrs        >/R                   SSI
    Mr
    Mr                         4 August 1989
    Mr
    Mr
    Miss Hey
    Mr       ]0/R
    Mrs       0/R
    Mr
    Missl
    Mrsl ~l
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: VISIT TO MERSEYSIDE
1 AUGUST 1989
I visited the special teams established in the Wirral,   Sefton,
Liverpool and Knowsley to assist bereaved families and   survivors
of the Hillsborough football disaster. I lunched with    a number
of Directors and senior officials, including the Chief   Probation
Officer for Merseyside.
2. A more detailed account of my personal impressions is
attached for those who are interested. Salient features are:
    2.1 The units were brought into existence as an important
    part of the overall response of each local authority to a
    local disaster.
    2.2 The importance of the operation was reflected by the
    allocation of additional resources. The continuing need for
    each unit is scrutinised periodically.
    2.3 There are interesting differences between each unit as
    well as fundamental similarities. All are engaged in
    preventive social work corresponding to secondary or tertiary
    prevention in the health model.
    2.4 Organisation of the social services response was
    facilitated by two strokes of good fortune:
             the attendance of significant actors a few days
             earlier at a regional gathering on disaster
             planning,
    and, more significantly,
         -   the immediate availability of a Disaster Consultant,
             Mr                 \ who provided immediately a
             structure for action within which both members and
             officials felt confident. His influence was
             constantly referred to during the visit: in
             particular, the support acquired from his accurate
             initial prediction of the course of reactions to the
             disaster over time.
                                1
    2.5   The Directors have worked together well.
    2.6 Aspects of the experience deserve systematic recording
    and evaluation.




W B UTTING
Chief Inspector
Social Services Inspectorate
Room 519/522, RH
Tel. No. 210 5569




                               2
                                                         ANNEX 1


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: VISIT TO MERSEYSIDE
1 AUGUST 1989
The Wirral
Housed in the old Town Hall in elegant Hamilton Square. A team
leader and five social workers, all very experienced and all with
mental health backgrounds (one including hospital experience and
another voluntary work in CRUSE). Theirs is an explicit
preventive mental health approach, undertaking main stream
bereavement and grief-counselling in the context of a high
profile disaster.
2. Established at once by being called out of district teams,
they dealt immediately with the wide range of practical problems
besetting bereaved families and survivors. The rush of referrals
then fell away, to be followed by family and survivors returning
with classical symptoms. They have 71 active cases with a
further 20 awaiting the establishment of group-counselling. Nine
of the cases are bereaved families, with substantial numbers
involved.
3. The shared mental health background gave a strongly marked
and integrated approach to preventive work. Inter-professional
collaboration (with GPs, CPNs, EWOs, college counsellors and
youth workers) was obviously well developed. They supported the
network and each other. They referred to the literature and to
Mr
4. The concentration of work, as much as its nature, placed
pressure on the team. They were mutually supportive. Anxieties
were the mental health work they had left and the fact that
continued support for the unit was to be reviewed in October.
They point to the likely effect of inquests, the publication of
the report and the anniversary of the disaster as triggering
further referrals.
5. I was impressed bv the Assistant Director (Jim Black) and by
the Team Leader (
                I            \.
Sefton
6. A team leader and three social workers operate from the top
floor of an old people's home on the seafront! Three of them are
approved social workers and one is a PSW with hospital
experience, but they are not operating with the strong mental
health culture of the Wirral Group. This shows through the lower
level of their contact with other agencies and the generally
pragmatic approach they have to the work. There is a strong team
identity, to the extent that they operate almost completely
detached from SSD operations - to the extent of not sharing
records.
                              1
7. Early work was dominated by important practical issues
affecting bereaved families. Dealing successfully with these was
useful in establishing credibility.   Referrals fell off after the
hectic activity of the first week but showed a revival after six
weeks as survivors and others reported, or were referred with,
relationship and employment problems, heavy drinking, aggression,
anxiety and depression. Fifteen families are currently worked
with (including numerous individuals) and 24 survivors. They
have a further 40 referred to them yet to be followed up. The
morale of the group was good, members showing a sense of being
privileged to do this work. They referred to                   s
help, to the literature and to learning on the job. They were
making extensive use of visual effects, including videos, and of
written accounts in working with people.
8.   Lunch with Directors.
This was a useful discussion. Directors and CPO were concerned
to press the need for some structured evaluation of what had gone
on and to seek pointers about how to do it and how to raise money
for it. I agree that aspects of the experience deserve study.
An administrative case study could deal with the organisational
issues. A description of what had gone one would be useful
professionally. But they needed to identify researchable issues
if they wished to encourage research. Ascertaining the
effectiveness of intervention, for example, would require
scientific enquiry over a period of time. They should identify
their areas of interest and be prepared to approach them
differentially. Securing the interest of reputable researchers
would be necessary in order to produce supportable proposals and
tap research funds. The topic did not figure in current DH
research priorities but this did not preclude application to the
Department.
9.   Liverpool.
Liverpool had a completely different approach. District social
work teams had dealt with initial referrals. The authority had
decided to recruit a specially appointed team (two leaders and 12
social workers) on permanent appointments, who will move to other
jobs when the team's work is done. It started work four weeks
ago and was still only just over half-strength.
10. This was in time to receive the revival of referrals that had
occurred, as in the other authorities, after the first few weeks.
Work that needed long-term commitment was also being transferred
from the districts. Characteristics problems presented by
referrals included child management, disturbed behaviour and
excessive drinking.
11. Staff had applied for posts and had been appointed after
interview. They were highly motivated and again included some
with hospital backgrounds and experience of working with both
mental health and traumatic injuries. One worker was seconded
from the Children's Society. In discussion they stressed the
importance of good administrative and clerical backup and
reported difficulties of establishing a data base without the
assistance of IT. I was impressed by the Assistant Director,
Carole Wilkinson, and by one of the Team Leaders,
                              2
*

    12. Help Line was situated in the same large and noisy room at
    SSD HQ. Manned by volunteers, the level of referrals was now
    down to 7-10 per day.
    13. Knowslev.
    This was a team of six located in the staff house of an old
    people's home. The team was brought into being at once. Only
    two of the original members remain, but all six will be staying
    for the foreseeable future. They saw themselves as an integrated
    part of their SSD and paid tribute to the total Departmental
    effort that had sustained them.
    14. They decided at the outset to visit all 13 bereaved families
    and had done so within four days of the disaster. They made 60
    to 80 visits in the first two weeks and have pursued a policy of
    positive outreach by visiting and repeat visiting of all
    referrals. Main professional methods appear to be bereavement
    and grief-counselling.
    15. Knowsley assisted with arrangements for training sessions
    for Merseyside staff and they too, referred to                 as
    a helpful influence. Some of them were experiencing personal
    stress and were using an external consultant for de-briefing.
    Knowsley and Sefton referred to the helpfulness of the BASW
    Staffline member who also appeared to be functioning as a
    consultant. Social workers in the team were still arranging to
    spend time in their parent areas and there was a proposal to re­
    locate them there, with them coming together regularly with their
    co-ordinator. They described client symptoms familiar to the
    other authorities and spoke particularly of the effects of the
    tragedy upon children. They have made a written record of early
    experience and reported to Social Services Committee.




                                  3
               <^t u lC                w




                                                         c-n°          a/g




   N 15 April ninety-five people were crushed to death and two-hundred                Although the tragedy which hit Liverpool

O  were injured when an FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough, Sheffield,
turned into Britain’s worst ever sporting tragedy.
                                                                               fans happened over 70 miles from home,
                                                                               Merseyside’s emergency planners lost no time in
                                                                               responding.
                                                                                      It seems almost prophetic that less than
                                                                               4 8 hours before the tragedy Merseyside should
                                                                               have hosted a major seminar on emergency
                                                                               planning to discuss the problems of Zeebrugge.
                                                                                     The two tragedies are similar in that both
                                                                               occurred away from the community in which the
                                                                               majority of those involved live.
                                                                                      Knowledge of this and the need for an
                                                                               immediate response persuaded the Merseyside
                                                                               Emergency Planning Unit to activate its
                                                                               emergency plan. Within an hour of the media
                                                                               announcement of the tragic events of that
                                                                               Saturday afternoon they contacted the five
                                                                               Merseyside local authorities, those in South
                                                                               ■ybrkshire, Sheffield City Council and a number of
                                                                               voluntary organisations to try to co-ordinate the
                                                                               response on Merseyside to the initial information
                                                                               arriving from Hillsborough.
                                                                                      Over the next hour the various social
                                                                               services departments were put on full alert when it
                                                                               became obvious that the bulk of the response
                                                                               would fall within their discipline. Some 60 social
                                                                               workers, plus transport, were put on standby as it
                                                                               was initially envisaged they would have to travel to
                                                                               Sheffield to help with the immediate problems at
                                                                               the incident control.
                                                                                      As the evening wore on and further
                                                                                information was accumulated by the Emergency
                                                                                Planning Unit the social workers were stood
                                                                               down. It was apparent that the bulk of the
                                                                               workload would involve long-term counselling
                                                                               within the local community. To smooth the way for
                                                                               this process a meeting of senior social workers
                                                                               was arranged, via the Emergency Planning Unit,
                                                                               for the following morning at which all five
                                                                                Merseyside local authorities, the Emergency
                                                                                Planning Unit and health authorities were
                                                                                represented. Almost immediately a 24-hour,
                                                                                multi-telephoned helpline was established and a
                                                                                number of drop-in centres opened.
                                                                                      George Gee of the Merseyside authority
                                                                                said: ‘From an emergency planning viewpoint the
                                                                                disaster at Hillsborough stadium has highlighted
                                                                               the need for the “all-hazards” approach which
                                                                                Merseyside adopted over three years ago. This
                                                                                approach has resulted in a high level of
                                                                                awareness, training and co-ordination from the
                                                                                study of previous disasters.'




                                                                                                                             p iie f
                                                                                            m                                son.
                                                                                                                    a fte ’ito m e




                                                                Rex Features
To: Mr                         From: W B Utting
    (SSI)                            Chief Inspector
                                     Social Services Inspectorate
                                     13 June 1989
                               Copy to             (SSI)
                                                   (SSI)
                                                   (CS1)
                                                   (RL1E)


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
We spoke about my visiting Merseyside and I identified 11 or
12 July as possibilities. I am willing to travel the night
before (or at crack of dawn) in order to provide a fairly full
day.
2. I should be more interested in getting to the content of the
work being done and talking to some of the people doing it than
in the managerial and organisational arrangements, but I must
obviously pay due regard to the latter. I look forward to
hearing further from you.




W B UTTING
Chief Inspector
Social Services Inspectorate
Room 519/52 2, RH
Tel. No. 210 5569
                                       Ref: GSS 9/1
                                                            PlU'
                                                                   r
                                       From: Mrs          , EES
Room B304                                    SSI, NW Region

Room B508

Room B1604A
ABH                                    Date: 13 June 1989


HTTTfimRODCTI DISASTER
1.   Further to Mrs        |s minute to Miss Hey last week, she has asked me
     to forward the attached to you.




Personal Secretary
■i   *




                                                 Ref: GSS 9/1

         Miss C Hey                              From: Mrs
         DCI                                           SSI, NW Region
         Room B413
         ABH
                                                  Date: 6 June 1989


         TmTRBOBOCJGH DISASTER
         1.    We have ceased sending bulletins down to London concerning the activity
               in the North West relating to the above, although the local authorities
               still meet on a weekly basis to review progress.
         2.    I have not copied this note to anyone else in the Department as I am not
               sure who still retains an interest.
         3.    The last meeting I attended of the co-ordinating group was on 26 May
               1989. I am attaching a copy of the notes I made after the meeting which
               reflect the sense of concern and anxiety that the aspirations of the
               Mersey authorities may not be realised.       Whilst this anxiety was
               expressed there continued to be a very strong commitment that a number
               of local authorities would do all in their power to ensure the delivery
               of a quality service to families and victims affected by Hillsborough.
         4.    I am-also copying to you a report which was prepared by a group of
              .officers to review the current services being provided post-
               Hillsborough. This is an honest appraisal of the current co-ordination.
               It was discussed at the meeting I attended on 26 May and highlighted the
               problems of maintaining a co-ordinated response across local authorities
               in the absence of separate and additional staff to provide the co­
               ordination on a full time basis. The issues raised were also those
               which                  the consultant, had indicated would be present in
               any post-crisis situation.
         5.    I believe                  pas spoken to you about an approach I had on
               5 June 1989 from David Mason, Director of Social Services for Liverpool,
               following the meeting of local authority representatives on Friday 2
               June 1989.    Basically, members of this meeting had confirmed the
               problems of running a service new, the demand was falling off for help
               and initial goodwill was running out in scone quarters. There was a
               strong feeling that it was important to replace the rather creaking
               service now with a substantive long term service. The feeling of the
               group however, was that an inspection of the current services was much
               needed in order to identify problems in a more rigorous manner and to
               help to define a 'quality service'. Mr Mason's request was for a joint
               SSI/CRUSE working party inspection.
6.   The Merseyside representatives had identified the need to split the
     inspection into three parts
     a)     an evaluation of the helpline and outreach work;
     b)     an evaluation of the computer (database); and
     c)     an evaluation of the public relations approach adopted by the
            Merseyside authorities.
7.   Help from SSI was requested in relation to an evaluation of the
     counselling services (helpline and outreach work).
8.   David Mason had already made contact with Mr             at CRUSE and I
     understand he is a member of the Disasters Working Party (EWP). David
     Mason hag also spoken to the chair of the EWP, and there seems to be an
     interest in evaluating the activities on Mersey as the information would
     be of value to the EWP.
9.   I believe Mr           has indicated the response from this region and
     the possible difficulties for SSI to be involved in the evaluation of a
     piece of work which is currently seeking Government funding. I haven't
     really thought this one through but, in any case, we would have
     difficulties, I think, in this region providing a member of an
     inspection team at short notice. It may be that SSI as a body may
     welcome however, the opportunity to form part of an inspection team
     which can obtain first hand experience of post-disaster activity.
10. I hope _the above information and the background papers win assist you
     in any further deliberations as it may well be that the next contact
    ~from the Merseyside Directors may come in relation to a request from
     them to CRUSE or the DWP to take part in an evaluation of their current
     services for Hillsborough victims.




inspector
                                         Ref: GSS 9/1

Note for file                            Date: 5 June 1989
POST Hm/ranBansff nrsasroR
IOCAL aDTBSKITY OO-CSRDINA'CING MEETING - 26 MAY 1989
1.   I attended the meeting of the above to find some degree of lew spirits
     amongst Directors, which whilst they recognised was understandable and
     had been predicted by                     they still fauna, difficult.
     There was also an acknowledgement that same SSDs were drawing back and
     politicians were unlikely to give the same degree of support they had
     done same weeks earlier.       Basically, there was a feeling that
     Hillsborough was yesterday's news.
2.   In particular, St Helens were drawing attention to this very issue and
     the representative from St Helens was indicating that he was having
     problems in justifying his continued attendance at the meetings.
3.   Directors, Mr Mason and Miss Farrell accepted this, although it was
     clear that their commitment was still more than from other local
     authorities. Lancashire to some extent identified with this issue but
     seemed still to be striving to ensure political support.
4.   Reference was made to the meeting with                    to review the
     progress to date. It was acknowledged that there needed to be a quality
     assurance model to look at each aspect of the continuing service. The
     group which had. met -to discuss quality assurance, still felt that the
     agreed suggestion for a long term unit was appropriate. There was also
     a feeling that any plan for the future must- ensure a local response.
     There had been problems identified in the use of the data base losing the
      •Zeebrugee’ package.     It was new felt that this package was
     inappropriate. It was agreed there was a need for a group of officers
     to address the current issues. Scene of the procedures were creaking and
     falling apart. In relation to the computer package, it was acknowledged
     that some LAs were losing other computer packages and there was no
     guarantee whatsoever that information was being fed from any local
     databases onto the main package in Liverpool. Mr Will Twist from
     Lancashire indicated it might be possible to get scans help in relation
     to compatibility of programmes. Great concern was expressed an hew to
     guarantee a quality service in future given the withdrawal of certain
     aspects of the service. Commitments and promises had been given to the
     general public that ongoing help would be available.
     It was also acknowledged that other local authorities outside Merseyside
     were not passing on information to the central information base and
     David Mason was going to take this up again with Bob Lewis to raise it
     through ADSS.
5.   There was some discussion about the possibility of another meeting with
     politicians, the timing of this was felt to be important.
6.   Reference was made to a BBC documentary on Hillsborough in which the IAs
     may play a part. Officers of the IAs are still of the opinion that the
     involvement of the IAs in their counselling support role received very
     little recognition.
7.   Problem of central funding was still a big issue and members present
     were really quite distressed and irritated that there had been no
     response frcra London. They queried whether letters had actually got
     through to ministers and the IM. The question was raised as to whether
     the organisation currently could be sustained until funding appeared, if
     at all. Given that there might be no possibility of funding for the
     planned unit, what aspects of the current system could be maintained.
8.   A suggestion was made that members might go back to their politicians
     and remind them that they had supported the original strategy and staff
     had ensured the services were running but at what cost to staff and what
     was the next step.
9.   There was a strong feeling that there was a need for a central co­
     ordinator and it was recognised that already there was slippage within
      staffing and systems. This was regarded as high priority.
10. Reference was made to the fact the IAs had already put in a great amount
    of money, half a million (£) expenditure in Liverpool. Is political
    will still there?
11. It was finally agreed there should be some short term contingency plan
    for at least 3 months and that IAs need to discuss internally an action
    plan for service in the next 3 -months. Reference was made as to whether
    in fact this should or should not be shared with politicians.
12. There was to be a meeting with NWASSA on—16 June 1989 which might be a
    possible arena to share Directors's dilemmas.
13. It was decided that Directors would meet again and their representatives
    at 2.00pm on the following Friday (2.6.89) having had discussions back
    in local authorities to identify weaknesses and to cane up with views
    about hew to proceed. It was agreed that at this stage no politicians
    would be involved.
14. Burton Manor had been offered for use of staff on 16,17 and 18 August.
    It was agreed this should be made available for staff who had been
    manning the help lines and providing a direct service to clients. It
    was agreed that Derek Evans-should negotiate sane plan for the use of
    Burton Manor on those days.
15. Derek Evans frcm Wirral referred to the psychotherapy and family therapy
    which was taking place with some families in relation to_ the
    Hillsborough tragedy and wandered whether in fact there was any video
    material frcm the BBC available to help in training purposes and as part
    of the therapeutic work with families. There was sane doubts expressed
    about the wisdean of this although it was agreed that an approach should
    be made to the BBC to find out what could be made available, if
    anything.
 Comment
      A rather dispirited meeting althouffi. staff recognised the "phase of
      lull" which                   had identified. There were strong views
      expressed about the failure of the government to respond and the feeling
      that local politicians may in fact use this to further disassociate
      themselves from central government. It could in fact became politically
      difficult. I tried to indicate the problems in relation to funding,
      setting precedents etc. There was a lot of aggression about money which
      had gone from central government direct to the disaster fund and the
      money which was going to the CRUSE working party. I was informed that
      Mr Utting had phoned David Mason and that he had agreed to came and
      visit Miersey region to talk with staff about the developments. He had
      also indicated that there was no way this should be associated with a
      promise of money from central government.




^ Inspector
                    CQPR D l N A T IO N - _ A f TE R . H I L L S B O R O U G H
                  Dangers and Problems for Service Provision



                   *
A short discussion*paper focussing on issues of re$1cna1 coordination Amongst
the lead authorities and voluntary sector.




             [Cheshi re Social Services)
             1 (Merseyside Probation)
              (Catholic Social Services)
               (Manchester University) (Chairperson)
          (Sefton Social Services)
               (Knowsley Social Services)




                                           May 1989
i    ’ g9   11:03       FROM   S.S.I.   NW R E G I O N                   PAGE. 00B




                                                    2

IN T RP P .U fiI.IQ N
                                                                                     en
      The Hillsborough disaster and its aftermath continues to have a profound       ent
ind traumatic effect on many people. The immediate response of all agencies
vas admirable. It cut through many of the traditional methods of working both
within and between agencies and enabled a sensitive 'crisis service’ to be
delivered remarkably well.                                                           ■fter
                                                                                     he
          It was recognized in the After Hillsborough Report that this emergency     the
    esponse could not and would not be sustained. Statutory agencies 1n
    articular *re-normal lie* and other pressures and priorities roll back Into
    tlace. Thus it was recommended that a regional coordinating structure which          PR -
    ncluded some ’independent’ staff and funding would be required to assure
     larity of purpose and sustain a high quality service over the next couple of
    ears.
         This short paper notes that warning signs are now appearing which               is
    uggest that the continued lack of a Regional Unit will Inevitably lead to a
    ess effective overall service for Hillsborough victims. It 1s also felt          id to
    mportant that we ^11 look beyond Hillsborough and recocniie that given            task
    urther disasters will occur the Hillsborough response needs to be monitored
    nd evaluated and the lessons learnt in the N.W. disseminated nationally.


    MERGING PROBLEMS
                                                                                     tance
          The Staff, particularly 1n Liverpool, who have been organizing central     rts ‘in
    ervices such as the Helpline and the Database have worked remarkably hard in
    xtremely difficult circumstances. What is becoming clear however is that
    effort' will not necessarily translate Into effective service if the
    rir.clples, framework and tools are ill thought out or inappropriate. Some
    xtmples of the problems which are emerging 1 n the absence of a coordinating
    tructure are:
                                                                                     would
    I) Bfltaba&fl
          Although beginning to produce some useful output from over a thousand
    ntrles, the programme (used in the Zeebrugge follow up) is not ideal and will
    ot _be able to provide the appropriate information service. Tt has not been
    ossible to implement the recommendations made 1n the After Hillsborough
    3 port and in the absence of a coordinated corporate approach it 1s clear that
                                                                                     yaftcn
    any hundred of referrals and cases are not being forwarded to the Database,      i   0T
    oreover many voluntary agencies are not referring to the Database st all.
    eferrals which are being received often do not contain vital Information,        :*;lv«s
    11 this dysfunctioning is perfectly predictable and Is not the fault of
                                                                                      about
    ndivldual staff. It is the product of the non-implementation of a corporate
    tratefly.
    II) ttoiflllflfi
         This line was a great success during the initial crisis pi-s-se following
    illsborough. However its use is dropping off rapidly. Its ro’<» nesds
                                        4


caagkmaas
      The Immediate responses to Hillsborough were jr&gnificsr.t and fcrought
great credit to communities and their leaders throughout the resort. The
crisis phase 1n which this all took place 1$ now over. In practice t h i s a'.cc
means that for the ’unaffected’ Hillsborough 1s Also oyer. iJnfortun&tely fcr
the thousands of ’victims' both known and still hidden thsrs are sisvera* ( W a ­
stages to endure. The evidence from agencies throughout the region and frost
the Database 1s clear - there are many hundreds of people seaklns help and
showing the predicted post-disaster symptoms. Out ef the K:l* 5 bcrc‘j$h
disaster came an opportunity for local authorities and agencies anc others
across the region to work together on behalf of and with the co.-v-unUy.
Whilst much goodwill remains the delay 1n crucial decision (taking sbc-ui, &
regionally coordinated approach 1 s Increasingly likely to seriously undermine
the quality of service for the victims of Hillsborough. The warning signs are
already appearing.

                   *




                                                             **   TOTAL   P AGE . 0 1 0   .**
                                                R
                                                efe
                                                  ren
                                                    ce                                          '




                                                        •» * r L Z            jl            '
                                                                                      •|V^ <f

          To            ^           ( W                         /^-


          I k           fc r i) * * i&




                                                                      H-.       JJJL J*-


ffa--- »
                    „       . 3         -               - r     ^             u       r



                                                e       y   ^         *       a^         <yJ'

    “ *     e           ^       fk ^        U                   < p       1u^      t "      j


t>0L            ^           ■       a jx r ^ u

 ^
ir        (^/Jl-(M
                 l~l         s£        ***y                      ^        x        oyv-M

*         ^                     '                                    * ■

6 ^
 It i ^ s                         dbuM              ^           fyr-y^A^M                   q
(j   &trV i   ^tAMdU/^Cj   Sev^-e.

uicu^    -y ef'   /{>
•            FAX TRANSMISSION

    To; Miss                                 4              , Del
Room;            &         '3 , A f H

    Ext;
             H   v_a a a - vJ h£_   Vo       \ S £>          — e3.       p c<-<:^ C o

             PiX jl ,\^SVe -             3    p
             P) <$ C U S s 1Q gv-- ^                  —<•         p < ^ 0 ^ 2^

From;
     Social Services Inspectorate,
     North Woo+—-                                                      7/6
    W a rw                                            ^      M              L    -




    Warwi                                    ./   X          (^
                                                                                        Pages
                                                                                         rirn
                          J-                 u '                 '                       lo
     o l d       T                                                                      ;o U o »
                 .                                                                      O)
     M   a n c h e s te r


          Tel;061 872 6724
          Fax ;061 872 3747
                                                                              PAGE. 0 0 2


•.
G   JUN    ’ 89   11:01   FROM   S.S.I.   NW R E G I O N


     -



                                                      Ref: GSS 9/1

     Miss C Hey                                       From: Mrs
     DCI                                                    SSI, NW Region
     Roam B413
     AFH
                                                       Date: 6 June 1989



      HTTT«H»HnH3I BESftSTER
      1.      We have ceased sending bulletins down to London concerning the activity
              in the North West relating to the above, although the local authorities
              still meet on a weekly basis to review progress.
      2.      I have not copied this note to anyone else in the Department as I am not
              sure who still retains an interest.
      3.      The last meeting I attended of the co-ordinating group was on 26 May
              1989. I am attaching a copy of the notes I made after the meeting which
              reflect the sense of concern and anxiety that the aspirations of the
              Mersey authorities may not be realised.        Whilst this anxiety was
              expressed there continued to be a very strong commitment that a number
              of local authorities would do all in their pcwer to ensure the delivery
              of a quality service to families and victims affected by Hillsborough.
      4.      I am also copying to you a report whic& was prepared by a group of
              officers to review the current services being provided post-
              Hillsborough. This is an honest appraisal of the current co-ordination.
              It was discussed at the meeting I attended on 26 May and highlighted the
              problems of maintaining a co-ordinated response across local authorities
              in the absence of separate and additional staff to provide the co­
              ordination on a full time basis. The issues raised were also those
              which Michael Stewart, the consultant, had indicated would be present in
              any post-crisis situation.
      5.      I believe                 has spoken to you about an approach I had on
              5 June 1989 frcm David Mason, Director of Social Services for Liverpool,
              following the meeting of local authority representatives on Friday 2
              June 1989.    Basically, members of this meeting had confirmed the
              problems of running a service now, the demand was felling off for help
              and initial goodwill was running out in some quarters. There was a
              strong feeling that it was important to replace the rather creaking
              service now with a substantive long term service. Ihe feeling of the
              group hcwever, was that an infection of the current services was much
              needed in order to identify problems in a more rigorous manner and to
              help to define a 'quality service’. Mr Mason's request was for a joint
              SSI/CRUSE working party inspection.
G   JUN    ’ 89   11:01   F ROM   S .S.I.   NW R E G I O N                    PAGE. 0 0 3




     6.      Ohe Merseyside representatives bad identified the need to split the
             inspection into three parts
             a)    an evaluation of the helpline and outreach work;
             b)    an evaluation of the computer (database); and
             c)     an evaluation of the public relations approach adopted by the
                    Merseyside authorities.
     7.      Help frcan SSI was requested in relation to an evaluation of the
             counselling services (helpline and outreach work).
     8.      David Mason had already made contact with Mr             |at CHOSE and I
             understand he is a mentoer of the Disasters Working Party (DWP). David
             Mascn has also spoken to the chair of the CWP, and there seems to be an
             interest in evaluating the activities on Ifersey as the information would
             be of value to the DWP.
     9.      I believe Mr               indicated the response frcsn this region and
             the possible difficulties for SSI to be involved in the evaluation of a
             piece of work which is currently seeking Government funding. I haven't
             really thought this one through but, in any case, we would have
             difficulties, I think, in this region providing a member of an
             inspection team at short notice. It may be that SSI as a body may
             welccsae however, the opportunity to form part of an inspection team
             which can obtain first hand experience of post-disaster activity.
     10.     I hope the above information and the background papers will assist you
             in any further deliberations as it may well be that the next contact
             from the Merseyside Directors may come in relation to a request from
             them to CRCJSE or the DWP to take part in an evaluation of their current
             services for Hillsborough victims.




     Inspector
                                         Kef:   GSS 9/1

Note for file                            Date: 5 June 1989
post   HUIgnnatTKH nrsagreR
iockl jgnaacnY co-cggnnmMS meeting -     26   «sz 1989
1.     I attended the meeting of the above to find same degree of low spirits
       amongst Directors, which whilst they recognised was understandable and
       had been predicted by                     I they still found difficult.
       'Ihere was also an acknowledgement that some SSDs were drawing back and
       politicians were unlikely to give the same degree of support they had
       done same weeks earlier.        Basically, there was a feeling that
       Hillsborough was yesterday’s news.
2.     In particular, St Helens were drawing attention to this very issue and
       the representative frcm St Helens was indicating that he was having
       problems in justifying his continued attendance at the meetings.
3.     Directors, Mr Mason and Miss Farrell accepted this, although it was
       clear that their cxamitment was still more than from other local
       authorities. Lancashire to some extent identified with this issue but
       seemed still to be striving to ensure political support.
4.     Reference was made to the meeting with Howard Parker to review the
       progress to date. It was acknowledged that there needed to be a quality
       assurance model to look at each aspect of the continuing service. The
       group which had met to discuss quality assurance, still felt that the
       agreed suggestion for a long tern unit was appropriate. Ihere was also
       a feeling that any plan for the future mast ensure a local response.
       Ihere had been problems identified in the use of the data base using the
       ’Zeebrugee’ package.      It was now felt that this package was
       inappropriate. Xt was agreed there was a need for a group of officers
       to address the current issues. Seme of the procedures were creaking and
       falling apart. In relation to the ocajpiter package, it was acknowledged
       that sane IAs were using other computer packages and there was no
       guarantee whatsoever that information was. being fed from any local
       databases onto the main package in Liverpool. Mr Will Twist from
       tancashire indicated it might be possible to get some help In relation
       to compatibility of programmes. Great concern was expressed on how to
       guarantee a quality service in future given the withdrawal of certain
       aspects of the service. Commitments and promises had been given to the
       general public that ongoing help would be available.
       It was also acknowledged that other local authorities outside Merseyside
            not passing chi information to the central information base and
       w er e
       David Mason was going to take this up again with Bob Dswis to raise it
       through ADSS,
5.     Ihere was seme discussion about the possibility of another meeting with
       politicians, the timing of this was felt to be important.
b   j   UNi   '83   11:02   F ROM   S. S. I .   NUI   REGION                     PAGE.005




         6.     Reference was made to a BBC documentary on HHlsborough in which the IAs
                may play a part. Officers of the IAs axe still of the opinion that the
                involvement of the IAs in their counselling support role received very
                little recognition.
         7.     Problem of central funding was still a big issue and members present
                were really quite distressed and irritated that there had been no
                response fern Lsndon. They queried whether letters had actually got
                through to ministers and the Htf. The question was raised as to whether
                the organisation currently could be sustained until funding ,appeared, if
                at all. Given that there might be no possibility of funding for the
                planned unit, what aspects of the current system could be maintained.
         a.    A suggestion was made that members might go back to their politicians
               and remind them that they had supported the original strategy and staff
               had ensured the services were running but at what cost to staff and what
               was the next step.
         9.    There was a strong feeling that there was a need for a central co­
               ordinator and it was recognised that already there was slippage within
               staffing and systems. This was regarded as high priority.
         10. Reference was made to the fact the IAs had already put in a great amount
             of money, half a million (£) expenditure in Liverpool. Is political
             will still there?
         11. it was finally agreed there should be seme short term contingency plan
             for at least 3 months and that IAs need to discuss internally an action
             plan for service in the next 3 months. Reference was made as to whether
             in fact this should or should not be shared with politicians.
        12. There was to be a meeting with NWASSA on 16 June 1989 which might be a
            possible arena to share Directors's dilercsnas.
         13. It was decided that Directors would meet again and their representatives
             at 2.00pm cm the following Friday (2.6.89) having had discussions back
             in local authorities to .identify weaknesses and to ccms up with views
             about how to proceed. It was agreed that at this stage no politicians
             would be involved.
         14. Burton Manor had bean offered for use of staff on 16,17 and 18 August.
             It was agreed this should be made available for staff who had been
             manning the help lines and providing a direct service to clients. It
             was agreed that Derek Evans should negotiate sane plan for the use of
             Burton Manor on those days.
         15. Derek Evans from Wirral referred to the psychotherapy and family therapy
             which was taking place with seme families in relation to the
             Hillsborough tragedy and wondered whether in fact there was any video
             material frcm the BBC available to help in training purposes ani as part
             of the therapeutic work with families. There was seme doubts expressed
             about the wisdoa of this although it was agreed that an approach should
             be made to the BBC to find out what could be made available, if
             anything.
6   JUN   ’ B9   i l : 03   F ROM   S .S.I .   NW R E G I O N               PAGE.0 0 6




     Comment
            A rather disoij
                      rijgrn-Hfr-ad meeting althou^i staff recognised the "phase of
            lull” which                    had identified. There 'were strong views
            expressed about the failure of the government to respond and the feeling
            that 1^*w1 politicians may in fact use this to further disassociate
            themselves frcra central government. It could in fact become politically
            difficult. I tried to indicate the problems in relation to funding,
            setting precedents etc. There was a lot of aggression about money which,
            had gone fran central government direct to the disaster fund and the
            money which was going to the CHOSE worKing party. I was infanned that
            Mr Utting had phoned David Mason and that he had agreed to ocroe and
            visit Marsey region to talk with staff about the developments. He had
            also indicated that there was no way this should be associated with a
            promise of money from central government.




      inspector
    D   jjh     • os   .I'-Zj   r KUI’ I    3   .   3   .   j   ..   n i x     .lUS-i                      r ’ HlaL   . Id Id <
    m

#       '       •                                                                                      w & ib ix           C




                                           COORDINATION AFTER                           HILLSBOROUGH
                                   Dangers                  and Problems for Service Provision




                                    t
              A short discussion»pa per focussing on issues of rational coordination amongst
              the lead authorities and voluntary sector,




                              (Cheshire Social Services)
                                 (Merseyside Probation)
                                 Catholic Social Services)
                                 (Manchester University) (chairperson)
                         T S e f t on Social Services)
                                 (Knowsley S o d a ! Services)




                                                                             May 1989
I N TRPP.USTIQN

           The Hillsborough disaster and its aftermath continues to have a profound
and traumatic effect on many people. The Immediate response of all agencies
was admirable. It.cut through many of the traditional methods of working both
w i t h i n and between agencies and enabled a sensitive ’crisis s e r v i c e ’ to be
delivered remarkably well.
         It was recognized in the After Hillsborough Report; that this emergency
response c ould not and would not be sustained. Statutory agencies in
particular * r e - n o r m a l i z e > and other pressures and priorities roll back Into
place. Thus it was recommended that a regional coordinating structure which
included some 'independent’ s t a f f and f u nding would be required to assure
c l a rity of purpose and sustain a high q u a l i t y service over the next couple of
years.

      This short paper notes that warning signs are now appearing which
suggest that the continued lack of a Regional Unit will inevitably lead to a
less effective overall service for Hillsborough victims. It is also felt
Important that we ^11 look beyond Hillsborough and recocniie that given
further disasters will occur the H i llsborough response needs to be monitored
and evaluated and the lessons learnt in the N.W. disseminated nationally.


EMSftSINQ PROBLEMS
            The staff, particularly in Liverpool, who have been organizing central
services such as the Helpline and the Database have worked remarkably hard in
extremely difficult circumstances. What is becoming clear however is that
’effort' will not necessarily translate into effective service if the
principles, framework and tools are ill thought out or inappropriate. Some
e x a m p l e s of the problems which are emerging in the absence of a coordinating
structure are:

(I) e&tafeaas
      Al t hough beginning to produce some useful output from ovsr a thousand
entries, the programme (used in the Zeebrugge follow up) is not ideal and will
not be able to provide the appropriate Information service, it nas not b&fcn
possible to implement the recommendations made in the After Hillsborough
Report and in the absence of a c oordinated corporate approach it Is clear that
many hundred of referrals and cases are not being forwarded to tr.e Database.
Moreover m a n y voluntary agencies are not referring to the Database at all.
Referrals which are being received often do not contain vital information.
All this dysfunctionin g is perfectly predictable and is not the fault of
individual staff. It is the product of the non-impleir.entaticn of a corporate
strategy,

 (II) HftMiflfl
      This line was a great success during the initial crisis phs-re following
Hillsborough. However its Use is dropp i n g off rapidly, Its role nestfs
        o         ow   . . . . . t-i^i   r xw       o.o.   ; »   "t*    is e. j .l ' » n\                                     “ HLtil . UkS t:



    •
T




              •
/"“"N




            rethinking and then relaunching with a new central number, Again it is
            unlikely that this can occur in the absence of a Regional Unit.

            (111) Communication and PR

                        There are numerous examples of poor communication particularly between
            statutory and voluntary services, ’C o m p e t i t i o n ’ between agencies is apparent
            a nd evidence that some families are b eing over visited ^ecauss of
            u n c o o r d i n a t e d responses between agencies 1s now emerging.

                        In relation to PR the present reactive response, warned against In After
            H i l l s b o r o u o h . means that media interest in Hillsborough has     T h u s ths
            Impression begin gained is that the problem 1s over. This is net, true as the
            e v i d e n c e produced by the Database and local agencies demonstrates.
            Unfort u n a t e l y images and impressions influence resourcing and a self
            fulfilling prophecy emerges - no Regional Unit - no proactive approach tc               -
              no media interest - no lasting problem - no need for a Regional Unit.
                                                y                      ********
                                            V


                       The problem as we see it is that six weeks after Hi 1 Isbo-ougr. titers is
            still no clarity of purpose about the 'second p h a s e ’ m - p o n s e and no real
            structure to ensure quality and equity of service. This 5 'tuition is bound tc
            co n t i n u e without regional coordination and Sufficient staff whose primary task
            is to manage and -activate the overall response.


            THE WAY FORWARD

                  The need for regional coordination and support via a Regional Assistance
            Unit remains. Indeed on the evidence of the past month the r ^ c c ^ t e ^ r - i o n s in
            the After H i l l s b o r o u g h Report seem even more pertinent.

                       W e recommend the setting                   up     of .the R e g i o n s U & s . i s t a £ & 8 _ i h
                       without further d e l a y .
                  Even 1n the absence of such a Unit, at this ti.re, there       f'v&ny
            immediate Improvements which could be made by the leac' suthc-: Ui-.* wlvioh 'would
            pave the way for the Unit,

                    In particular we recommend that a. s m a l l n u m b er of ?an.for, staff, wt&s.e.
            primary task is to coordinate g e rvicea_JUld^-ftYfli&^u/&&r. daifiriai
            s econded or employed without d e l a y . This core group cou’c re p ort to the 1«ao
            authorities’ coordinating committee.
            Immediate tasks for this core t e a m could Include rethiik'r.a the natur-a,
            functions and capacities of the Helpline and D&tabass, improving corsr.v.-n*cation
            and PR and setting up quality assurance systems based on clear s t a t i s t s of
            philosophy, alms and objectives. In the absence of a Regioral approach
            f u rther tasks would include setting up monitoring systerr.s ;<.■                        ob^ec^lvss
            are being met and introducing e v a l u a t i o n and ’f e e d b a c k ’ from ‘c s n s w r a r s ’ about
            the utility and effectiveness of the service.
                                                                              ■ ,-1. ^ i- .




                                           4

CSMCL.W,SICKS

       The Immediate responses to Hillsborough were rrsgnificsr.v and brought
great credit to communities and their leaders throughout the region. Th&
crisis phase in which this all took place is now over. In practice this a',sc
means that for the ’u n a f f e c t e d 1 Hillsborough 1s also over, Unfortunately fer­
tile thousands of 'victims’ both known and still hidden thsrs are ssvera* more'-
stages to endure. The evidence from agencies throughout the region and from
the Database is clear *- there are many hundreds of people sealing help and
showing the predicted p o s t-disaster symptoms. Out cf ins ri:1 ‘six-roush
disaster came an opportunity f o r local authorities and a g e n d a s 4 nc others
across the region to work together on behalf of and with the c o ' ^ u n H y .
W hilst much goodwill remains the delay 1n crucial decision                &b:>uv &
regionally coordinated approach is Increasingly likely to seriously undermine
the quality of service for the victims of Hillsborough. The warning signs are
already appearing,

                     *
         DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY


                         DE:p=-i=iR-rME:M"r          of         health

                          f=*re i v o t e   of   ^ f^   i c e   :   c a s e     :

   POH       1/        1& 5 S /    1                    Due Date For Reply c ! 3 / 0 5 / S 9


   Minister Replying                             I Correspondent
   KENNETH CLARKE                                1 MISC C
                                                 I
                                                 I Constituency                                                                           Pari
                                                 I
                                                 I
                                                 I Date Of Letter
                                                 I 06/05/89

                                                 1
   Keyword                                       1 Const it uent/Subject
   TEMP                                          1                 ETC


   Notes:
   ******** BY HAND AT ALL STAGES ********


   Referred To         IDate I

   MRTIN HARRISON     I
   CS1     C /\] i12/ I
   BISO^AF             105/   I
             kfl   X   ,89/   1

   FINAL MINUTE MUST BE COMPLETED BEFORE RETURN TO PRIVATE OFFICE




                                                                                             To be noted after

                                                                                            settlement by: —




EF 53A                                                                  (01618) Prim ed in 1h« UK tor HM SO 5 /8 8 Dd. 8106317 C 200 (151211
JP0050O/2


               * * * * ALWAYS RETAIN AS TOP MIHOTE OH LEFT TAG * * * *

                                         FINAL MINUTE



1.   A TYPED LETTER ON-gHfr-AFPROPRIATE MINISTERIAL HEADED HOTCPAPER IS
ATTACHED OPPOSITE WHICH HAS BEEN CLEARED BY (PO GUIDE PARA 3.33 AND 3.43B):


Name                             Grade        .77?.
           S   H                                         Ext




2.     ENCLOSURES ARE CONTAINED IN PS2 AND ARE:

       A

       C

                                                               Enclosures sent
                                                               (initial and date):

3.     SEND COPIES OF THE FINAL REPLY TO (GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS ONLY):

       A

       C

                                                               Copies sent
                                                               (initial and date):

4.     IN CASE OF ANY QUERY ON THE REPLY CONTACT:

       Name                        . Ext m    i   Room             Building ..



5.     THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL POINTS SHOULD BE NOTED:




                                                               Special points actioned
                                                               (initial and date):

6.     AFTER DESPATCH OF THE FINAL RgPLY RETURN THIS FILE TO:

       Name                               Div/Branch
                                                                  j c_

       R o o m ........ W.Siirc.'V......... Building ...            ....


                                 vv (                 (SAM1
JP0050O


                               PRIVATE OFFICE CASE
                        PLEASE READ THESE KOTES CAREFULLY



IS THIS FILE FOR YOU?


1.   Check that this file is for you. If it isn't, redirect it immediately
and inform by telephone, the officer in the Correspondence Section responsible
for this case who is:-


                  Ext 5192, Room 226 Richmond House (01-210 3000 or GTN 210)

Do other branches need to contribute?

2.   If contributions from other branches will be required this action should
be set in train without delay, using part papers. These should be enclosed in
a folder boldly marked as containing Ministerial correspondence and bearing a
clear indication of the date by which it should be returned to the originating
branch. The lead branch has responsibility for the co-ordination and drafting
style of the whole reply.


Is a Local Report Necessary?

3.   Where a constituent's experience is only quoted in an MP's letter as an
illustration of the effect of policies as opposed to where the complaint
concerns the treatment which the constituent has received from the Department
it may be necessary to seek a local report.


Interim Replies

4.   Where it is not possible to provide draft replies within the time
specified branches should explain to Correspondence Section that an extension
is needed. The draft interim reply should include an explanation of the
reason for a delay to the full reply.


Checking Typing and Legibility

5.   Branches should thoroughly check typed replies before they are sent to
the Private Office Correspondence Section or ensure that manuscript drafts are
legible. This is most important if unnecessary delay to correspondence is to
be avoided. Wherever possible, branches should prepare replies typed on the
appropriate Ministerial notepaper.


Final Minute

6.** PLEASE ALWAYS COMPLETE THE FINAL MINUTE OVERLEAF BEFORE RETURNING THE
FILE TO CORRESPONDENCE SECTION. **
b   /   H         |
                  ____________
                     h l -<-




            J (> b o - iA ~




                   ^?3i
               FB                                From                        CS1C

           SSI                                  Date:        18 May 1989

                                                 Copies:     Mr
                                                             Mr
                                                             Mr
                                                             Dr



Hillsborough Tragedy
Secretary of State1s Correspondence

1. I have spoken to you about the attached letter from Liverpool Council
Annex A, and my failure to 'persuade' Dept of Environment that their Minister
should more appropriately reply. At this stage DOE Private Office do not
regard this correspondence (which was only copied to them) as a formal
application for additional resources. They are viewing it as a "social
services matter". They have however provided a draft contribution towards the
reply Annex B .

2. I have put together a draft reply at Annex C and would welcome your urgent
comments.

Do you agree that at this stage it would not be appropriate to comment on the
plans the LAs have to provide continuing care or on any other aspects of
Profess^j.or Parkers report?
                                                        *4
Presumably if and^yhen DOE receive a request under the Bellwin Scheme they
will need to seek^advice on the follow-up programmes proposed by the SSDs?

Comments by close on Monday 22nd,please.




                                                        B1604A
                                                        Ext 6431




JAR/1242A+/1
                                                             Annex, C


P0H1/1659/153

Draft reply for S of S to send to Keva Coombes. Leader of Liverpool Council

Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial support for
direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you propose to establish to
provide and co-ordinate continuing care in the aftermath of the Hillsborough
tragedy.

The Department's Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed of tIjg
action taken by the local social services departments together in the wa^Te of
the tragedy and I know that the Chief Inspector has written personally to all
the Social Services Dirjfetors to congratulate them and their staff on their
most impressive response. By this letter I would like to express my own
appreciation for the magnificent response by all the Social Services
departments involved.

I am afraid however that on masters of funding my Department has no power to
make additional resources available. I understand from Nicholas Ridley,
Secretary of State for Environment, that under a model scheme designed to deal
with extra-ordinary costs arising from emergencies (The Bellwin S c h e m e & i e
Government can provide special financial assistance to local authorities in
certain circumstances.

The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local Authority
Associations and provides for assistance towards the immediate and additional
costs of dealing with an emergency once expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond
which local authorities would normally be expected to budget for. The scheme
has been used twice to date; following the emergencies created by the severe
weather during the winter of 1986/87 and the storm of 1987.

If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind, I understand
from Nicholas Ridley that he is prepared to consider a detailed and fully
costed application. I know that he will keep me informed of events.




JAR/1242A+/2
         1        pB                             From:                        C S IC
            SSI
         ^SSI                                    Date:        18 May 1989

                                                 Copies:     Mr
                                                             Mr
                                                             Mr
                                                             Dr
                                                                                       'J

Hillsborough Tragedy
Secretary of State's Correspondence

1. I have spoken to you about the attached letter from Liverpool Council
Annex A, and my failure to 'persuade' Dept of Environment that their Minister
should more appropriately reply. At this stage DOE Private Office do not
regard this correspondence (which was only copied to them) as a formal
application for additional resources. They are viewing it as a "social
services matter". They have however provided a draft contribution towards the
reply Annex B .

2. I have put together a draft reply at Annex C and would welcome your urgent
comments.

Do you agree that at this stage it would not be appropriate to comment on the
plans the LAs have to provide continuing care or on any other aspects of
Profess^or Parker's report.*
                                                                        <•(
Presumably if and when DOE receive a request under the Bellwin Scheme they
will need to seel^advice on the follow-up programmes proposed by the SSDs?

Comments by close on Monday 22nd.please.




                                                         B1604A
                                                         Ext 6431




/UAsS'




        c          .      .^   7




JAR/1242A+/1
Mr                                         From:        Carolyn Hey
                                                         DCI

                                           Date:        22 May 1989

                                           Copies:      as in your minute
                                                         Mr
                                                         Mr             NW



HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - SECRETARY OF STATE'S CORRESPONDENCE


     In the absence of Mrs       I am co-ordinating the response for SSI to your
     minute and papers of 18th May.

     I have discussed your draft response to the Merseyside authorities with SSI
     col l e agues.

     Clearly, if this Department does not have any power to make additional
     resources available, we must refer them to the Department which does.

     However, we think it would be helpful if the money contributed by
     government to the National Disaster Fund could in future be targetted to
     the provision of the necessary additional services needed to relieve
     individual distress, which will subsequently be funded by local authorities
     and other agencies.

     SSI are convinced of the value of a central co-ordinating and monitoring
     role in a disaster affecting so many local authorities and that this is an
     appropriate use of resources.  The proposed work would complement that
     undertaken by the Disasters Working Party.

     It is important that the service provision and the lessons to be learned
     from co-ordination on such a scale are not lost.

     We are particularly concerned that resources provided in emergency
     circumstances are not at the cost of essential on going provision to often
     vulnerable clients.




                                                         CAROLYN HEY
                                                         DCI
                                                         B413 AFH
                                                         EXT 6606/6077
                                                                        Annex, C


    P0H1/1659/153           HeutlL

    Draft reply for S of Sj^to send to Keva Coombes, Leader of Liverpool Council

    Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial support for
    direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you propose to establish to
    provide and co-ordinate continuing care in the aftermath of the Hillsborough
    tragedy.

   The Department's Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed of tljg
   action taken by the local social services departments together in the wa^fe of
   the tragedy and I know that the Chief Inspector has written personally to all
   the Social Services Dilators to congratulate them and their staff on their
   most impressive response. By this letter I would like to express my own
   appreciation for the magnificent response by all the Social Services
   departments involved.

   I am afraid however that on matters of funding my Department has no power to
   make additional resources avaijjabl^. I understand from Nicholas Ridley,
   Secretary of State for Environment, that under a model scheme designed to deal
                                                                                                  ©
   with extra-ordinary costs arising from emergencies (the Bellwin S c h e m e & i e
   Government     provide^ special financial assistance to local authorities in
   certain circumstances.

   The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local Authority
   Associations and provides for assistance towards the immediate and additional
   costs of dealing with an emergency once expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond
   which local authorities would normally be expected to budget for. The"sehome
   V.-I. Vin,a«  t-wirn t-n          f nil nTTi'niy IIn ■munpfiii i.«n nwmhnfl hy the severe
                J-     ’ftTlTTVl"■ r 19nfi1rrf- nnrl Ihr ilriim rif l-TITTi ^         — ------

   If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind, <■ understand
        Nicholas Ridley fehat ho is prepared to consider a detailed and fully
   costed application. I know that he will keep me informed of events.

                             I*
                             tl/\j rue              --- ---          4\J fa,           ' L/
ft (rfcU Sfww A                      li^UU
         ^     « * - tk                                   "   , 0 F '“i f *
  (£ )’ fe     lot* I                     fa     ft, ft>sfa+\




                                                                                   f   4      m



       JXjl                 Jl U.&A      ^ c              0,1 Uj CK*.                             ^


                                                                    fvbSt'     c6s>
   JAR/1242A+/2
'    F ROM


    »■■ i.
             DOE   FLT


                                                BY FAX
                                                         5.17.193?           15:34

                                                                                                                     B
       tf
                           D epartm ent of the Environment
                           2 Marsham Street London SW1
                                                           Direct line 0 1 - 2 1 ^ 6    ^136
                          N5/H                           Switchboard 01-212 3 434




                                                                                 Your reference
                         Esq
              Department of Health                                               Our refers rice
              Alexander Fleming House
              London SE1                                                         Data


                                                                               / 7 May 1989




              HILLSBOROUGH


              We spoke earlier today about a possible compromise on the handling of the
              letter from Liverpool City Council, i,e, that your1 Secretary of State should
              reply to the letter explaining, inter alia:

                          - his position, including the fact that he has no power to offer grant
                            assistance

                          - that the only scheme in existence under which assistance could be
                            made was DOE's ’'Bellwin" scheme

                           that the Bellwin scheme was limited in its scope to emergency work to
                           relieve suffering in the immediate wake of a disaster

                           that DOE were prepared to consider applications for financial
                           assistance within the scope of the scheme.

              Attached as agreed is a draft of the sort of contribution we propose to make.
              This has not yet been cleared with Ministers,

              Copies of this letter go to John Roberts here, and Philip Ruttnan at Treasury.




              Finance, Local Authority Grants Division




              D0C840AU




                                                                                               01£763090   P A G E . 00
       17    MAY   ’ S3    15:3£
                                                                                                      P.   3
                                                                  5.17.1939    15:34
f r o m    d o e   f l t



      i
  #
            DRAFT CONTRIBUTION TO A REPLY FROM THE SECRETARY OP STATE FOR
            HRALTH TO KEVA COOMBES ESQ., LEADER OF LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL




            The basic position is that primary responsibility for dealing with emergencies
            rests with local authorities, who have powers to spend money for such purposes
            under s. 138 of the Local Government Act 1972.                    Local authorities are expected
            to include an amount in their budgets in respect of such contingencies.


            In exceptional circumstances the Government has made grants, but only where
            the burden on local taxpayers would otherwise have been excessive.                    The model
            scheme, known as the Bellwin scheme, was drawn up after discussions with the
            Local Authority Associations, and provides for assistance towards the
            immediate and additional costs of dealing with an emergency, once expenditure
            exceeds a threshold;which in the case of the 1987 storm, was (for counties and
            metropolitan districts) set               '0&   the exclusive product of a l.Op rate.


            If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind, perhaps you
            could let Nicholas Ridley have a detailed and costed application.




                                           D0C842AU




                                                                                          01E76303W    PAGE.0 ^ 3
      17    MAY        ’ 89   1 5 '• 3 £
                   *1
                353
                                                     w r i t t e n .Insners                          * M A Y 19X9                             Written Answers                            354


                p fo J S e i 1°              b°   about     £1()                  h.ghcr     lh.ni      the                 Natural Knvironment Research Council
                per annn                  u mC' W“ h addltlonal costs o fa h o u t t : n u l l u m                  M r. Bowis: T o ask the S ecretary o f State fo r the
                S thc^ trT VCr'SUChUSChemC1SUMhU'!'>-                                                            E nvironm ent if he will list the research projects
                                                                                        ....                     undertaken for his D ep artm en t by th e N a tu ral
                                                                                                                 Hnvir.onment Research C ouncil d u rin g the p ast five years.
                eom bin pdHC t a i ll 0 l ,t hC ° p t i 0 n o f a SCWa- c ‘ a i l m e n t * . . r k s
                                                                                                                    M rs. Virginia Bottomley: This is a m a tte r fo r m y right
                u n d e rs ta n d "! \      ^ ° Utlal1 a a ‘ ,U>1                              but 1
                to £ 3 f l S         1 eC api' al CO!it Woukl bc                         1 -" miHion             hon. Friend the Secretary o f State for E du catio n and
                    Nort^w11highCrthan th0Pr-P'>-'                                                               Science.
 i             rletailn .        . est w ater «lu th ority has been asked tn liraw up
 1                                                                                                                                        D om estic Property
 3             and n fh P m t0 b n n g thG b ath in ^’                                   S, A nne'!.
               S n H ^ erKn0n'COmp,ying bathin-l! *aicr<. up to l-C                                                 M r. William Ross: T o ask the S ecretary o f S tate for the
 .S             S essed T             '      ' " 5- Until thCSC Pla" s h a - ‘                   fulh           E nvironm ent w hat is his estim ate o f the m a rk e t value o f all
  I                                               eivc'*“■*or                                                   dom estic rated p ro p erty in E ngland a n d W ales, the
 •n                                                                                                             rateable value o f that p roperty a n d the sum s w hich will be
                                                                                                                raised by rates on th at p ro p erty in the c u rre n t year.
 ilf                                                                                                               M r. G um m er: T he latest in fo rm atio n fo r E n gland an d
 ;d                                                                                                             W ales is as follows:
 ng
 >5.                                                                                                                                                  £ billion
  to
                                                    M ark et value o f housing slock                                    31 December 1986              645-3
 ice
                                                    Rateable value o f domestic properly                                     1 April 1988               3-969
                                                    R ate incom e from domestic ratepayers in 1988-89                                                   7-812
 for
 the                                      B IS F H o u ses (N ottingham )                                            M rs. Virginia Bottomley: A s m y rig h t h o n . F rien d the
ind
                                                                                                                S ecretary o f State for the E n v iro n m en t said a t th e first
 age            Mr. Andy Stewart: T o a sk the S ecretary o f State for th e
                                                                                                                m eeting o f the M o n tre a l pro to co l parties in H elsinki last
 age         E nvironm ent w h a t p rog ress he has m ad e in his discussions
                                                                                                               w eek it is tim e to “sh arp en th e te eth ” o f the proto col.
n to         with building societies concerning the m ortgag eability o f
                                                                                                               D u rin g the review process w hich w as started there, and
EC;          BISF h o u ses in N o ttin g h a m ; an d if h e will m a k e a
                                                                                                               building o n th e im petus pro v id ed by the L o n d o n
•lace        statem ent.
                                                                                                               conference, we shall be pressin g fo r a significant
 and
                M r. Trippier: T h e A b b ey N a tio n a l an d H alifax                                      stren g th en in g o f th e p ro to co l. T h e E u ro p e a n C o m m u n ity
             building societies have confirm ed to officials th a t their                                      is calling fo r a red u ctio n o f p ro d u c tio n an d c o n su m p tio n
right        national lending policies m a k e n o distin ctio n betw een                                      o f C F C s by 85 p er cent, as so o n as possible w ith a view to
iorth        BISF h ouses a n d those o f tra d itio n a l co n stru ctio n . T hey                            th e ir com plete elim in atio n by th e end o f th e century.
 view        treat each h ou se o n its ind ividu al m erits, lending on
is by                                                                                                                                 H illsborough D isaster
             normal term s u p to th e societies’ u su al m a x im u m loan,
I am         subject to co n d itio n , v alu atio n , a n d sta tu s o f th e ap plicant.                         M r. Terry Fields: T o ask th e S ecretary o f S tate fo r the
iance
             Where ow ners wish to c a rry o u t im p ro v em en ts, the                                       E n v iro n m e n t if his D e p a rtm e n t will m ak e p rov isio n to
             societies will consider a p p licatio n s fo r re-m o rtg ag e in th e                            reim b urse L iverpool city council fo r special expenditure
te for       normal way.                                                                                       arising o u t o f the events a t H illsb o ro u g h on 15 A p ril; and
irt the          T hese n a tio n a l policies ap p ly eq ually to p ro p erties in                            if h e will m a k e a statem ent.
A nnes        he N o ttin g h a m area. T h e Societies h ave ta k en steps to
                                                                                                                   M r. Gummer: N o rm ally , local a u th o rities m a k e som e
il and        em ind survey ors, valuers a n d estate agents w ith w hom
                                                                                                              p rov isio n in th e ir o w n b udgets for e x tra o rd in a ry an d
i) full       hey n o rm ally d eal in N o ttin g h a m o f tho se policies.                                  u n foreseeable costs.
ad (iii)         T h e societies h av e also p o in te d o u t th a t v alu atio n s o f
                                                                                                                   L iverp ool city co u n cil’s officers h ave raised o rally w ith
 fall to     ill kinds o f p ro p e rty can easily be affected by m isleading
                                                                                                              the D e p a rtm e n t’s region al office officials the p ossibility o f
inomic       itatements a b o u t safety a n d d u rab ility , an d th a t som e
                                                                                                              the cou ncil’s seeking special assistance. I f th e council was
    and       ecent press an d television coverage m a y n o t h ave h a d a
                                                                                                              to seek such assistance, we sh o u ld o f cou rse consider its
 giving      lelpful effect o n th e m a rk et.
                                                                                                              req u est carefully.
ion.            I very m uch w elcom e th e positive a n d pub lic a ttitu d e
             aken by these tw o m a jo r building societies, w hich I believe                                                            E nglish H eritage
: N o rth
             ■effects th e p o sitio n o f o th e r lending in stitu tio n s, an d I am
/ing the                                                                                                           M r. Simon Hughes: T o ask th e S ecretary o f S tate fo r the
             ■ure th a t ow ners o f B IS F houses will w elcom e this, and
ilia, the                                                                                                     E n v iro n m e n t h ow m a n y E nglish H eritage properties
             ake to h e a rt th e ir advice o n factors w hich could affect the
: waters                                                                                                      w hich w ere, p rio r to th e form ing o f English H eritag e in
             jperation o f th e m a rk e t locally.
bathing                                                                                                       1984, o p en all d ay every d a y now h ave opening a n d closing
m illi° n-                                        O zo n e L ayer                                             tim es; a n d if he will list these, w ith th e ir c u rre n t opening
ds upon                                                                                                       a n d closing times.
o grant      Mr. W ray: T o ask th e S ecretary                               o f S tate fo r the                M rs. Virginia Bottomley: T h e D e p a rtm e n t h o ld s no
rorn the  Environment w h eth er H e r M ajesty ’s                             G o v e rn m e n t are         reco rds o f o p ening h o u rs a t th e v ario u s m o n u m e n ts for
          -onsidering new steps fo r th e p ro tectio n                       o f the ozone layer             w hich E nglish H eritag e assum ed resp onsibility o n 1 A pril
lative. a n line w ith th e U n ite d N a tio n s call fo r                   im m ediate u rg e n t          1984. D etails o f o p ening h o u rs since th e n are a m a tte r for
utfall is iction.
                                                                                                              English H eritage.

               177 C W 5 3 /3 7 J o b 8-10
G0/2310D/2




PLEASE NOTE    PLEASE NOTE       PLEASE NOTE




Before returning this case to
correspondence section can you please
ensure that the flnnl minute has been
completed.

The final minute should at all times be
held on the top left hand side of the file.




                             Correspondence
                             Section
                             Room 226
                             Richmond House
                                                   Reference



             lb -               cs                  fif& V t(.
                                                                    C-S   10
                     ..,! ' V


              h-                ZS)

                                fiAAb                         C.C      faJjiJ
             %-
             /fa                \SSX
              ( 4 i14           S S 2-

                                  S iX

               kr                        M r

              K                            %D&-


               P^W-                               HiULS&&Z£OUrH 'T-tZAC^^'f

                iou.                 CLu> r c y ^ x - ^             Uwyx>-*-^
                                           «JA                   y&u               Ue

                    4z                ol           °j     &         /^d
                    U/UZ                 U-ee**           UtA              ^   .




                                                        G/6 0 ? A/iM
                                                        M- 4 ^
                                                        CfTN 1>V f




CODE 18*78
BM/89260
   -■      <*> -®- ^   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                          Richmond House, 7 9 Whitehall, London SW1A 2N S
                                        Telephone 01-210 3000

                            From the Secretary o f State fo r Social Services




POH(1)1659/153

K Cooml|s Esq
Leader Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88
Muncipal Buildings
LIVERPOOL                                                        4;  i t * £ 9 r™ m o o
L69 2BH                                                           1 « ^ N t 1989




Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial
support for direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you
propose to establish to provide and co-ordinate continuing care in
the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy. You also wrote to
John Moore, Secretary of State for Social Security and to
Nicholas Ridley Secretary of State for the Environment. Please
accept this as a reply to all three letters.
The Department's Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed
of the action taken by the local social services departments
together in the wake of the tragedy and I know that the Chief
Inspector has written personally to all the Social Services
Directors in appreciation of the remarkable efforts made by them and
their staff.
The precise response to a tra^e^y of this sort needs to be decided
on the spot, on the basis of a careful examination of needs. My
Department has no power to make additional resources available to
local authorities for this purpose. However, I understand from
Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment, that under a
model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided
special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
circumstances.
The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local
Authority Associations and provide for assistance towards the
immediate and additional costs of dealing with an emergency once
expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond which local authorities would
normally be expected to budget for. In the case of the last use of
the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold was
(for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive
product of a l.Op rate.
E.R. '

 If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind,
 Nicholas Ridley is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed
 application (though at first sight it looks as if the level of
 expenditure needed would be substantially below the likely threshold
 for the authorities involved). I know that he will keep me informed
 of events if you do decide to pursue this possibility.
 The Government has, of course, as you mention, already made a
 contribution of £500,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most
 closely affected by the Disaster
 Copies of this letter go to John Moore and Nicholas Ridley.




                                                    KENNETH CLARKE
            U'        %■> 5     ( ..3 - i> , ^ - U                      | / ,t,S                         ,
             KJ                                                        / '                 ht\< l   ^rt
                                             M              C A ^ c k         k       r w o    Y    t   i. AA
              FROM THE OFFICE OF THE LEADER OF THE CITY COUNCIL )                                   J        '
                                     P.O.BOX 88                                   *
                              MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS,
                                LIVERPOOL, L69 2DH.                                   •—   J

                            Telephone: 051—225k39cHxikfc.    2 2 5 -2 3 1 8


The Rt. Hon. Kenneth Clarke, M.P.,                                     6th May, 1989.
Secretary of State for Health,
Richmond House,
Whitehall,
LONDON, SW1A 2NF.

                                             1989

Dear Secretary of State,


                            Hillsborough Tragedy

     Since Hillsborough seven Local Authorities in Merseyside, plus Cheshire
and Lancashire, together with Mersey Regional Health Authority, Merseyside
Probation Service and numerous voluntary organisations have been providing a
co-ordinated response.   On Saturday last, the 29th April, the Leaders of these
seven local authorities and the Leaders of Nottinghamshire and Sheffield Councils
met to consider a joint approach to the provision of services which will continue
to be necessary for several years to come.

     The attached report, prepared under the independent Chairmanship of the
Professor of Social Work at Manchester University, was agreed in principle. The
report recommends the establishment of a Regional Unit to provide a core of common
services, including:—

     i)     A Helpline to receive calls from anywhere day and night;
     ii)    The Co-ordination of counselling Services both within and outside
             the nine local authorities provided by voluntary as well as
             statutory agencies;

     iii)   A Database capable of dealing with all requests for assistance and
             offers of help;

     iv)    A continuing training and staff support programme in this previously
            unfamiliar area of work;

     v)     The management of media contacts and publicity.


     It was agreed to reconvene the meeting following exploration of all possible
sources of funding.   Recognizing that services will need to extend beyond these
nine local authorities and be available nationally on a scale not previously
experienced by an authority or group of authorities, our first but not only approach
for funding is addressed to Government.   Further work is being undertaken to
approach private industry, charitable bodies and E.E.C.    Already the local social
services authorities in the North West have agreed to jointly sponsor an additional
training officer.

                                                                      /cont1d
                                         -2 -

 The Rt. Hon. Kenneth Clarke, M.P.,                                6th May, 1989
 Secretary of State for Health.




/continued




     The Department, we anticipate, would wish to be associated with this
initiative and through Government may be able to make finance available to fund the
Regional Unit at a cost of £350,000 per year for a period of three years. Within
all the participating local authority areas it will also be necessary to take urgent
action to strengthen staffing in order to directly help individuals and their families,
according to the scale of the problems which they are facing. As yet these costs
have not been fully assessed but when aggregated are unlikely   to be less than £1million
per year, spread across the North West.   The Government we hope would wish to be aware
of this and may consider making resources available to assist   in direct service
provision as well as the establishment of the Regional Unit.

     It is, of course, appreciated that Government has already donated £500,000 towards
the National Disaster Fund.   This fund has quite properly focussed its attention on
the relief of individual hardship and will provide financial help directly to victims,
but will not do away with the need for other help of a non-financial kind to be
provided.

     Given the nature and extent of these services this letter has been copied to
the Secretary of State for Environment and the Secretary of State for Social Security,
and also for information to officers in other agencies.

     In view of the importance of the issues involved a copy has been forwarded to
the Prime Minister so that she, personally, can be aware of the state of service
development and needs.

     An early decision on financial support would be most appreciated as it is
anticipated other potential sources of finance will await the response of Government
before making a commitment.

                                      Yours sincerely,




   Councillor D                                             Councillor Mrs. L.J. Ellman,‘
               u
Leader, Notf-fr,    tett       Councillor John Col1ins      Leader, Lancashire C.C.
        Nottinghamshire CC.                     i_j   n n




   MARIE E. RIMMER
   Leader of St. Helens MBC
                                                            P. J « CORCORAN           P.T.0.
                              E. T. CUNNIFFE
                              Leader - Democrat Group Leader — Labour Group
                                      -3-


The Rt. Hon. Kenneth Clarke, M.P.,                                       6th May, 1989.
Secretary of State for Health.




                                                  l£Ar>eA   op



                                                  Ufibt*. of     r tti




      douncillor   J   Keight.   JP

      Leader,   K n o w s l e y Borough Council
            A F T E R       H I L L S B O R O U G H




    A Report and Recommendations      for C o - o r d i n a t i n g and

              Delivering Helping Services of the

                 Directors o f ’Social Services

                        of the areas affected




 P r e pared by Officers from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire
 Liverpool, Sefton, St. Helens and Wirral in con s u l t a t i o n
 with Merseyside Probation Service, the V o l u n t a r y Agencies,
 M e r s e y Regional Health Authority and M e rseyside Emergency
 Planning Unit, under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard
 Parker.


                              APRIL 1989




HLAAAB
t




AIM

          To consider the feasibility including costings of
e s t a b l i s h i n g a regional unit in order to marshall and
o r g anise the allocation of a variety of resources so. that
h e l p can be made available in the right p lace at the right
time to people affected b y the "Hillsborough" disaster.         In
this context "Region" is the seven local authorities.

M E T H O D A N D FORMAT

     A working p a r t y of senior staff, drawn from statutory
and vol u n t a r y agencies in the region was e stablished to
report on the potential for an Assis t a n c e Unit built upon
the service structure created after "Hillsborough".         The
group was chaired b y Howard Parker, Professor in Social Work
at the Unive r s i t y of Manchester.

          The report uses the experience gained from the disaster
at "Hillsborough" and other recent tragedies, and sets out
recommendations for dealing with the organisational,
information and co-ordination issues w hich hav e arisen.
Specifically, this consists off a synopsis of the key
elements required to operate a service which is responsive
to need and has an outreach capability, including the
p r o v i s i o n of a helpline, counselling, specialised work,
database, staff training/support and public relations.          All
of these elements are included within the b r o a d aim as
stated above, and the role of the unit as p e r ceived b y the
group.

    INTRODUCTION

          The events at "Hillsborough", Sheffield, on 15th April
1989, are a graphic illustration of the extensive damage to
personal well-being which can be p r e c i pitated b y the trauma
of a major disaster.            This applies to those directly
involved, through injury or bereavement, their helpers,
onlookers, and people suffering shock due to p u b l i c i t y or
a s s o c i a t i o n with similar events.  The effects are often
lon g - t e r m and can hav e a p r o found impact upon family life
and on individual ability to cope with e v e ryday living.

         "Hillsborough" is the latest in a tragic line of
    disasters.  Manchester Airport, Bradford, Piper Alpha,
    Zeebrugge, Kegworth, Clapham and Lockerbie h a v e all
    illustrated h o w a major unexpected disaster affects the
    lives of ordinary p eople and the agencies w hich must provide
    them with assistance.    We h a v e learnt a great deal from
    these earlier tragedies, p a r t i c u l a r l y ho w large scale
    disasters produce trauma and grief much further and deeper
    than common sense would expect.




    HLAAAB
6.             Following the disaster, there was a rapid mobilisation
     of resources from a variety of authorities, and -
     n o n - s t a t u t o r y agencies. It became apparent from the outset,
     that a mec h a n i s m was n ecessary to ensure that these
     resources were p r o perly c o - o r dinated to reach people and
     families in need in the most effective a n d speedy manner.
     D rawing from the experience of those involved in the
     r esponse to earlier disasters, and from the current
     situation, it is considered essential that an infrastructure
     is e s t a b l i s h e d which can consolidate the effort currently
     under way, and develop and adapt it to meet the changing
     needs of the region for a minimum pe r i o d of two years.

     BACKGROUND

7.            The services and resources available for             assistance
     are, in the main, already in place though not always on the
     scale required.             These services are p r o vided b y a
     m u l t i p l i c i t y of organisations.  T hey must respond to those
     w h o hav e asked for help, but also reach out to those who
     h a v e not come forward spontaneously.            It is important that
     services are available quickly, are easily accessible,
     a p p r o a c h a b l e and able to deal wit h a whole range of
     emotional and practical needs.             Some of these needs will be
     immediate, some short-term, some of a more permanent nature
     and in man y cases needs will remain hi d d e n for months, or
     eve n years.

8.            Localised services, well publicised, are        of course,
     most important but these should be seen in the context of a
     regional network of centrally c o - o r dinated resources.           In
     addition, regional co-ordination can mobilise resources in
     p a r t i c u l a r areas which would perhaps be overwh e l m e d by
     demand, if left to cope alone.

     K E Y C O - O RDINATION FUNCTIONS REQUIRED ARE:-

9.   (i)      Receipt and analysis of all requests for h e l p b ot h
               locally and nationally to ensure a co-ordinated
               response is made;

     (ii)     provision of an outreach service to track those who
               need help, but who have not yet come forward;

     (iii)    promote quality assurance of services,        through
               monitoring and review;

     (iv)     establishment of criteria for staff^ training and
               support patterns which are common across the region;

     (v)      advise on the public relations function;




     HLAAAB
      (vi)     guidance and assistance in the estab l i s h m e n t of
               appropriate local databases which are compatible with
               the central system, to ensure speedy, reliable and
               accurate information;

      (vii)    p r omotion of liaison and co-operation b e t w e e n all
               relevant agencies in the region;

      (viii)   review action already taken in other regions            (e.g.
               Sheffield, Nottinghamshire).

      C O U N S E L L I N G SERVICES - C O NTINUING REQUIREMENTS

10.         It is clear from the information from p r e vious
      disasters that cont inued access to practical and counselling
      services is required b y some victims for a considerable time
      after the event.    It cannot be assumed that individuals
      needing help will be requesting or needing it no w and
      a rrangements must be made to ensure that h e l p is accessible
      and readily available in the medium and long-term.

11.         The extent of future service requirements is difficult
      to predict though some      indications of the range of problems
      presented, the location of pe o p l e needing h e l p and the form
      of h e l p they require should be available when data collected
      so far, has b e e n analysed.   Some patterns of service
      requirements will be discernible and inform the detailed
      planning of provision.

12.        Meanwhile it is possible to identify in b r o a d terms the
      kinds of services that   will be needed and the ways in which
      they may be provided.    A co-ordinated mix of c entralised and
      local services from the statutory and vol u n t a r y sector is
      likely to provide the greatest flexibility in the use of
      resources;   such flexibility will be n e cessary given the
      difficulty of identifying the extent and type of need, and
      ensuring that deployment of resources is appropriate and
      adequately monitored.

      Philosophy

13.        It is important to ensure that the service response
      meets with an overall p h i l o s o p h y agreed b y the participating
      agencies.

              For the consumer this will mean that:

      (i)       There are clear avenues for seeking h e l p        (locally and
                regionally).

      (ii)      The response to their requests will be quick and
                appropriate.




      HLAAAB
            (iii)      H e l p is easily accessible (i.e. h e l p is not
                       dependent upon where people live).

            (iv)       Hel p should be non-labelling and non-stigmatising.

                 For the participating agencies this will mean that
            services:

            (i)        Should be well co-ordinated and consistent.

            (ii)       Should be quality assured.

            (iii)      Cost effective.

            (iv)       Keep the consumer as the prim a r y                  consideration.

 14.             In addition, the agencies will need to contribute to
            the wider body of knowledge that can be drawn upon-in the
            event of further disasters.  Funds to mount an evaluation of
            the response to this disaster are b eing sought
            independently.  The feedback from such research could be
            invaluable regionally and nationally in emergency planning.


            Specific Service Requirements

  15.            The provision of services as a response to disaster can
            be considered along a c o ntinuum with practical h e l p at one
            end and long-term counselling at the other.    Figure 1
            attempts to show this continuum in more detail.

            Figure 1 - A Service Continuum

Practical         _____________        Advice/ ___________              Counselling                            Long-term
Help                                   Guidance                                                                Support
                            I I        I     I I       I I      II         I
        Transport |    Legal | Information |     A   | Physical |Sharing |            Mourning | Bereave- |   PTSD
                             |              | Liaten- I         Ifeelings |                    I went     I
                             |              | ing ear |         I         I                    I         I
                                  I           I    I            I          I                   I         I
                  Finance    Medical       Referral Support   Medical    Relation-           Streaa   Staff Support
                                             on      Group               shipa
                                                                                 Grief

  16.            It can be seen that the services along the continuum
            reflect particular post disaster time phases, the possible
            different modes or models of service pro v i s i o n and the
            possible locations where services are received.        Many of the
            services are best left at the local level where resources
            are familiar and can easily be adjusted in response to
            changes in need.




            HLAAAB
17.             However, some can be p r o v i d e d more e f f e c t i v e l y at a
      Regional level, e.g.             Helpline, central information.             In
      addition, some services can best be monitored, e v a luated and
      c o - o r d i n a t e d at a regional level.   A ’network* of specialist
      skills can be developed b y a regional unit.

18.             The Inter-Agency Planning G roup recommends that a
      c o - o r d i n a t i n g body, k nown as the "Hillsborough Support U n i t ”
      be_ established for a minimum pe r i o d o f two years.                 The Unit
      should h a v e an executive officer, and support staff;
      operate the central Helpline;               set up an efficient database;
      oversee the pattern of services to enable resources to be
      used effectively;              see that districts p r o v i d e s y s tematic
      support and training for all staff;               deve l o p clear channels
      of communication and form partnerships w ith all relevant
      authorities and non-statutory agencies in the region;                       set
      up monitoring, evaluation and performance review systems.

19.        The lead authorities responsible for the Unit could be
      represented through a Committee comprising local a u t horit y
      members and officers' representatives of Me r s e y Regional
      Health Authority, Merseyside Probation Service, Vo l u n t a r y
      Organisations, and the Disaster Trust Fund.                      '

      Su g gested   'Regional Services'

            The services outlined b e l o w will need to be            linked to
      e ach o ther through the proposed Regional Unit.

      HELPL I N E

20.         This service currently operates on a 24 h o u r day, 7 day
      w eek b a s i s and is staffed by officers of the Social Services
      Departments and a variety of other organisations.              G iven the
      na tionwide ‘c a t c h m e n t ’ of potential users of the service it
      will be cost-efficient to retain this ce n t r a l i s e d service at
      its current level for a period of weeks to come and will
      ensure n ready access point for assistance while medium to
      longer term arrangements are effected.            It is e n visaged that
      trie Helpline will become a national ’one number' service run
      b y the regional unit with calls then referred to local
      services as appropriate.

      Co -or d i n a t i o n of Counselling Services

21.        W h i l s t counselling will usually be offe r e d very
      'locally' it will be necessary to ensure that individuals
      are referred to the most appropriate agency; that their
      needs are met, and the services are monitored.          In addition




      HLAAAB
      there will be people needing h e l p from outside the 'region'
      whose needs must be assessed and referrals made.     This will
      require a team of 4 h e a d e d b y a team leader.

22.         It is important that referrals to and from statutory
      a gencies across the country are p r o p e r l y co-ordinated.
      There are a number of voluntary agencies on Merseyside and
      in the region for whom counselling is already the major, or
      a significant part of their work; these should be used
      wherever possible.      These include COMPASS, Personal Social
      Services, C. of E. Board of Social R e s p onsibility (through
      the cl e r g y and national o r g a nisations with local bases, such
      as Cruse).      The regional unit w ould aim to co-ordinate
      r eferrals to and from these agencies where appropriate.

       Drop-in Centre

23.         The Anfield Advice Centre ha s alre a d y allowed a large
      number of 'survivors’ to describe and share their experience
      of b eing at Hillsborough.    It ha s offe r e d other services as
      well.    It is likely that this Centre will continue via
      funding from other sources.     However, because of the
      symbolic importance of Anfield we recommend that it is used
      as a referral point for Helpline on M atch Days.        We believe
      that m a n y new referrals will be o b t ained on Match Days.

      O U T R E A C H AN D CO-ORDIN ATION

24.             Whilst the majority of people affected b y Hillsboroug h
        reside within or just outside the Merseyside region it is
       known that a significant number reside elsewhere.          This
       p r o b l e m was found b y Kent following the Zeebrugge disaster
        where survivors and others lived long distances from the
        centre of help.        An "away" Team was established to initiate
        and provide assistance outside the Dover area.         Zeebrugge
        also demonstrated that many people required specialist h e l p
        from Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychiatrists etc., and
      . that a mec h a n i s m was needed to co-ordinate their services.
       Thus problems were both identified and met b y the Kent
        "away" Team.

25.          Unlike Zeebrugge, however, the identity and location of
       people affected b y "Hillsborough" are largely unknown.
       Whilst this is a handicap, there is sufficient justification
       to reach out to those in potential need.    There is a need,
       therefore, to establish the equivalent of the Kent "away"
       T eam but with the limited role of referring those from
       outside the region to appropriate services across the
       country.    Basic tasks will be to:-




       HLAAAB
      1.    Provide a central telephone line,        e.g. an 0800
            (freephone) number;

      2.   Provide an assessment and referral service, whereby
           people are re-referred to Local Advice Services;

      3.   Co-ordinate referrals bot h from within and without the
           region;

      4.    Provide oversight of the different elements of
            specialist services, e.g. p s y c hologists etc.

      5.    Identify ke y events and anniversaries which may effect
            individuals and c o n s e q u e n t l y service p r ovision (e.g.
            Inquests, future football games).

           Thus the differing needs of people will be identified
      and the appropriate resources matched up to meet those
      needs:  this will avoid du p l i c a t i o n of effort and create a
      more efficient use of resources.

      D A T ABASE REQUIREMENTS

26.         The unit will require a database capable of recording
      information fed through to the 'helpline', 'drop.in' centres
      and other source points.      The m a j ority of contacts will be
      w ithin two broad categories, i.e. either requesting
      assistance or offering help.      Cu r r e n t l y the 'Hillsborough
      Helpline' has separate systems dealing with these two
      elements.     At present, nearly 3,600 offers of h e l p h ave been
      received from a variety of sources, including over 600
      through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'.             About 1,650 requests
      for h e l p have b een received nationally, the majority of
      these b eing through the ’Hillsborough Helpline'.            Wit h this
      level of activity occuring, it is clear that an effective
      database is essential to matching needs for assistance with
      the wide range of resources available.

27.        In respect of referrals for help, a manual database was
      established as a record of callers, pending the setting up
      of the computerised system.   It is suggested that this be
      retained and maintained as a back up in case of problems
      with the system.

28.         Information which is useful for the database, includes
      basic details such as names, addresses, local authority of
      origin, referral to district and agency, general
      practitioners, significant dates, (birthdays, anniversaries
      etc)..   Each per s o n h as an individual reference number, and
      there is a facility for a group reference for people linked
      together.




      HLAAAB
     Staffing levels, which are currently based upon staff
seconded from other duties should be formalised as soon as
possible.  Minimum staffing is expected to require a systems
manager, two operators, and full-time clerical support.
Once the system is up to date close links should be
maintained with the 'Helpline', and other agencies involved
in collating or investigating data.

Staff Training and Support

        The need for on-going and c a refully targetted training
h a s b e e n demonstrated via earlier disasters.   Clea r l y such
training can and has already b e e n 'bought in' from external
sources.       So far this specialist training has been
p r o vided for local authority workers.     The regional unit
woulcf hop e to adopt a po l i c y of 'training the trainers' and
thus b y using expertise within the region attempt to reduce
training costs.

      It is absolutely clear that those managing and working
in post-disaster situations found the work very stressful.
T hey need access to regular de-briefing and ’talking out'
sessions.   Whilst ,for some workers this will in part be
provided in their own agencies there is a need for an
independent service which all helpers, whether p aid or
vo luntary staff, can use.   The regional unit would aim to
ensure these support systems were in place and make
arrangements to co-ordinate offers of this 'care for the
carers' (e.g. by BASW and the Psychology Service).    The unit
could also respond, in confidence, to direct requests from
staff anywhere in the region.

PUBLIC RELATIONS

      "Public relations" is an important and b asic element in
the success or failure of any venture.     This is complex and
requires skilled and sensitive h a n dling if its potential is
to be realised.   It needs to be regarded as an explicit
task, and as part of the management and objectives of the
unit.   It can best be organised within the framework of a
public relations strategy.

      Such a strategy will acknowledge that:-

(i)      Interest in the disaster will be subject to
         fluctuation.  For example:  funerals, inquests,
         litigation, football matches, a nniversary of the
         disaster etc.  Forward planning for the impact of
         these events is required.




HLAAAB
      (ii)   Public Relations is h e a v i l y dependent on hard, factual
             and accurate information about the work of the unit.
             There will, therefore, need to be direct links between
             the management and the public relations functions of
             the unit.

      (iii) Media interest can sometimes be aggressive and
            time-consuming.  This can be wasteful at best and
            damaging at worst.  Thus contact with the media needs
            to be carefully channelled and regulated separating
            local and regional issues.

33.        It is suggested that Public relations can bes t be
      undertaken by the Head of the Unit along with substantial
      support from the Management Committee.

      COSTINGS

34.        Since "Hillsborough" is a national disaster, it is
      recommended that strenuous efforts are made to ob t a i n the
      funding of the Unit from central government, the EEC and
      other sources.  Costs are estimated at around £350,000 per
      year for two years.  This may be generous or alternatively
      additional resources may need to be added on.

      CONCLUSION

35.        The advantages of co-ordinating all help i n g responses
      seem clear.  It is b e l ieved that a Regional Unit would, in
      the long run, be cost effective and more importantly would
      introduce a whole series, of supports and checks which would
      mean a better service for those who need it, including the
      carers.




      29th April,   1989




      HLAAAB
             ESTIMATED COSTS "HILLSBOROUGH" SUPPORT UNIT

                                 1989/90   1990/91   1991/92
                                 From      Full      To
                             •   1.7.89    Year      30.6
 RUNNING COSTS                   £000      £000      £000
 Salaries                         140       185           46
  Volunteer Expenses               33        44           11
F*Office Accommodation, etc.       26        34            9
 Supplies and Services             12        14            4
 Transport                            6       8            2
 Telephone                         11        15            4
 Printing, Stationery etc.            8      10            2
 Central Support                      8      10            3
 Contingency                      30         30           15
                                 274        350           96


 EQUIPMENT ETC
 Typewriter, Wordprocessor
 Computer Hardware
 Software                        40
 Phone System
 Office Furniture


                                 314        350       96




 HLAAAB
H                                                                               f h f>v.
                                                                                          Reference




                                                                                                                               cs/c
                                                                                                  53. r. * r
                                                   P*7
               Pp .
                                                                                                         C£
                                                                                      U CfXfa.y          $s/
                                                                                                         eS ^
                                                                                                          h &
                                                                                      1                      &/
                                                                               AMi r. ^                    SSJ
                                                                               tU f                          P jS
                         6   >u                                                                                     £>o<£“
                                  ^ :                                          ru
                                  fv*                                          f^e, l i b * * *

               Port          ///*r?//r*_.                    fk/fcOrrru.^'k /remedy

               T ^ T r        / fit ! / n y
                         7ZI        e*U<*u,U                                   ^       /w                            ^     /Afii

                A      ^u*_c/           &    /C'~£a*-^'           ^        ^                                  Coh^ C O U M o J
                             Culms *                         I     ccva^6^tx-/uv                          C~r>ft.
                                                     ^                         *^U>.                    < ^ p ^ t c U ( *~t

                £ 0 <c                      C^U-         ^                 SL^A^y                     tfj~~i*'»ft

                %        TtnuJj             ru*Zci(iA            A^c^w-                    /c^.cc            /6_

                                                                 <t/*°             C ytU L d            &      A /tU jfZ * -t

                Lidh^.
                Jl^_         ctfJ^Lj            C(sl o d d r          <f

                rt& iT K          o*^-'£>C$         *~>**             /V a ^ i^ a v y f c /              £      A coi




                                                                                                              B U    q   <4^

                                                                                                                M<£\




CODE   18-77
Xeva Coombes, Leader of Liverpool Council




Thank you for your letter of 6 Kay about additional financial support for direct
service provision and for the Regional Unit you propose to establish to provide
and co-ordinate continuing care in the afteriaath of the Hillsborough tragedy.

The Department's Social Services Inspectorate have kept ne Informed of the action
                -;-oeai social services departments together In the wake of the tragedv
and I know that the Chief Inspector has written personally to all the Social
 j, *vices Directors to ,r*nrlo^T|,:u>I ^ t n w : u atta their staif^ m i -trioir ffiogt -a-iaprooaivc'
               Hy      s letter JL.gouId like •••to-expanse ray ovm appreciation fe^-the-■
 sa^nii'xcant rnr.ponnn by n 1     4.)in         >;■'ri. *m >>- -^npp-tmentg
        VT"Vj2_ Y^-ve rtAA^AAA-f ^ <x..                ^ liJX )vM- w>jJ^                4jl cM-a^tLsJv
                                      Ov CAr\-zA/tjJ. •Wc^T-aa^J^'c^T>Vi gfl vMLs_tJ-£>*
     -aj-raid,— howarer,— that on matters of funding-^ Department has no power to
ns.Ke additional resources available to local authorities for this purpose.
However, I understand from Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment,
that under a model scneiae designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
emergencies (the Bexiwin Scheme), the Government has provided special financial
assistance to local authorities in certain circumstances.


                                                               - A.. ^v«t -^V
The 3ellvvin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local Authority
Associations and provides for assistance towards the immediate and additional

costs of deeding with an emergency once expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond
which local authorities would normally be expected ira-budget for.                        In the case
of the last use of the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold
was (for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive product of a

1 .Op rate.                   / Haxmj/V -                                  «?£ U       (G T U v -tl
                                aJ3 .c/ uoJLu L U. *                           W o o t-TTUMsJUi jL'^’lkcAJ
                          £// Cix, lfuJ&<SvUll*i4 (AAs^AM-dL) ^
If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind, /Nicholas Ridley
is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed application^/                        I know that he
will keep me informed of events,                  cfoLAA.c£z_                  [(XL*                  _


The Government has       of course, as you mention, alrea.dy made a contribution of
£500,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most closely affected by the Disaster.




                                                                        Kenneth Clarke
      Pfbjauu o

                                                                                                                    CC1C



                                                       tJlP
                                                                                                    anv^9




                                                                                          Atac             /icu
                                                                                          \W

                                                                                                                                  bos


        Po (h )        y ^ S ^ /s ^                        I h lU b w d U ^ k .       f m ^ tc O j



            f fU A O           &4AscM o ZZ~                    a      s


                                                           f                              fe«V                  ^ tua. C a n

  L ^   olc£ q s                 L u j ^ i p J l td h j               Ccaa^   ucJ   L .


 2.                                   'A A *j    C^                       M    C c A A J tM j~ ---- ^vf/T/t                 fU /> \

  /     l/'-CXMJL      O &L m ,           oxko^cl                  lA j   b O E       d ^ iX U L o J - r               /o      &KCU.


 ftu*t       M &                LUJbuC            (A               rUh                    -u   m   J xI N    u   M ^ O olj,

 fijuclQxj          kcu           hsC ucL             CL           cM ^cuiAytJL,          7^           &UL,       co^ cl

 CCAAAAbL'UAst                 cn^.       far^L                                ^     0 B              c /jj^ u u o M           < < ju t


Cadr-O^tf-— Majl                      u T L za^        . tbuw                 So^t/tLAy                           / f&Jji

hxA          Sjzjua -             Ax            d i ^ t              — pnflraM&j                            T ^        sc U l^ ,


S O                    ,              /         u U i               dcAAj~OLA*£                    CAy^~   G^JCL4sK,           CLJ


S& iAa .     CL{           I       A ^ a -j/           -jjU s i^ C L o j-          f"lA/W                   '




                                                                          Y b tfiL                          M      m
i in   i   Owi    i u   • u u                                                                              r   l i 'j c   .   ukj <
                                                                                                                                  .
BM/89260
                                     d e p a r t m e n t o f h e a l t h a n d s o c ia l s e c u r it y

                                          Richmond House, 7 9 Whitehall, London SW1A 2N S
                                                          Telephone 01-2K) 3000

                                             From the Secretary o f State fo r S m vkS ssviam Health


                                         3>/£4-£t

P0H(1)1659/153

K Coombs Esq
Leader Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88
Wuncipal Buildings
LIVERPOOL
L69 2BH




Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial
support for direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you
propose to establish to provide and co-ordinate continuing care in
the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy* You also wrote to
John Moore# Secretary of State for Social Security <xwl fe KcrUdlos;*£id(ay.
                 <% SfrLiL.     te                     , (%asc. csuccttpt JHu) m         g.          fe"at! -Hw j l

The Department's Social Services inspectorate have kept me informed
of the action taken by the local social services departments
together in the wake of the tragedy and I know that the Chief
Inspector has written personally to all the Social Services
Directors in appreciation of the remarkable efforts made by them and
their staff.
The precise response to a tradegy of this sort needs to be decided
on the Spot, on the basis of a careful examination of needs. My
Department has no power to make additional resources available to
local authorities for this purpose* However, I understand from
Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment, that under a
model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided
special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
circumstances.
The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local
Authority Associations and provider for assistance towards the
immediate and additional costs of dealing with an emergency once
expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond which local authorities would
normally be expected to budget for. In the case of the last use of
the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold was
(for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive
product of a l.Op rate.
If you consider that the expenditure necessary on emergency work is likely
to be an excessive burden in terms of the Bellwin Scheme, Nicholas Ridley
would be prepared to consider a detailed ana fully costed application.
I know that he will keep me informed of events if you decide to pursue
thiss possibility.

The G-ovemment has of course, as you mention, already made a contribution
of £560,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most closely affected by
the Disaster.

Ccp(-€.c,   Ctufo         Mo0{^                 om(I U lcUa Co s £cdUaj




                                    KENNETH CLARKE
                                                                                          Reference .

   tius.

                                                                                    friMjL
           (o    /^ * *   rr    %                                                                                   cxic



                                                                                    fa* tittup




     Po (h )                                         I jills b r v c f u ^ k         ln x ^ jf.c O j



           /        t?uao                                 a      sUyfaU^               q^m a a          M   jlcJL           oiv^4

     p f        t              Quutfvy                ^        S'hcGT^                feM^i                 ^       / £ W        Coovuk

 L'& .a.dlsiS                  L u j1l* /V<f>
                                            fL        C ^h j        Cc^    m   ^ o jL .


                    io ju - e jx ts v y        cjj S f a t e          14       c c m J-€m      /    —       i^ iit          T tu n

                      1/QJLaa^ oxh&scl                                & 0£ dj^AjLoJ. r                                  fe>
(O^oJL          tkjL           UMuC            (A             rJh                      a a m AJL                N   u   A   o   Co a

 (hucLQ ixj      hou                L ascL       CL           cA s&aaszJU             7^            gjUL            co^d

C.CMAM^L^iA^t                  °t]A-     ffz        d r t^ f \                 2)   d t            c/jJj^ A X -oJx               U fliL

                                        ufhjgsu_ . T b u W                 ^C4t<JlXAy                       cf^ { faufci

koA            XeiLvc               ^                           — pnSbaJf&j                                  T a^scU ll^

3 o tL     M /C U j. —              j     jaJ\M ^             C c w fa ^ ts t        jtjc a * .         c ljc u a ^              a j

    X      d(              I        A^oV             ^ua^CLu-                                      "*   ~




                                                                     Y     ^    L                           M       m
■Lw   i in   »   i_ i   i u   • u u

      BM/89260
                                           DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                              Richmond House, 7 9 Whitehall, London SW1A 2NS
                                                           Telephone 01-219 3000

                                                From the Secretary o f State fo r ^m nkSeKV«xs Health


                                      ”4             tA—fer

      P0H(1)1659/153

      K Coombs Esg
      Leader Liverpool City Council
      PO Box 88
      Huncipal Buildings
      LIVERPOOL
      L69 2BH




      Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial
      support for direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you
      propose to establish to provide and co-ordinate continuing care in
      the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy. You also wrote to
      John Moore* Secretary of State for Social Security aad fe NcrUdlas. £cdGiqJ
              <%Q  h    te o^o^c’kum.'^mX'. p/aaae. ojcczpt Uu* cxs o. kr O.CL
      The Department's Social Services inspectorate have kept me informed
      of the action taken by the local social services departments
      together in the wake of the tragedy and I know that the Chief
      Inspector has written personally to all the Social Services
      Directors in appreciation of the remarkable efforts made by them and
      their staff.
      The precise response to a tradegy of this sort needs to be decided
      on the spot, on the basis of a careful examination of needs. My
      Department has no power to make additional resources available to
      local authorities for this purpose. However, I understand from
      Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment, that under a
      model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
      emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided
      special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
      circumstances.
      The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local
      Authority Associations and provider for assistance towards the
      immediate and additional costs of dealing with an emergency once
      expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond which local authorities would
      normally be expected to budget for, in the case of the last use of
      the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold was
      (for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive
      product of a l.Op rate.
If you consider that the expenditure necessary on emergency work is likely
to be an excessive burden in terms of the Bellwin Scheme, Nicholas Ridley
would be prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed application.
I know that he will keep me informed of events if you decide to pursue
thiss possibility.

The Government has of course, as you mention, already made a contribution
of £560,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most closely affected by
the Disaster.

Copc€.^ Q   ttu                                 cha^cS? Ktcko(ar




                                    KENNETH CLARKE
BM/89260
                    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                       Richmond House, 7 9 Whitehall, London SW1A 2N S
                                     Telephone 01-210 3000

                         From the Secretary o f State fo r          Health




POH(l)1659/153

K Coombs Esq
Leader Liverpool City Council
PO Box 88
Muncipal Buildings
LIVERPOOL
L69 2BH




Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial
support for direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you
propose to establish to provide and co-ordinate continuing care in
the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy. You also wrote to
John Moore, Secretary of State for Social Security. Please accept
this as a reply to both letters.
The Department's Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed
of the action taken by the local social services departments
together in the wake of the tragedy and I know that the Chief
Inspector has written personally to all the Social Services
Directors in appreciation of the remarkable efforts made by them and
their staff.
The precise response to a tradegy of this sort needs to be decided
on the spot, on the basis of a careful examination of needs. My
Department has no power to make additional resources available to
local authorities for this purpose. However, I understand from
Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment, that under a
model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided
special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
circumstances.
The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local
Authority Associations and provide for assistance towards the
immediate and additional costs of dealing with an emergency once
expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond which local authorities would
normally be expected to budget for. In the case of the last use of
the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold was
(for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive
product of a l.Op rate.
if you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind,
Nicholas Ridley is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed
application (though at first sight it looks as if the level of
expenditure needed would be substantially below the likely threshold
for the authorities involved). I know that he will keep me informed
of events if you do decide to pursue this possibility.
The Government has, of course, as you mention, already made a
contribution of £500,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most
closely affected by the Disaster




                                                   KENNETH CLARKE
                         11659/15i   w                                                                                    o             V3 C
    Item Coombes#
         Coombesfe- Leader of Liverpool Cummil~"                                                                          w                                     f)
    l_^cxdsti Uw«-r$e>£>\ GlXU Cs^ ^ A                                                                                                                               (Jl\
    p o eo* <&G a           o
    JfvV.Wi£AP(»A lC^u^Vs^-Qp
    \_we^<^in5\ L-lcV^X 1 W
    Thank you for youo letter of 6 May about additional financial support for direct
     service provision and for the Regional Unit you propose to establish to provide
    and co-ordinate continuing care in the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy.

 ‘C j -c S c ^ . - s k S . , .                       %   V 4 * »                   j m   ?*,   «*»   W   j b   W    > W        \    4   9   3   5   *   0   •


^ The Department’s Social Services Inspectorate have kept me informed of the action
    taken by the local social services departments together in the wake of the tragedy
    and I know that the Chief Inspector has written personally to all the Social 0 .                                                                                    ,.
                                         V*                        ArW. w.wAjc*^(N?cO«s\je.                                             <*/wc\■tujll*                        *
    Services Directors                        oongrntulato thom and the-ir staff on thei-r most impreesi-ve
    reaponacs"                   By thio letter I would like to express my own appreciation for the
    magnificant
    magnifleant response by -all tho
                                 the Soc-
                                     Social       eeu
                                        lal Sorvi-t   Tfepartmen-
                                                  teu itepartmento
                                                                to involved.

        mwagaa.            a                Sov^C muls V W &£>Cx<U<X Cf^^U                      ^
  -•
   I oa-
     am -afraid, however, that-
                          *,— on matters of fundinalhiy
                                    --- --------        Department has no power^ to--'°cwa'-° ^
                                                  --j.--------------
                                 ’                                                                                                                              cxvw-uJl




                                                                                                                                                    -
   make additional resources available to local authorities for this purpose.
                                                                                                                                                                v\ vua_a<J*/»„
   However, I understand from Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for Environment,
    that under a model scheme designed to deal with extra-ordinary costs arising from
    emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has provided special financial
    assistance to local authorities in certain circumstances.


   The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local Authority
   Associations and provides for assistance towards the immediate and additional

    costs of dealing with an emergency once expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond
    which local authorities would normally be expected to budget for.                                                         In the case
    of the last use of the Scheme, following the Great Storm of 1987, that threshold
    was (for Counties and Metropolitan Districts) set at the exclusive product of a
    1 .0p rate.


    If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind, Nicholas Ridley                                                                                    >> . „
    is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed application^. ITcnow that hey
    will keep me informed of events^*A                              uoa   . cko c\jtyw.d*. Vo

                                 —       v—                         *                                                         S                 s &                    j f
   The Government has, of course, as you mention, already made a contribution of
   £500,000 to the Disaster Fund to help those most closely affected by the Disaster.




                                                                                                                   Kenneth Clarke
                                                                                                         Reference .




               P / W oJ a,                                                                         Fh+A,                                          CS/C
                                                                                                                  2 1 , r . *?.


                                                                           cc          /%/                                  cs
                                                                                           rw           UCtiAKtt            $$(
                                                                                           Aw                               c$ t
                                                                                           }hs                               h &
                                                                                           rw

                                              ("VS
                                                                                                                              a s
                                                                                                                                         £>0 (£
                                                                                           rw                                _


                Potf          / / / « r ? / / r j . ■ th fc b m u .'/k                                                           . ___
               ■ t f p    r   n    t i i i / r        s                                        r
                          7 Z^       tM<£>u.d                  «6 ^ f                                    /*v                              tQ / A &

                 /i      ^ c /           6    fCTU^dUe                     ^           *.               L u ^ e H                  Cvty 6 m           m   «J

                              6   **-*       pr*fo^>                 '<*       c                                                   ft.

                 ^            ^ U - ^ 4                        <2    ^ ' /<'"‘" ^ J '                                  <f f i * teUl          **

                              ^      — c«vU -                    ^                 s       U        ^    y          r t c - 'r f 'Y * 1
                                                  «                                    *

                 ^                           /W       lf lu                                                  jc v c c * .        /& .

                £(//~f< ip!A*xJhu>*~*Jc                   <s-Z><^>    OstiO                        C^>UL,iX             ^          //f C-^*/?a_f

                /tlddty,
                              c*py           ^        faTUJks                                                                             \P&L-^

                 /~({jyjy^.                   f£              ogl^             /Vcu44.£^2VV* c/                             ££      /^U -4

                 tn ^ cU ^ J : $ - f oe< r / /fe *"?/^5                                                                                     ^


                                                                                                                                   ^<5^4

                                                                                                                                                  i




CODE   18-77
PS 2
                                                    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH

                                                            FAX COVER SHEET


Name of Recipient:-
Address of Recipient:-
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ ,   ji#*4" vO C.~v ^

Name of Originator:-
Address of Originator:-                                                *2-^2-


No. of pages:- THIS +
If you have any queries regarding this fax please contact the
originator above on 01 -2 1 0 - tS\c€"^\


Date:-


     C'&A                <£( o                                                         Cp
                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY ^

    n i M H u   i' u   i v u   i l   p i u s i    t i t       u u i » i K u t i t u   t i t r u K t   rck i u k im   i u   H K i V H i t          u r - r - i u e        *




                                                 D E P f i R T M E W T                                 O F           H E f i L T H

                                                 i='F* I V f i T E                           O F F        X CEE


    P1*O H             5 /              1 S Q T /                         1                              Due Date For Reply i S S / O S / Q 3


    Minister Replying                                                                             1 Correspondent
    ROGER FREEMAN                                                                                 1 LOCAL AUTHORITIES

                                                                                                 1 Constituency                                                                                                        Par
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                 I Date Of-Letter
                                                                                                 1 06/05/89

                                                                                                 1
   Keyword
                                                                                                 1 Const ituent/Subject
   LA SOC SERVICES GEN                                                                           1 K COOMBES/L’POOL CC

   Not e s :
   HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


   Referred To                             Date


   CSl
         14                                05/
                                         IQS/             I




   UJ




                                                                                                                                                             T o be noted after

                                                                                                                                                           settlement by: —




EF 53A                                                                                                                        (017781 P rin ted in t h e UK for H M S O 7 / 8 8 D d . 813231 1 /9 9 0 0 1 C 2 5 0 115121)
JP0050O/2


                * * * * ALWAYS RETAIN AS TQP KIHDTE OH LEFT TAG * * * *

                                          FINAL MINUTE



1.   A TYPED LETTER ON THE APPROPRIATE MINISTERIAL HEADED NOTEPAPER IS
ATTACHED OPPOSITE WHICH HAS BEEN CLEARED BY (PO GUIDE PARA 3.33 AND 3.43


Name                           Grade                       Branch

loom                     Building                    Ext         Date




       ENCLOSURES ARE CONTAINED IN PS2 AND




                                                           Enclosures sent
                                                           (initial and date)

          SEND COPIES OF THJ,NAL REPLY TO (GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS ONLY)




                                                           Copies sent
                                                           (initial and date)

        N CASE OF ANY QUERY ON THE REPLY CONTACT

       Name                         Ext          Room



5.     THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL POINTS SHOULD BE NOTED:

        T U , f ib     t r ^   ^    j               P o h ( i) u    r ? / / r 3



                                                           Special points actioned
                                                           (initial and date):

6.     AFTER DESPATCH OF THE FINAL REPLY RETURN THIS FILE TO:

       Name .,__________________ ... Div/Branch....

       Room .        M M ...... .. Building ..M M ...
JP0050O


                               PRIVATE OFFICE CASE
                        PLEASE READ THESE NOTES CAREFULLY



IS THIS FILE FOR YOU?


1.   Check that this file is for you. If it isn't/ redirect it immediately
and inform by telephone, the officer in the Correspondence Section responsible
for this case who is:-


                  Ext 5197, Room 226 Richmond House (01-210 3000 or GTN 210)

Do other branches need to contribute?

2.   If contributions from other branches will be required this action should
be set in train without delay, using part papers. These should be enclosed in
a folder boldly marked as containing Ministerial correspondence and bearing a
clear indication of the date by which it should be returned to the originating
branch. The lead branch has responsibility for the co-ordination and drafting
style of the whole reply.


Is a Local Report Necessary?

3.   Where a constituent's experience is only quoted in an MP's letter as an
illustration of the effect of policies as opposed to where the complaint
concerns the treatment which the constituent has received from the Department
it may be necessary to seek a local report.


Interim Replies

4.   Where it is not possible to provide draft replies within the time
specified branches should explain to Correspondence Section that an extension
is needed. The draft interim reply should include an explanation of the
reason for a delay to the full reply.


Checking Typing and Legibility

5.   Branches should thoroughly check typed replies before they are sent to
the Private Office Correspondence Section or ensure that manuscript drafts are
legible. This is most important if unnecessary delay to correspondence is to
be avoided. Wherever possible, branches should prepare replies typed on the
appropriate Ministerial notepaper.


Final Minute

6.** PLEASE ALWAYS COMPLETE THE FINAL MINUTE OVERLEAF BEFORE RETURNING THE
FILE TO CORRESPONDENCE SECTION. **
AR0029O
PLEASE NOTE     PLEASE NOTE   PLEASE NOTE   PLEASE NOTE   PLEASE NOTE


M R ( P S ( H ) ) HAS REQUESTED THAT THE FOLLOWING GUIDANCE
BE OBSERVED WHEN DRAFTING REPLIES FOR HIS SIGNATURE


1.    Is the MP*s letter part of a campaign or one of a number of
enquiries your branch has received on the same subject? Is a
standard reply appropriate? If you wish to raise a new standard
reply or background note please contact the Correspondence Section
supervisor who will make the necessary arrangements, eg Word
Processing and Ministerial clearance.
2.   Try at all times to limit the reply to no more than one side
O fA4. FOR THE MAJORITY OF LETTERS IT SHOULD BE POSSIBLE TO USE A
STANDARD REPLY OR A BACKGROUND NOTE WITH A SHORT COVERING LETTER.

3.    Always use the PO reference number, the MP*s reference number
if appropriate and the MP's full title, as shown on the cover of the
file.

4.    THE FIRST PARAGRAPH SHOULD ALWAYS
      a.   include the date of and to whom the MP's letter was
           addressed, the name and address of the constituent and the
           main point raised:
      b.   sympathise with any difficulties or misfortunes that the
           constituent/MP may have experienced, showing sensitivity
           to the circumstances, eg a breavement:
      c.      if it appears likely that one month will lapse between
              the date of the letter and the reply, have an apology
              included. This should read "I am sorry you have not
              received an earlier reply”.

5.      If you feel it will take     longer than onemonth to prepare a
full   reply, draft an immediateinterim response. This draft should
be forwarded to Correspondence Section without the YJ file but
should always quote the PO reference number. If no previous interim
reply has been sent, and the file is still outstanding with branch,
Correspondence Section will automatically send a standard interim
response one month after the date of the letter. This reply will
normally be signed by PS(H).

6.     The main point raised should be answered in the first line or
two of the second paragraph.

7.    Plain English - always use direct and concise English. Use
SHORT and FAMILIAR words and SHORT sentences, VERBS rather
than nouns created from verbs and ACTIVE verbs rather than passive
verbs. Wherever possible avoid ABSTRACTIONS, CLICHES and
JARGON.
8.     W h e r e it is not possible to prepare a full reply, for example
d ue to an outstanding SSI report, give as much information as
possible in a letter for PS(H)*s signature and advise that officials
will reply direct to the M P w h e n the n e cessary information is
available.


9.      Does the reply answer the c o n s t i t u e n t ’s enquiry?  It may be
the o nly M inisterial letter he or she ever sees.             Put yourself in
the p o s ition of the constituent.      Is the reply personal and easliy
understood?         Is the tone appropriate - polite, friendly?        Does the
corresp o n d e n c e deserve a sympathetic response.        PS(H) constituent
replies should be drafted in a more personal style.


10.   A concluding paragraph, eg "I hope this is helpful" or "Please
thank your constituent for his/her interest and concern" should
always be included.  For constituency cases this should read "If I
can help with any other matter as your constituency MP, please
contact me at the House of Commons.


11.    C heck it. Please pay particular attention to figures.   Also
s atisfy yourself that it will not become out of date before it is
signed and despatched.   If in doubt contact the Correspondence
Section supervisor.


NB:   Please ensure that all Private Office Correspondence Jackets
are returned d i r e c t l y to Correspondence Section, R o o m 226,
R ichmond House.


PLEASE A L W A Y S C O M PLETE TH E FINAL M I N U T E BEFORE RET U R N I N G TH E FILE
T O CO R R E S P O N D E N C E SECTION.


SEE A L S O TH E PRIV A T E OF F I C E GUIDE.    (COPIES M A Y BE O R D E R E D ON
E XT E N T I O N 5191).


C O R R E S P O N D E N C E SECTION SUPERVISOR                 EX T E N S I O N 5194.
GO/231Op/2




PLEASE NOTE    PLEASE NOTE    PLEASE NOTE




Before returning this case to
correspondence section can you please
ensure that the final minute has been
completed.

The final minute should at all times be
held on the top left hand side of the file.




                          Correspondence
                          Section
                          Room 226
                          Richmond House
                     SiPC /A L




^ vC.vUvt                                '/3 a o

               C>r        W«/vCAs>/K»

vU v.        4 » w      ^ — »r *          "       $

         Sf< W             Vo    *«■»*

C -W     *      < * -        «   * * *            s* * * ‘*
&w   v     -v V      « H ^        .( -   • * '

C«®fMW«rt         £acctV>K^>

^    <>*>**&      ►» * . V >                          *

C gp^ Vo                   ^*r                •
                                                               —>             V T JRjv
                                                                                         »V«a 4a IL^m^*^ V
                                                                               I
               FROM TH E OFFICE O F THE LEADER O F TH E CITY COUNCIll
                                                                               f09H
                                       P.O.BOX 88
                               MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS,
                                                                                   L ja ssss^
                                 LIVERPOOL, L69 2DII.
                                                                                     r
                             Telephone: 051-S3ScSt9ftdx£xJc.   225-2318
                                                                                                m      r-
 The Rt. Hon. John Moore, M.P.,
                                                                     6th May, 1989.
 Secretary of State for Social Services,
 Richmond House,
 Whitehall,
 LONDON, SW1A 2NF.
                                                                                            $
                                                                              I k

Dear Secretary of State,


                            Hillsborough Tragedy

     Since Hillsborough seven Local Authorities in Merseyside, plus Cheshire
and Lancashire, together with Mersey Regional Health Authority, Merseyside
Probation Service and numerous voluntary organisations have been providing a
co-ordinated response.   On Saturday last, the 29th April, the Leaders of these
seven local authorities and the Leaders of Nottinghamshire and Sheffield Councils
met to consider a joint approach to the provision of services which will continue
to be necessary for several years to come.

     The attached report, prepared under the independent Chairmanship of the
Professor of Social Work at Manchester University, was agreed in principle. The
report recommends the establishment of a Regional Unit to provide a core of common
services, including

     i)     A Helpline to receive calls from anywhere day and night;
     ii)    The Co-ordination of counselling services both within and outside
             the nine local authorities provided by voluntary as well as
             statutory agencies;

     iii)    A Database capable of dealing with all requests for assistance and
             offers of help;

     iv)    A continuing training and staff support programme             in this previously
            unfamiliar area of work;

     v)     The management of media contacts and publicity.


     It was agreed to reconvene the meeting following exploration of all possible
sources of funding.   Recognizing that services will need to extend beyond theise
nine local authorities and be available nationally on a scale not previously
experienced by an authority or group of authorities, our first but not only approach
for funding is addressed to Government.   Further work is being undertaken to
approach private industry, charitable bodies and E.E.C.    Already the local social
services authorities in the North West have agreed to jointly sponsor an additional
training officer.

                                                                    /cont*d
The R t . Hon. John Moore, M . P . ,                                                                          6th May, 1989
Secretary o f S ta te fo r S o cia l S e r v ic e s -




 /continued




          The D e p a r t m e n t , we a n t i c i p a t e , would w i s h t o b e a s s o c i a t e d w i t h t h i s
i n i t i a t i v e and t h r o u g h Government may b e a b l e t o make f i n a n c e a v a i l a b l e t o f u n d t h e
Regional Unit a t a c o s t o f £350,000 per y ea r f o r a p eriod o f th r e e y e a r s .                                  Within
a l l t h e p a r t i c i p a t i n g l o c a l a u t h o r i t y a re a s i t w i l l a l s o be n e c e s s a r y t o ta k e u r g e n t
a c t i o n t o s t r e n g t h e n s t a f f i n g i n o r d e r t o d i r e c t l y h e l p i n d i v i d u a l s and t h e i r f a m i l i e s ,
a c c o r d i n g t o t h e s c a l e o f t h e problems which th e y are f a c i n g .                     As y e t t h e s e c o s t s
h a v e n o t b e e n f u l l y a s s e s s e d b u t when a g g r e g a t e d a r e u n l i k e l y t o b e l e s s t h a n £1 m i l l i o i
p e r y e a r , s p r e a d a c r o s s t h e N or t h W e s t .         The Government we h o p e woul d w i s h t o b e aware
o f t h i s and may c o n s i d e r making r e s o u r c e s a v a i l a b l e t o a s s i s t i n d i r e c t s e r v i c e
p r o v i s i o n as w e l l as t h e e s t a b l i s h m e n t o f t h e R e gion a l U n it.

        I t i s , o f c o u r s e , a p p r e c i a t e d t h a t Government h a s a l r e a d y d o n a t e d £ 5 0 0 , 0 0 0 t o w a r d s
t h e N a t i o n a l D i s a s t e r Fund.         T h i s f u n d h a s q u i t e p r o p e r l y f o c u s s e d i t s a t t e n t i o n on
t h e r e l i e f o f i n d i v i d u a l h a r d s h i p and w i l l p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l h e l p d i r e c t l y t o v i c t i m s ,
b u t w i l l n o t do away w i t h t h e n e e d f o r o t h e r h e l p o f a n o n - f i n a n c i a l k i n d t o b e
provided.

        G i v e n t h e n a t u r e and e x t e n t o f t h e s e s e r v i c e s t h i s l e t t e r h a s b e e n c o p i e d t o
 t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e f o r E nv i r o n me n t and t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e f o r S o c i a l S e c u r i t y ,
 and a l s o f o r i n f o r m a t i o n t o o f f i c e r s i n o t h e r a g e n c i e s .

           I n v i e w o f t h e i m p o r t a n c e o f t h e i s s u e s i n v o l v e d a c op y h a s b e e n f o r w a r d e d t o
t h e P ri me M i n i s t e r s o t h a t s h e , p e r s o n a l l y , c a n b e aware o f t h e s t a t e o f s e r v i c e
d e v e l o p m e n t and n e e d s .

          An e a r l y d e c i s i o n on f i n a n c i a l s u p p o r t woul d b e m os t a p p r e c i a t e d a s i t i s
a n t i c i p a t e d o t h e r p o t e n t i a l s o u r c e s o f f i n a n c e w i l l a w a i t t h e r e s p o n s e o f Government
b e f o r e making a commi tment .

                                                           Yours s i n c e r e l y ,




    Councillor D p                                                                               c o u n c i l l o r Mrs. L . J . E l l m a n ’
Leade.
   d er.    N o tt,        Pet t e t t             C o u n c illo r     John       u o l 1in s   L e a d e r , L a n c a s h i r e C.C.
                   l n g h a m s h i r e CC.       L e a d e r,    C h e s h ire    C.C.




     MARIE E. RIMMER
     Leader of St. Helens MBC
                                                                                                  P. J,      CORCORAN                     P.T.0.
                                                E.    T.     C UN N I F F E
                                                Leader            - D em oc r at         Group Leader           - L a b o u r G ro up
The R t . Hon. John Moore, M . P . ,
Secretary o f State fo r S ocial S erv ices.




         Councillor      J Keight.     JP

         Leader,     Knows ley Borough C o u ncil
                  A F T E R             H I L L S B O R O U G H




      A Report       and Recommendations                for C o - o r d i n a t i n g and

                     Delivering Helping               S e r v i c e s of the

                         D i r e c t o r s of S oc ia l     Services

                                of   the a re as      affected




 P r e p a r e d b y O f f i c e r s f rom Ch es hi re , Know sl ey, L a n c a s h i r e
 L i v e r p o o l , -Sefton, St. H e l e n s and W i r r a l in c o n s u l t a t i o n
 w i t h M e r s e y s i d e P r o b a t i o n Service, the V o l u n t a r y Agenc ie s ,
 M e r s e y R e g i o n a l H e a l t h A u t h o r i t y and M e r s e y s i d e E m e r g e n c y
 P l a n n i n g Unit, u n d e r the C h a i r m a n s h i p of P r o f e s s o r H o w a r d
 Parker.


                                          APRIL      1989




HLAAA©
     AIM

1.          To consider the feasibility including costings of
     establishing a regional unit in order to marshall and
     organise the allocation of a variety of resources so. that
     h e l p can be made available in the right place at the right
     time to people affected b y the "Hillsborough" disaster.    In
     this context "Region" is the seven local authorities.

     M E T H O D A N D FORMAT

2.        A working p a r t y of senior staff, drawn from statutory
     and voluntary agencies in the region was established to
     report on the potential for an A ssistance Unit built upon
     the service structure created after "Hillsborough".      The
     group was chaired by Howard Parker, Professor in Social Work
     at the University of Manchester.

3.            The report uses the experience gained from the disaster
     at "Hillsborough" and other recent tragedies, and sets out
     recommendations for dealing w ith the organisational,
     information and co-ordination issues which have arisen.
     Specifically, this consists off a synopsis of the key
     elements required to operate a service which is responsive
     to need and has an outreach capability, including the
     p r o v i s i o n of a helpline, counselling, specialised work,
     database, staff training/support and public relations.          All
     of these elements are included within the broad aim as
     stated above, and the role of the unit as p e rceived by the
     group.

     INTRODUCTION

4.             The events at " H i l l s b o r o u g h ” , Sheffield, on 15th April
     1989, are a graphic illustration of the extensive damage to
     p ersonal well-being which can be precipitated b y the trauma
     of a major disaster.         This applies to those directly
     involved, through injury or bereavement, their helpers,
     onlookers, and people suffering shock due to pub l i c i t y or
     a s s o c iation with similar events.                The effects are often
     l o ng-term -and can have a p r o found impact upon family life
     and on individual ability to cope with everyday living.

5.        "Hillsborough" is the latest in a tragic line of
     disasters.  Manchester Airport, Bradford, Piper Alpha,
     Zeebrugge, Kegworth, Clapham and Lockerbie h ave all
     illustrated h o w a major unexpected disaster affects the
     lives of ordinary people and the agencies w hich must provide
     them with assistance.    We h a v e learnt a great deal from
     these earlier tragedies, p a r t i c u l a r l y ho w large scale
     disasters produce trauma and grief much further and deeper
     than common sense would expect.




     HLAAAB
          F o l l o w i n g th e d i s a s t e r , t h e r e was a r a p i d m o b i l i s a t i o n
o f r e s o u r c e s from a v a r i e t y o f a u t h o r i t i e s , and
n o n -sta tu to ry a g en cies.             I t becam e a p p a r e n t from t h e o u t s e t ,
t h a t a m e ch a n ism was n e c e s s a r y t o e n s u r e t h a t t h e s e
r e s o u r c e s w ere p r o p e r l y c o - o r d i n a t e d t o r e a c h p e o p le and
f a m i l i e s in n eed in th e m ost e f f e c t i v e and s p e e d y manner.
D raw ing from th e e x p e r i e n c e o f t h o s e i n v o l v e d i n th e
r e s p o n s e t o e a r l i e r d i s a s t e r s , and from th e c u r r e n t
s i t u a t i o n , i t i s c o n s i d e r e d e s s e n t i a l t h a t an i n f r a s t r u c t u r e
i s e s t a b l i s h e d w h ich can c o n s o l i d a t e th e e f f o r t c u r r e n t l y
under way, and d e v e lo p and ad ap t i t t o m eet th e c h a n g in g
n e e d s o f t h e r e g i o n f o r a minimum p e r i o d o f tw o y e a r s .

BACKGROUND
          The s e r v i c e s a n d r e s o u r c e s a v a i l a b l e f o r a s s i s t a n c e
a r e , in t h e m ain, a l r e a d y i n p l a c e th o u g h n o t a lw a y s on th e
s c a le req u ired .        T hese s e r v ic e s a re p ro v id e d by a
m u ltip lic ity of o rg a n isa tio n s.             They must r e s p o n d t o t h o s e
w h o h a v e a s k e d f o r h e l p , b u t a l s o r e a c h o u t t o t h o s e who
h a v e n o t come fo r w a r d s p o n t a n e o u s l y .       I t i s im p ortan t th a t
s e r v ic e s are a v a ila b le q u ick ly, are e a s ily a c c e s s ib le ,
a p p r o a c h a b l e and a b l e t o d e a l w i t h a w h o le r a n g e o f
e m o tio n a l and p r a c t i c a l n e e d s .     Some o f t h e s e n e e d s w i l l b e
i m m e d i a t e , some s h o r t - t e r m , some o f a m ore p e r m a n e n t n a t u r e
a n d i n many c a s e s n e e d s w i l l r e m a i n h i d d e n f o r m o n t h s , o r
even y ea rs.

          L o ca lised s e r v ic e s , w ell p u b lic is e d , are o f co u rse,
m ost im p ortan t b u t th e s e sh o u ld be see n in th e c o n t e x t o f a
r e g io n a l netw ork o f c e n t r a l l y c o - o r d in a t e d r e s o u r c e s . In
a d d itio n , r e g io n a l c o -o r d in a tio n can m o b ilis e r e so u r c e s in
p a r t i c u l a r a r e a s w h ich w ould p e r h a p s b e overw h elm ed by
demand, i f l e f t t o co p e a l o n e .

KEY CO- ORDINATION FUNCTIONS REQUIRED A R E : -

(i)        R e c e ip t and a n a l y s i s o f     a l l r e q u e s ts fo r h e lp both
            l o c a l l y and n a t i o n a l l y   to ensure a co -o rd in a ted
            r e s p o n s e i s made;

(ii)       p r o v i s i o n o f an o u t r e a c h s e r v i c e t o t r a c k t h o s e      who
            n e e d h e l p , b u t who h a v e n o t y e t com e f o r w a r d ?

(iii)      prom ote q u a l i t y a ssu r a n c e       of    ser v ic es,     through
            m o n ito r in g and r e v ie w ;

(iv )      e s t a b l i s h m e n t o f c r i t e r i a f o r s t a f f ^ t r a i n i n g and^
             s u p p o r t p a t t e r n s w h i c h a r e common a c r o s s t h e r e g i o n ;

 (v)       a d v ise   on   th e   p u b lic   rela tio n s      fu n ctio n ;




HLAAAB
     J
 /



         (vi)      guidance and assistance in the establishment of
                   appropriate local databases which are compatible with
                   the central system, to ensure speedy, reliable and
                   accurate information;

         (vii)     promotion of liaison and co-operation between all
                   relevant agencies in the region;

         (viii)    review action already taken in other regions       (e.g.
                   Sheffield, Nottinghamshire).

         C OUNSELLING SERVICES - CONTINUING REQUIREMENTS

10.           It is clear from the information from previous
         disasters that continued access to practical and counselling
         services is required b y some victims for a considerable time
         after the event.  It cannot be assumed that individuals
         needing help will be requesting or needing it now and
         arrangements must be made to ensure that help is accessible
         and readily available in the medium and long-term.

11   .          The extent of future service requirements is difficult
         to predict though some indications of the range of problems
         presented, the location of people needing h elp and the form
         of h e l p they require should be available when data collected
         so far, has b e e n analysed.  Some patterns of service
         requirements will be discernible and inform the detailed
         planning of provision.

12.            Meanwhile it is possible to identify in b road terms the
         kinds of services that will be needed and the ways in which
         they may be provided.   A co-ordinated mix of centralised and
         local services from the statutory and v o luntary sector is
         likely to provide the greatest flexibility in the use of
         resources;   such flexibility will be n e cessary given the
         d ifficulty of identifying the extent and type of need, and
         ensuring that deployment of resources is appropriate and
         a dequately monitored.

         Philosophy

13.           It is- important to ensure that the service response
         meets with an overall philosophy agreed by the participating
         agencies.

                 For-the consumer this will mean that:

         (i)      There are clear avenues   for seeking h e l p   (locally and
                  regionally).

         (ii)      The response to their requests will be quick and
                   appropr i a t e .




         HLAAAB
             (iii)        Help is easily accessible (i.e.  h e l p is not
                          dependent upon where people live).

             (iv)          Help should be non-labelling and non-stigmatising.

                  For the participating agencies this will mean that
             services :

             (i)          Should be well co-ordinated and                       consistent.

             (ii)         Should be quality assured.

             (iii)        Cost effective.

             (iv)         Keep the consumer as the primary consideration.

  14.             In addition, the agencies will need to contribute to
             the wider bod y of knowledge that can be drawn upon-in the
             event of further disasters.   Funds to mount an evaluation of
             the response to this disaster are being sought
             independently.   The feedback from such research could be
             invaluable regionally and nationally in emergency planning.


             Specific Service Requirements

  15.             The provision of services as a response to disaster can
             be considered along a continuum with practical h e l p at one
             end and long-term counselling at the other.  Figure 1
             attempts to show this continuum in more detail.

             Figure 1 - A Service Continuum

P ractical                                Advice/                           Counselling                                Long-term
                                          G uidance                                                                   _Support
Help

        Transport |        Legal    Information |    A      |Physical I Sharing I         M ou rning I Bereave-     PTSD
                                                | Liaten-   I         I feelings |                   | ment
                      I
                                                | ing ear   |         I          I                  I

                   F in an ce   Medical       Referral Support    Medical    Relation-            Stresa   S ta f f Support
                                                on       Group               ships
                                                                                     Grief


  16.             It can be seen that the services along the continuum
             reflect particular post disaster time phases, the possible
             different modes or models of service provision and the
             possible locations where services are received.  Many of the
             services are best left at the local level where resources
             are familiar and can easily be adjusted in response to
             changes in need.




             HLAAAB
       //
      VA
      f




17.                   H o w e v e r , some c a n b e p r o v i d e d more e f f e c t i v e l y a t a
            R egion al l e v e l , e . g .       H e lp lin e , c e n tr a l in fo rm a tio n .         In
            a d d i t i o n , some s e r v i c e s c a n b e s t b e m o n i t o r e d , e v a l u a t e d and
            co -o rd in a ted at a region al le v e l.                A 'netw ork' o f s p e c i a l i s t
            s k i l l s can be d evelop ed by a r e g io n a l u n it .

18.                  The      I n t e r - A g e n c y P la n n in g Group recom m ends t h a t a
            co-ordinatTng b o d y ,                 k n o w n as t h e ‘‘H i l l s b o r o u g h S u p p o r t U n i t "
            b e e s t a b l i s h e d f o r a minimum p e r i o d o f tw o y e a r s .                  The U n i t
            s h o u l d h a v e an e x e c u t i v e o f f i c e r , and s u p p o r t s t a f f ;
            o p era te th e c e n tr a l H e lp lin e ;              s e t up a n e f f i c i e n t d a t a b a s e ;
            o v e r s e e th e p a tte r n o f s e r v ic e s to en a b le r e so u r c e s to be
            used e f f e c t iv e ly ;            see th a t d i s t r i c t s p ro v id e sy ste m a tic
            s u p p o r t and t r a i n i n g fo r a l l s t a f f ;           d ev elo p c le a r ch a n n els
            o f c o m m u n i c a t i o n a nd f o r m p a r t n e r s h i p s w i t h a l l r e l e v a n t
            a u t h o r i t i e s and non - s t a t u t o r y a g e n c i e s in t h e r e g i o n ;           set
            up m o n i t o r T n g , e v a l u a t i o n a n d p e r f o r m a n c e r e v i e w s y s t e m s .

19.                   The l e a d a u t h o r i t i e s r e s p o n s i b l e f o r t h e U n it c o u l d b e
            r e p r e s e n t e d th ro u g h a C om m ittee c o m p r is in g l o c a l a u t h o r i t y
            members and o f f i c e r s ' r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f M e rsey R e g i o n a l
            H ea lth A u th o r ity , M erseysid e P ro b a tio n S e r v ic e , V olu n tary
            O r g a n i s a t i o n s , and th e D i s a s t e r T r u s t Fund.

            S u ggested        'R egion al      S erv ices'

                     The s e r v i c e s o u t l i n e d b e lo w w i l l n eed t o b e              lin k ed    to
            each     o th e r through th e p rop osed R egion al U n it.

            HELPLINE

20 .                  T h is s e r v i c e c u r r e n t l y o p e r a t e s on a 24 h o u r d a y , 7 day
            w eek b a s i s and i s s t a f f e d b y o f f i c e r s o f t h e S o c i a l S e r v i c e s
            D ep artm en ts and a v a r i e t y o f o t h e r o r g a n i s a t i o n s .         G iven th e
            n a tio n w id e 'catchm en t' o f p o t e n t i a l u se r s o f th e s e r v ic e i t
            w ill be c o s t - e f f i c i e n t to r e ta in th is c e n tr a lis e d s e r v ic e at
            i t s c u r r e n t l e v e l f o r a p e r i o d o f w eek s t o come and w i l l
            e n s u r e a r e a d y a c c e s s p o i n t f o r c i s s i s t a n c e w h i l e medium t o
            lo n g e r term a rr a n g e m en ts a r e e f f e c t e d .          It is en visaged th at
            t h e H e l p l i n e w i l l becom e a n a t i o n a l 'o n e num ber' s e r v i c e run
            by th e r e g io n a l u n it w ith c a l l s then r e fe r r e d to lo c a l
            s e r v ic e s as a p p ro p ria te.

            C o-ord in ation         of    C o u n sellin g     S ervices

21.                  W h ilst c o u n s e llin g w ill u s u a lly be o ffe r e d very
            ' l o c a l l y ' i t w i l l be n e c e s s a r y to en su re th a t in d iv id u a ls
            a r e r e f e r r e d t o th e m ost a p p r o p r ia t e a g en cy ; t h a t t h e i r
            n eed s a r e m et, and th e s e r v i c e s a r e m o n ito r e d .        In a d d i t i o n




            HLAAAB
there will be people needing h e l p from outside the 'region'
whose needs must be assessed and referrals made.     This will
require a team of 4 hea ded by a team leader.

     It is important that referrals to and from statutory
agencies across the country are properly co-ordinated.
There are a number of voluntary agencies on Merseyside and
in the region for whom counselling is already the major, or
a significant part of their work; these should be used
wherever possible.  These include COMPASS, Personal Social
Services, C. of E. Board of Social Responsibility (through
the clergy and national organisations with local bases, such
as Cruse).  The regional unit would aim to co-ordinate
referrals to and from these agencies where appropriate.

Drop-in Centre

      The Anfield Advice Centre has already allowed .a large
number of 'survivors' to describe and share their experience
of being at Hillsborough.   It has offered other services as
well.   It is likely that this Centre will continue via
funding from other sources.   However, because of the
symbolic importance of Anfield we recommend that it is used
as a referral point for Helpline on Match Days.   We believe
that many new referrals will be obtained on Match Days.

OUTREACH AND CO-ORDINATION

     Whilst the majority of people affected by Hillsborough
reside within or just outside the Merseyside region it is
known that a significant number reside elsewhere.   This
problem was found by Kent following the Zeebrugge disaster
where survivors and others lived long distances from the
centre of help.  An "away" Team was established to initiate
and provide assistance outside the Dover area.   Zeebrugge
also demonstrated that many people required specialist help
from Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychiatrists etc., and
that a mechanism was needed to co-ordincite their services.
Thus problems were both identified and met by tlie Kent
"away" Team.

     Unlike Zeebrugge, however, the identity and location of
people affected by "Hillsborough" are largely unknown.
Whilst this is a handicap, there is sufficient justification
to reach out to those in potential need.  There is a need,
therefore, to establish the equivalent of the Kent "away"
Team but with the limited role of referring those from
outside the region to appropriate services across the
country.  Basic tasks will be to:-




HLAAAB
 : //




        1.   Provide a central telephone line, e.g. an 0800
              (freephone) number;

        2.   Provide an assessment and referral service, whereby
              people are re-referred to Local Advice Services;

        3.   Co-ordinate referrals both from within and without the
              region;

        4.   Provide oversight of the different elements of
              specialist services, e.g. psychologists etc.

        5.   Identify key events and anniversaries which may effect
              individuals and consequently service provision (e.g.
              Inquests, future football games).

             Thus the differing needs of people will be identified
        and the appropriate resources matched up to meet those
        needs: this will avoid duplication of effort and create a
        more efficient use of resources.

        DATABASE REQUIREMENTS

26.          The unit will require a database capable of recording
        information fed through to the 'helpline', 'drop.in' centres
        and other source points. The majority of contacts will be
        within two broad categories, i.e. either requesting
        assistance or offering help. Currently the ‘Hillsborough
        Helpline' has separate systems dealing with these two
        elements. At present, nearly 3,600 offers of help have been
        received from a variety of sources, including over 600
        through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'. About 1,650 requests
        for help have been received nationally, the majority of
        these being through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'. With this
        level of activity occuring, it is clear that an effective
        database is essential to matching needs for assistance with
        the wide range of resources available.

27.          In respect of referrals for help, a manual database was
        established as a record of callers, pending the setting up
        of the computerised system. It is suggested that this be
        retained and maintained as a back up in case of problems
        with the system.

28.          Information which is useful for the database, includes
        basic details such as names, addresses, local authority of
        origin, referral to district and agency, general
        practitioners, significant dates, (birthdays, anniversaries
        etc). Each person has an individual reference number, and
        there is a facility for a group reference for people linked
        together.




        HLAAAB
29.        Staffing levels, which are currently based upon staff
      seconded from other duties should be formalised as soon as
      possible. Minimum staffing is expected to require a systems
      manager, two operators, and full-time clerical support.
      Once the system is up to date close links should be
      maintained with the 'Helpline', and other agencies involved
      in collating or investigating data.

      Staff Training and Support

30.        The need for on-going and carefully targetted training
      has been demonstrated via earlier disasters. Clearly such
      training can and has already been 'bought in' from external
      sources. So far this specialist training has been
      provided for local authority workers. The regional unit
      would hope to adopt a policy of 'training the trainers' and
      thus by using expertise within the region attempt to reduce
      training costs.

31.        It is absolutely clear that those managing and working
      in post-disaster situations found the work very stressful.
      They need access to regular de-briefing and 'talking out'
      sessions. Whilst for some workers this will in part be
      provided in their own agencies there is a need for an
      independent service which all helpers, whether paid or
      voluntary staff, can use. The regional unit would aim to
      ensure these support systems were in place and make
      arrangements to co-ordinate offers of this ‘care for the
      carers' (e.g. by BASW and the Psychology Service). The unit
      could also respond, in confidence, to direct requests from
      staff anywhere in the region.

      PUBLIC RELATIONS

32.        "Public relations" is an important and basic element in
      the success or failure of any venture. This is complex and
      requires skilled and sensitive handling if its potential is
      to be realised.   It needs to be regarded as an explicit
      task, and cis part of the management and objectives of the
      unit.   It can best be organised within the framework of a
      public relations strategy.

            Such a strategy will acknowledge that:-

      (i)      Interest in the disaster will be subject to
               fluctuation. For example:   funerals, inquests,
               litigation, football matches, anniversary of the
               disaster etc. Forward planning for the impact of
               these events is required.




      HLAAAB
      (ii)     Public Relations is heavily dependent on hard, factual
               and accurate information about the work of the unit.
               There will, therefore, need to be direct links between
               the management and the public relations functions of
               the unit.

      (iii) Media interest can sometimes be aggressive and
            time-consuming. This can be wasteful at best and
            damaging at worst. Thus contact with the media needs
            to be carefully channelled and regulated separating
            local and regional issues.

33.        It is suggested that Public relations can best be
      undertaken by the Head of the Unit along with substantial
      support from the Management Committee.

      COSTINGS

34.        Since "Hillsborough" is a national disaster, it is
      recommended that strenuous efforts are made to obtain the
      funding of the Unit from central government, the EEC and
      other sources. Costs are estimated at around £350,000 per
      year for two years. This may be generous or alternatively
      additional resources may need to be added on.

      CONCLUSION

35.        The advantages of co-ordinating all helping responses
      seem clear. It is believed that a Regional Unit would, in
      the long run, be cost effective and more importantly would
      introduce a whole series, of supports and checks which would
      mean a better service for those who need it, including the
      carers.




                                                                        /A



      29th April, 1969




      HLAAAB
            ESTIMATED COSTS "HILLSBOROUGH" SUPPORT UNIT


                                1989/90   1990/91   1991/92

                               From       Full      To

                                1.7.89    Year      30.6

RUNNING COSTS                   £000      £000      £000
Salaries                         140       185           46

Volunteer Expenses                33        44           11

Office Accommodation, etc.        26        34            9

Supplies and Services             12        14            4

Transport                            6       8            2

Telephone                         11        15            4

Printing, Stationery etc.            8      10            2

Central Support                      8      10            3

Contingency                      30         30           15

                                274       350        96



EQUIPMENT ETC

Typewriter, Wordprocessor
Computer Hardware
Software                        40
Phone System
Office Furniture



                                314       350        96




HLAAAB
       Of   f




■X .



                r.; -i-V'M'. ■■
                    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY


                                                    'E Z 8 M T       O t~ ~      H 1 S :£ = *L _ T "M




                                                                      Due Date For Reply                                   / O       S     / Q       9


 minister Reply
 n m i D MELLO                                                    Correspondent
                                                                  MI SC S

                                                              i Constituency


                                                              I Date Of Letter
                                                              ! £ 6 / 04/89

Keyword
                                                              i Const ituent/Subject
EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                                              i SALVATION PRMY

Notes




MISS GREEN
HSS     B              105/
A 417    ftF h /'      IO S/
                       !89/

                               -GM PiLKXED,- B F F n R F j - B E X L ig fe L -X C L J S B IV flT F   nFFTpi
  IP**..




                                                                                                                         To be noted after

                                                                                                                      ^settlement by: —




EF 53A                                                                                          <01778) Printed In th e UK fo r HMSO 7 /8 8 Dd. 8132311/99001 C 250 <15121)
JPOOSOo/2


                  • • * * UNXI5 BHAXV AS XBE MZIDXS OB LEFT SAG • • • •

                                                         FZHAL HXVDTE



1. A    tfttty
            'LETTER QH-UU. Ai'l'KOPAlAiE MlWlSTEBlAL BEADED V QTEPAPM ZS
ATTACHED OPPOSITE WHICH BAS BEEN CLEARED BY (PO GUIDE PARA 3.33 AND 3.43B):


Vue .                                      . G rad *              77.................. Branch . . £ & ! Jr7 .

Boon . . . . & & $ ? {              Building . & £ £ { ............* * t JsVf.^./cata . . .l? L A




      ENCLOSURES ARE CONTAINED ZN PS2 AHD ABE:

      A ............................................................ B,

      C .............. ........                      D
                                                                                   Znclosuras sent
                                                                                   ( in it ia l and data):
      SEND COPIES OF THE FINAL REPLY TO (GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS ONLY):

      A ...................... .                                   B          .................... .

      C ............... ............. D ........................... .

                                                                                   Copias sant
                                                                                   ( in it ia l and data):

      IN CASE OF ANY QUERY ON THE XEPLY CONTACT:

      Varna                                        Ext jL!f.7/ Boon . . . . . .VJ Building              .Am..
5.    THE FOLLOWING SPECIAL POINTS SHOULD BE VOTED:




                                                                                   Spacial points actionad
                                                                                   ( in it ia l and data):

6.   AFTER DESPATCH OF THE FZHAL 1EPLY RETURN THIS FXLS TO:

     VtM                                                ^Div/Branch . . . £r.£A £ rr..

     Boon         . Q ilk P . f i ......................... Building .        M     t .
                                                                                                                13   ih
JP0050O


                                   PBIVATE OFFICE CASE             tW
                            PLEASE READ THESE NOTES CASEFULLY
                                                                                     T

IS THIS FILE FOR YOU?


1.   Check that this file is for you. If it isn’t, redirect it immediately
and inform by telephone, the officer in the Correspondence Section responsible
for this case who is:-


        PHILIP HASBIMAN Ext 5189, Boon 226 Biehmond House (01-210 3000 or GTN 210)

Do other branches need to contribute?

2.   If contributions from other branches will be required this action should
be set in train without delay, using part papers. These should be enclosed in
a folder boldly marked as containing Ministerial correspondence and bearing a
clear indication of the date by which it should be returned to the originating
branch. The lead branch has responsibility for the co-ordination and drafting
style of the whole reply.


Is a Local Eeport Necessary?

3.    Where a constituent's experience is only quoted in an MP's letter as an
illustration of the effect of policies as opposed to where the complaint
   >cerns the treatment which the constituent has received from the Department
it may be necessary to seek a local report.


Interim Beplies

4   .Where it is not possible to provide draft replies within the time
specified branches should explain to Correspondence Section that an extension
is needed. The draft interim reply should include an explanation of the
reason for a delay to the full reply.


Checking Typing and Legibility

5.   Branches should thoroughly check typed replies before they are sent to
the Private Office Correspondence Section or ensure that manuscript drafts are
legible. This is most important if unnecessary delay to correspondence is to
be avoided. Wherever possible, branches should prepare replies typed on the
appropriate Ministerial aotepaper.


Final Minute

6.** PLEASE ALWAYS COMPLETE THE FIKAL MINUTE OTESLEAF BEFOBE KETUOTEG THE
FILE TO COB1ESPOHDENCE SECTXO*. **
                                                        R eference




                 &'u3



             \            *        <>           Adr                                       ^

             ^                                          -jr          eu_          fcfct
             A t& u r^-Jc                i^ J C ^ . .                ( J      ^     ^ ^ o .,

             Ijo e ^ - ^ x - d     t t   >i        w v td             iLv r             ^
                                                                                                t)
             kV                                  (o         ^        ^u_      tr^j^         ,




                                 e \h
                    fmr 1 % ^ ^
                                          / " ■ /*/r

                                              -A ' C                              lr-




CODE 18-78
XA/89600                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                            Richmond House, 7 9 W hitehall, London SW1A 2 N S
                                         Telephone 01_210 3000

                                       From the Minister for Health


P0H(2)1701/126


Major Trevor A Smith
The Salvation Army
101 Queen Victoria Street
LONDON                                                       -9       J U N E   "^9
EC4P 4EP




Thank you for your letter of 26 April about the Joint Working Group on
disaster follow-up and counselling. 1 am pleased that The Salvation Army
welcomes the establishment of this Group and the work it intends to do.

Although funded by the Department of Health, the Working Group is being
administered by CRUSE-Bereavement Care and the membership was determined
following consultation between CRUSE and the various Local Authority
Associations. I know they faced a difficult task in attempting to ensure wide
representation but at the same time keep the size of the Group manageable.
However, I understand that the Group intends to undertake an extensive
consultation exercise with organisations involved in helping victims and
relatives following disasters and will naturally be seeking views and comments
from The Salvation Army. I have also been assured that the role played by
ministers of religion in times of disaster will be fully taken into account.
Incidentally, you may be interested to know that the Director of CRUSE,
Derek Nuttall, who is a member of the Group is, in fact, an ordained minister.

I was most interested to read your booklet "The Role of The Salvation Army in
the Emergency Services" and I know of the rapid and very helpful response
The Salvation Army has made in recent disasters. I am sure that your
experiences will be a valuable source of information for the Working Group.

I have passed this correspondence to the Working Group and thank you for the
interest you have shown.




                                                          DAVID MELLOR
THE SALVATION ARMY                                                                101 Q ueen Victoria Street
                                                          Founder                     London EC4P 4EP
N ation al H eadquarters fo r th e British Territory   WILLIAM BOOTH            Telephone: 01-236 5222   Telex: 895-4847

The Rt. Hon. David Mellor QC, MP,
Minister of State,
Department of Health,
Richmond House,
79 Whitehall,
London W1A 2NS.                                                                 26th April 1989

Dear Minister,

                         Coping With                   rological Effects___________

      I read with interest the Press Release of 20th April under the above
heading and, as National Emergency Officer for The Salvation Army, welcome the
steps being taken in regard to the above.

      May I draw to y o u r attention that Salvation Army officers, who are
ministers of religion and community care workers, are invariably involved in
scenes of disaster, not least being the Zeebrugge ferry disaster and subsequent
major disasters, including the recent one which so sadly affected Sheffield and
Liverpool. Our officers are usually involved in immediate counselling and
care and often in long-term counselling. For your information, we have our
own Counselling Department, which among other things is involved in counselling
our own people when involved in emergency work.

      I        enclose a copy of the booklet "The Role of The Salvation Army in the
Emergency Services" which at present is under revision, not least in the light
of recent disasters.

      May I make the observation that no minister of religion, whether Salvation
Army or another denomination, is involved in the list of those participating
in the Working Group. I hope that in future deliberation cognizance is taken
of the crucial role ministers of religion undertake in times of disasters.


      Interestingly enough, I recently met Lord Ferrers at the Croydon Police
Station, following our involvement in the Purley trains' disaster, when we
conversed about the Salvation Army response.

         Kind regards I
                                                                            Yours sincerely




                                                                             Trevor A. Smith
                                                                                  Major
                                                                       Services to the Community
FOREWORD
                                                     *       *
    For many the Salvation Army means the harmonious tones of a
                                                                   ■*
    band playing hymns on a Sunday, to others the girls selling
    "w a r c r y ” in the local pub on a Friday or Saturday night.

    How many remember though the Salvation Army that greeted
    the Allied Troops on the south coast on their return from
    Dunkirk? How many remember their dauntless efforts at
    Aberfan? The people of Wisbech will certainly remember the
    assistance they gave when the River Nene overspilled its
    banks in early January, 1978.

    Disasters do not finish when the "clearing-up" is completed;
    the long term social effects of disasters is a role in
    which the Salvation Army plays a particularly important
    part.

    This manual is essential reading material for any person
    wishing to obtain an experienced and practical approach to
    incident area practices.   The brief summaries of the roles
    played by the Ambulance, Police and Fire Services indicate
    the part these services play at the scene of a disaster.

    The remarks on pre-planning,     approach to the incident,
    conduct at the incident and dress together with the very
    practical advice on the use of various types of equipment,
    should be thoroughly learned by all groups considering
    providing a service under disaster conditions.

    The L o n d o n E m e r g e n c y   Services Joint Pl ann ing Committee
                                                                  January     19 73



        Quality involvement...
               Society has come to expect,  and rightly so, that
        The Salvation Army will always be on the 'spot1 when a
        caring role is to be played.   Our involvement in the
        'emergency situation'  is not a new one to us as we have
        played a part to the best of our ability during times of
        war, natural disaster and those disasters caused by man.

                    Our aims
                         have not changed, but the ' e m e r g e n c y
        work involvement’  has, due to technical advancement.
        This  'Manual'  of guidance must be the handbook of our
        operations and therefore every Salvationist., adherent or
        friend should acquaint themselves with these guide-lines
        which have been read and approved by Police, Fire and
        Ambulance Authorities throughout the country.

                Success in this field will depend not only on the
         amount of assistance we can offer but also on the
         quality of our involvement. By being involved we show a.
         caring spirit, and through a caring spirit we show God's
         Love.




                                                           British Commissioner •
 SSviSisS
     The role o f
     The Salvation Arm y
     in the Emergency
     Services
     GENERAL PRINCIPLES
          B A S IC C H A R A C T E R A N D T R A D I T I O N
               The Salvation Army is a religious   and charitable
          movement,finding its expression in a desire to alleviate
          human distress wherever found.
               It is not primarily an emergency disaster relief
          organisation, but by tradition and inclination usually
          finds itself serving at the point of greatest need,
          during the emergency period of a disaster.

          DIMENSION
               The Salvation Army is an international movement
          organised to serve nationwide.   Its primary emergency
          service is financed by available resources and donations
          Long range service,    if required, is funded by special
          appeals.

          READILY AVAILABLE
               The network of varied programmes  for human better­
          ment is so geared as to be readily available         for
          emergencies.  Trained/untrained personnel are ready to
          give essential relief where needed.   These services are
          rendered by formal agreement or as need requires.



     TYPES OF SERVICE
i.
          Salvation Army Emergency Service may include
          1.     Evacuation.
          2.     Emergency feeding.                (Mass and individual)
f         3.     Food distribution.
I         4.     Shelter.          (Mass and individual)
          5.     Clothing distribution.
          6.     Counselling.            (Spiritual ministry)
          7.     M o r t u a r y ass is ta nc e.
          8.     Personal enquiry services.                    (Missing persons)
          9.     Welfare, family rehabilitation, casework,                     furniture
                  and bedding, household needs.
          10.    Services to disaster workers.
I                                                     1
WHAT IS A DISASTER ?
             A disaster may also be named as a                  'majo r i n c i d e n t '
       or ’s e r i o u s o c c u r r e n c e s ' depending in which part of the
       country it happens.

             'MAJOR DISASTER' is a relative term not easy to
       define. The definition commonly used by the Emergency
       Services is:-

              A S E R I O U S D I S R U P T I O N OF LIFE A R I S I N G W I T H L ITTLE
              OR NO W A R N I N G , C A U S I N G OR T H R E A T E N I N G TO CAUSE
              D E A T H O R INJ UR Y T O N U M B E R S OF P EO PL E IN E XCESS
              OF T H O S E W H I C H CAN BE D E A L T W I T H B Y T H E PUBLIC
              S E R V I C E S O P E R A T I N G U ND E R N O R M A L C O N D I T I O N S AND
              R E Q U I R I N G T HE S P E C I A L M O B I L I S A T I O N A ND O R G A N I S ­
              A T I O N OF T HO S E SERVICES.

            At the same time there may be        ' in cidents' which do
      not warrant the above mobilisation and organisation, yet
      at the same time, the assistance from the Salvation Army
      would be greatly valued and appreciated.            We should not
      concern ourselves whether a disaster is classed as a
      ' major d i s a s t e r ' or by any other classification, our
      primary concern is to offer our services           and resources
      if we feel they can assist the           " Full T im e  Emergency
       Services."




WHO ARE THE"FULL TIME EMERGENCY SERVICES" ?
       1.   THE A M B U L A N C E S E R V I C E
       2.   THE FIRE B R I G A D E
       3.   THE P O L I C E FORCE



WHAT ARE THEIR MAIN ROLES ?
      1. The Am bulance Service
            A I M S : In most incidents, the Ambulance Service
                      is responsible for:-
            providing initial treatment and conveyance to the
            nearest accident and emergency department of :
            i) persons who are injured in an accident whether
               it happens in the home or in a public place, &
            ii)persons taken suddenly ill in a public place.
      In the event of a major incident involving a large
      number of casualties, special arrangements will have
      been made to muster as much of the Services' resources
      as are required to deal with the situation.
      The aims normally of the Ambulance Service under
      major incidents conditions are:-
                                              2
  * a)   AT CONTROL
            To get sufficient personnel and equipment on the spot
            quickly to deal with immediately accessible casualties
   I        To keep up a flow    of ambulances   to meet    the   total
            requirement;
            To maintain    adequate   cover   for the duration of the
            incident;
            To alert the hospital services by notifying approp­
            riate hospitals that they are the 'Designated' and
            'Supporting1 hospitals.

   b) . AT SCENE
            To provide immediate life-saving treatment e.g.
            resuscitation, arrest of bleeding et c . , followed by
            immobilisation or fractures, application of dressings
            and other appropriate treatment for the less seriously
            injured before removal from the scene;
            To convey the casualties according to greatest need to
            hospital and to continue treatment en-route;
            To spread the casualties amongst appropriate hospitals

   C) SUPPORT OF OTHER SERVICES
            The Ambulance Service relies on the Fire Brigade for
            the rescue of victims and on the Police for assistance
            in establishing and keeping clear the ambulance park­
            ing and loading points.
            The Service is very much dependent on the ability of
            the Police to control traffic congestion, so that
            ambulances are not impeded in reaching the injured,
            and to help clear t h e ■routes to hospitals.
            If treatment beyond what is appropriate for an
            ambulance-man to apply is needed at the scene, the
            Service will call for the assistance of a team of
            doctors and nurses from a nearby 'listed' hospital.
            In the assessment of priorities and removal of
            casualties to hospital, the Service works closely
            with the site Medical Officer who normally attends
            from the designated hospital.
            Volunteers trained in first-aid   and other skills
            frequently offer their services   at a major incident.
            It is helpful if they report to   the Incident Officer
            so that they can be directed to   where their assistance
            is most required.




         2. The Fire Brigade
a) FUNCTIONS
         Fire fighting and rescue under fire conditions.
         Fire' precautions and heavy rescue under non-fire
         conditions.
         Rescues which require fire service specialist
         equipment and techniques, or in conditions
         where hazardous substances or gases are present.
         Effective liaison with other essential services
b) RESPONSIBILITIES OF SENIOR FIRE OFFICER
   PRESENT AT AN INCIDENT

      Initiating the rescue plan and the rescue of trapped
      persons.
      Deployment of specialist rescue equipment available
      to him - viz:
      Flame or compressed air cutting plant;
      Lifting gear;
      Purchase tackle;
      Breathing apparatus;
      Anti-acid and high voltage protective clothing;
      Mobile lighting plant as necessary;
      All forms of fire control.

      To call upon other suitably equipped bodies or
      organisations for their assistance if needed.
      To liaise with the officers of all other essential
      services at the incident either by two-way radio or
      physical delegation of fire officers.
      'The pumping appliances, special appliances, personnel
      and Mobilising Controls of the Fire Brigade are self-
      sufficient in the execution of their tasks.




3. The Police A uthorities
         AIMS:
         No precise formula can be laid down but the Police
         responsibilities may be summarised as follows
         Preservation of life;
         Co-ordination of emergency services;
         Control of traffic;
         Casualty Bureau;
         Protection of property.


EQUIPMENT AND SERVICES
      A mobile Police Station will be sent to the incident
      whenever it is needed.

      Major Incident Boxes are maintained at many Divisional
      and sub-Divisional Stations and contain equipment for
      setting up an "Incident Control Point" nearer to the
      incident if it is required. Some Police Authorities
      keep their equipment where the vehicles are garaged
      whilst others keep it always on the vehicles.
      Supplies of additional stationery and equipment are
      held at Divisional Stations and can be sent to the
      scene if required.
                                 4
ASSISTANCE OF OTHER ORGANISATIONS
          The Police Authorities are grateful tor assistance
          from voluntary organisations providing they report
          to the Incident Officer, and that they do not turn
          up at the incident before being called to do so by
          the Police.




           THE SALVATION A R M Y
           Whilst it is appreciated that no two incidents or
           disasters follow the same pattern or require iden­
           tical expressions of service, the following guide­
           lines are given for successful planning and work
           with other Emergency Services.
           AIMS
           To offer to the "f u l l t i m e e m e r g e n c y s e r v i c e s " ,
           equipment and manpower which will assist them in
           their demanding tasks to alleviate suffering and
           to show something of our Christian love in action.

           The next three headings will assist in our
           'thinking' regarding the offering of our services
           to the " f u l l t i m e e m e r g e n c y s e r v i c e s " s -

           B E F O R E IT H A P P E N S --- Forward Planning
           W H E N IT H A P P E N S ------ ACTION ON THE SPOT
           F O L L O W U P - - - - - - - - - - - A*1 a s s e s s m e n t to p r o v i d e
                                                 information for future action.




           1. B efore it happens
G U I D E L I N E S FOR P R E P A R A T I O N
           The following steps are necessary in organising for
           emergency disaster service at both corps (local) and
           divisional levels:-

a)         Prepare inventory of personnel in the area. This
           should include a file giving the name, address,
           telephone number,    method of communication ,
           special skills and qualifications of each indiv­
           idual who may be called upon to serve in the
           event of a special emergency. This would include
           corps officers, institutional officers,     head­
           quarters officers,  soldiers,   local   officers,
           employees, advisory board     and   service unit
           members and other volunteer workers.

b)         Prepare inventory of all available    structural
           facilities in the area of command, including
           Salvation Army buildings,   institutions,  etc.,
           and some description of the way in which they
           might be used in connection with an emergency of
           disaster proportions.   On each card it would be
           well to note special limitations and restrict­
           ions, such as the safe number of people for
                                                      5
       general occupancy, or the number of people that
       could be accommodated for emergency feeding ,
       clothing distribution, or whatever activity may
       be indicated.

c)     Prepare inventory of all material resources,
       including cooking apparatus,clothing and bedding
       and automotive equipment, whether set up as
       canteen or adaptable for canteen, or other emer­
       gency services. It is understood that resources
       of all departments of Salvation Army activity
       will be available.
       Work out co-operative arrangements in advance.

d)    Make sure that a stock of emergency supplies and
       equipment has been secured and is readily avail­
       able.    Be familiar with nearby sources for re­
       placement of supplies as need may require.

e)    Work out with responsible authorities the place
       of the Salvation Army in this important activity
       always maintaining the identity of The Salvation
       Army, working under The Salvation Army chain of
       command.  The responsible Salvation Army Officer
       should assist in every way possible with the
       development of sound planning and operation in
       his area.

f)    Prepare a file listing the other organisations,
      both public and private, in the community which
      might be related to giving some form of special
       service in a disaster.   Information concerning
       them should include addresses, telephone numbers
      names of key personnel to contact, a description
       of their specific function and any arrangement
      between the Salvation Army and such organisation
      with regard to co-operative endeavour for emer­
       gency disaster service.




       2. A ctio n on th e spot
PROCEDURAL GUIDELINES AT SCENE OF DISASTER
       Normally the 'local'  Corps/Institution Officer
       is the first on the scene and it is his duty to
       initiate the first lines of contact,although in
       many areas the Emergency Services are alerting
       The Salvation Army Services.

       In initiating services at the scene of a
       disaster, care shall be taken to insure that
       the resources of The Salvation Army are used to
       the best possible advantage in meeting the
       needs of distressed people in the area. Service
       is the only reason for the presence of The
       Salvation Army at the scene of disaster.   Upon
       arriving at the scene of disaster, the director
       of operations will:-
                 Q U I C K L Y S U R V E Y THE S I T U A T I O N
                 TO A S C E R T A I N S E R V I C E S N E E D E D

      The following steps should be taken,   in order
      or simultaneously, according to circumstances:-
                     Initiate services                and      assign         personnel to
                     specific duties.
                     a) Ascertain service needed.
                     b) Alert staff and voluntary workers.
                     c) Assemble supplies.
                     d) O r g a n i s e w o r k e r s - a s s i g n r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s .
                     e) Be sure Salvation Army identification is
                        visible.
          2   .     Notify divisional headquarters immediately
                     as to nature and scope of the emergency.
          3   _     Contact local authotities, informing them '
                     tha.t Salvation Army services are available,
                     and' are on "STAND-BY" alert and can be
                     mobilised if needed.
          4   _     Determine if additional equipment,                              supplies
                     and personnel are needed.
          5   .     Establish Salvation                    army      headquarters              or
                     base of operations -
                     Procure centrally located headquarters, if
                     possible - s c h o o l , c h u r c h , b a s e m e n t , h o t e l etc.
                     Post identifying signs                   (S.A. Shield).

THE I N C I D E N T G RO U N D
          The 'incident or disaster' is often surrounded
          by two zones:
                        a) Inner Zone.
                        b) Outer Zone. S e e f i g u r e 1 at b a c k o f manual.
             The 'outer zone'  is an area normally taped or
         barricaded off to normal access and it is at this first
         point that our 'services' will be stopped.    If we are
         expected or needed we will be allowed through this zone
         If we are not allowed through the outer zone,      then
         there is a good reason why - dangerous walls, explosive
         gases, chemical leakages and so on. Our duty is then to
         wait until we are allowed through, or to ask the Inci­
         dent Officer is there a role we can offer where we are.

             The 'inner zone'  is normally a few metres or so
         surrounding the incident/disaster and is the area often
         of confusion, carnage and mutilations.   Only those who
         can physically cope should be allowed into this area —
         remembering that if we are 'overcome' either physically
         mentally or emotionally then we become another casualty
         demanding time and effort from rescue workers which
         could be better used elsewhere.


S E T T I N G UP ON THE S A L V A T I O N A R M Y C O N T R O L P OI N T
             The normal reaction of Salvationists is to rush to
         the scene of the disaster and although we   commend our
         personnel for such action, it can at times cause chaos.
             On arriving at the incident ground,      the Corps/
         Institution Officer or appointed Emergency Officer,
         should make   contact with the Incident Officer at
         Control Unit and ascertain to what role we should adopt
         At the same time, the Divisional Commander should set
         up a base to which all Salvationists should present
         themselves. This base would supply the Salvation   Army
         Incident Officer with the types and numbers of people
         he would need within the inner-zone.             The role of the
         Salvationist would be forever changing and                 therefore
         the different types of people would be needed as the
         roles changed - e.g. s e e f i g u r e 1 a t t h e b a c k o f m a n u a l

             a),   serving of refreshments.
             b)    counselling casualties and relatives or friends.
             c)    minor first aid.
             d)    collecting of articles handed over by rescue
                   workers .
             e)    collating of information.
             f)    mortuary work.
             g)    escorting relatives to identifying bodies.

         As the Incident Officer asked the Salvation Army Inci­
         dent Officer for personnel,   then he would either by
         radio or by a 'runner'      pass this request on to the
         Control Officer at The Salvation Army base.

         The Control Officer on receiving the request from The
         Salvation Army Incident Officer would respond         by
         sending' the amount of people and where possible, those
         with the required skills which were needed. The Control
         Officer would need to see that Salvation Army personnel
         had either uniform or some other type of visible identi­
         fication upon them.         All Salvation Army personnel
         entering the inner-zone would need to be entered by the
         Control Officer within a log-book which would need to
         be kept as a record of both personnel and equipment
         which was used.

  REQUEST      T IME-      NAME E QUIP ME NT       ROLE      RELIEVED/CONTROL
               IN                                            TIME-OUT OFFICER
  S . A.                                           Coun sel­          J .S m i t h
  INCIDENT     1 1 -15                -            l i ng     15-30   (D.C.)
  OFFICER

  F IR E       11-50              5 g al l o n s   Refresh­     14-30    J.Smith
  BRIGADE                         Tea              m en t s              ( D . C .)

    »                             1 50 H am        Re fre sh-   14-30    A.Watson
                   "
                                  R o ll s         m e nt s              (DYS)
  POLICE       1 2-30    Ma jor       -                         i   t_   A. W a t s o n
                                                   Mortuary
                         B anks                                 16' 10   (DYS)
                                                   Mortuary     16-10    J.Smith
                                                                         (D.C.)
  INCIDENT     13-00 B r i g .                     Counsel­     14-15    J .S m i t h
  OFFICER            Mills                         l in g                (D.C.)
figure   2

         Salvationists could be told to report to the Salvation
         Army base at various times as  'relief' crews would be
         needed if the disaster/incident was to be a protracted
         one.

         It is of paramount importance that Salvation Army per­
         sonnel leave their own personal vehicles as far away
         from the Incident Ground as possible, therefore leaving
         plenty of access and exit for Emergency vehicles.

NON-INCIDENT GROUND WORK

         There is often great demand for 'volunteer' workers at
         the hospitals where both victims and relatives      are
         taken from the Incident Ground.
          The Salvationists can be a tremendous help to the Local
          Authorities and local hospital services.  The Ambulance
          Incident Officer would notify The Salvation Army Inci­
          dent Officer as to which hospitals were being used and
          he in return would pass this information on to the
          Control Officer who would dispatch personnel to assist,
          remembering to enter the relevant details within his
          log book.

          At the hospital there would be various              roles which
          Salvation Army personnel could do - e.g.

                a)   Refreshments.
                b)   Counselling
                c)   Writing letters/telephone calls.
                d)   Giving advice/directions.
                e)   Sitting with relatives/children.

          This would enable the hospital services to get on with
          jobs they are trained to do.




         3. Follow -up
         There would be families to visit, relatives to
         comfort and console,   furniture to provide and
         various other jobs which the Emergency Services
         do not normally cover.             In this field
         the Salvationist comes into his own. Names and
         addresses etc., would be provided either by the
         Police or local authorities.      Records of all
         those visited should be kept and what service
         was offered.

D E B R I E F I N G A F T E R T HE E VENT
         The best way to assess whether or not our services were
         effective or not is to look at the roles requested of
         us by the Emergency Services and how we are able to
         meet those roles.   If the essential Salvation Army
         Officers/non-officers were given a questionnaire     to
         complete, we would analyse the findings and come to an
         honest conclusion - e.g.

questionnaire:

         .1. Did the call out 'alert' system operate efficiently?
         • 2. Were we on the scene quickly enough?
           3. Were relationships with full-time Emergency Services
              etc. satisfactory?
           4. What weaknesses in organisation were apparent?
           5.    Were we ableto carry out       all ascribed roles?
           6.    In what way might we have done better in the actual
                operations?
           7.    What was the most effective aspect of our service?
           8.    Any contacts that will be beneficial in the future?
           9. Were letters of appreciation sent?
         10.    General remarks and comments.
                                            Q
             Number of personnel used and Manhours :
             Lise of provisions used :_______________
             List of equipment used :________________


•            Equipment checked :_____________________
             Comments :


             Equipment
             As already stated, the Salvation Army is not primarily
             an Emergency Service and therefore does not need to
             possess the same kind of equipment as other emergency
             services, but at the same time,we should have a source
             of equipment that will assist us to make our service a
             worthwhile contribution.

D I V I S I O N A L LEVEL
             Every Division should have a DIRECTORY OF EMERGENCY
             SERVICES (Salvation Army). The Directory should be in
             the possession of every 'Army'  institution and every
             Officer should know how the Directory operates.

             The Directory should be a simple, but efficient
             document giving a comprehensive guide and list of all
             available resources within the Division.      The most
             important person will be the Divisional Commander and
             therefore his/her telephone number, both home and
             office should be clearly stated as well as both home
             and office address.
             Other important personnel such as the Divisional
             Officer for Men's/Women's Social Services and Emer­
             gency Unit drivers should be clearly appointed within
             the first pages. The rest of the document which should
             be compiled either by Divisional Headquarters or the
             Co-ordinating Council could be compiled along the
             following lines:-

  DIRECTORY OF EMERGENCY S ERVICES
  (ioR P S        QUARTERS               HA L L             EQUIPMENT AVAILABLE
                  AD D R ES S            A D D RE SS        V:  TU: B:  M:  ACC:
  wasdock         99 B u n n H ill       S e ve n s Rd      Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
                  Wasdock                Wasdock
                  1 7 9- 3 3 1 7         1 7 9- 8 7 6 5
  HEYWORTH        Old Street             O l d S tr e e t   Yes    Yes   Yes     -
                  Heyworth               Heyworth
                  296-5678               2 9 6- 4 3 2 1

  COLINBURN       18 St A n n 1s Rd C u r d Road                   Yes Yes
                  Colinburn         Colinburn
                  2 9 7 -1 1 0 1

 ACTOT           21 S e n n S t r e e t M a i n S tr e e t Yes    Yes Yes
                 A c t ot               Actot
                 931-7210

 MAYDEN          30 M a y d e n   Hill   F o r e s t Hill         Yes    Yes   Yes   Yes
                 Mayden                  Vi e w ,
                 1 10 - 0 3 2 1          Mayden
C OD E :
                                                                .
v . V E H I C L E . T U : T H E R M O S URN. B.-BLANKETS. M : M E A L A V AI LA B LE .
ACC: S U I T A B L E F O R S H O R T T E R M E M E R G E N C Y A C C O M M O D A T I O N
                                                  10
          By the above guide-lines     for the presentation of a
          DIRECTORY OF EMERGENCY SERVICES throughout t h e ■Territory
          there would be no confusion when Divisional Staff or
          other officers have to move.  It would also be easy     for
          full-time Emergency Services to understand and        enter
          into their own local authority Emergency Procedure Plans.
          Every Division should try to have at least one Division­
          al Emergency Unit which is adaptable and able to stay on
          site longer perhaps than an ordinary car or van. If this
          is not possible then a Unit from the Red Shield or other
          department of the Army should be located and called upon.
          If this happens, it is vital for that Unit to know the
          procedure which the Division is operating - hence the
          need for a uniformity in Directories      of   Emergency
          Services.
         There are various types of vehicles which can be used at
         any 'serious' incident and although it would be desirable
         but perhaps not practical for every Division to possess
         a purpose-built Unit, there are other vehicles which can
         be adapted.



P U R PO SE B U I L T UNIT
         This type of vehicle is the most suitable at any incident
         and is of the type used by Red Shield.    It is important
         that besides carrying equipment and provisions    for re­
         freshments, it should also carry first-aid, blankets,
         writing materials, protective and warm clothing,  a Bible
         lists of useful addresses and telephone numbers,    hand-
         lamps, tabards, helmets and any other item which may be
         of use.  A soap-bag containing personal effects should be
         carried remembering at times the Unit may have females on
         board.
                                        SEE    FIGURE   2 AT BAC K      OF M A N U A L


CONVERTIBLE VEHICLES
         By far this is the type of vehicle which most    Divisions
         possess.  The mini-bus type of vehicle can be      easily
         adapted if seats are removed.       This type of Unit can
         easily carry at least two Thermos Urns,       as well as
         blankets, first aid etc. A clear sign stating who we are
         should be placed in a prominent position and it must be
         remembered that the Unit could be operating in bad
         weather or within the area of Fire Brigade water jets and
         therefore our own people would have to be protected.
         A sheet placed over the back of the van and across the
         doors would suffice for a short time.
                                         SEE   FIGURE    3 AT B A C K    OF M A N U A L

P RI VA TE CAR /V AN

         Almost every Centre will have access to a private car/van
         and this vehicle could be put to good use.      A 5 gallon
         Thermos Urn will travel on the back seat of a small car
         quite safely as well as refreshments and blankets.    This
         type of vehicle could be put into action by the Division­
         al Commander/ Emergency Officer and could be the first on
         the scene, serving refreshments and making a 'base' ready
         for the larger type of vehicle if it is needed.
                                        SEE    FIGURE   4 A T B A C K OF M A N U A L
                                   11
•IDENTIFICATION OF VEHICLES
            It is most important that all vehicles should be identi-
^          fiable at once by other Emergency Services and duty per-
            sonnel. The purpose built Unit will have our 'legend'  or
*          badge already painted on the side and so could our con­
           vertible type of vehicles.       Those vehicles with no
           identification could well be stopped by check points and
           therefore valuable time could be wasted.    A plastic sign
            can be rolled up and kept inside the vehicle.

V E H I C L E E Q U IP ME NT
           Every 'emergency' vehicle should carry equipment which
           may be called for and which should be replaced the moment
           it is used or broken.   The type of equipment needed will
           of course be dictated by the size, type and capacity of
           vehicle. Listed below are items which can be scaled down
           to fit any vehicle.    Photographs and addresses where to
           purchase the equipment are given at the back of the Manual

T H E R M O S URNS
           A Thermos Urn will keep liquids such as coffee, tea   and
           soup etc., usable for up to 6 hours.     Under no circum­
           stances must this type of urn be placed directly on to a
           gas or electric plate for heating.    A tap type of spout
           with a large bore hole is essential for soup, to allow it
           to flow.     An infuser should be used when making tea as
           well as tea bags.   The best sizes to use are a 5 gallon
           urn for larger vehicles and 3 gallon for smaller vehicles.
           Remember that a full 5 gallon urn takes two people to
           carry it any distance.

B L A N K E T S , D R E S S I N G G OW N S A N D S LI PP ER S
           At many incidents   casualties are found to be either in
           their sleeping clothes or no clothes at all.   The easiest
           and best article of clothing to give is a dressing gown,
           a pair of slippers and a blanket.     More often than not
           this type of equipment is not returned to us and is
           therefore disposable.   I would advise against buying this
           equipment new, but rather use good clean equipment which
           from time to time is handed into our Centres.    This type
           of equipment could be kept in polythene bags and used
           when needed.      The slippers could be kept together by a
           strong elastic band and their sizes marked on the soles
           with a felt tip pen.

COOKING EQUIPMENT
           There may be times when we would wish to heat or re-heat
           water etc. The purpose built unit will carry equipment to
           enable it to do so.    The smaller vehicles could use the
           fold-away type of camp cooker which uses calor gas. This
           type of equipment is easily stored or carried.
                                                       SEE      FIGURE   5 AT B A C K OF M A N U A L

CROCKERY
          The best type of crockery utensils are, of course,
          plastic cups and paper plates as well as serviettes.   It
          would be advisable to carry a supply of plastic lids
          which snap on to the cups, as sometimes these are carried
          some distance to those working at the face of the incident
          A supply of plastic knives, forks and spoons are useful.
lighting
          It is important that our Unit has plenty of illumination
          not only so that people can see where we are situated,
          but also to allow other emergency units which may be
          dashing to and from the incident to be able to see u s ,
          If there is no internal lighting in our units to do this
          job then the 'b u l l f i n c h ' calor gas type of lamp is ideal
          for the job, although permission from Police or Fire
          Brigade Authorities should be sought before using this
          type of lamp in case of the presence of explosive or
          hazardous atmospheres. Handlamps are also important and
          these must be of a robust construction as they often get
          knocked about.    If they are waterproof and shockproof so
          much the better. A spare mantle will be needed for the
          Bullfinch lamp as well as spare batteries and bulbs for
          handlamps.   The best type of handlamp to be used is the
          Police Type handlamps 'd y n a l i t e ' Lights Model 915 which
          use U.2. batteries.               These handlamps are robust and
          almost indestructable.            see figure 6 at back of manual




          Uniform & personalid en tificatio n
          Our own brand of uniform needs very little introduction
          to Emergency Services, but there are times when it is
          not practical to wear it, or we could use people without
          uniform who would need to be identified.
TABARDS
          It is most important that tabards be worn at many
          incidents because of poor lighting, bad visibility etc.
          The most useful type of tabard is the fluorescent wave-
          lock waist-coat printed with 't h e s a l v a t i o n a r m y ' on
          it.    This type of tabard is most useful when using a
          non-uniformed person in an official capacity.
OVERALLS
       At times, especially when the incident ground becomes
       covered with water and mud etc., it is advisable to
       wear an overall for protection, because of the danger
       of acid splashing in certain incidents, and the gen­
       eral need for some sort of overall to be worn for safe­
       ty. Officers' trimmings and a badge with name and rank
       could be worn. A boiler-suit type which is spark proof
       is ideal. An overall can also be worn by non-uniformed
       personnel.
F OOTWEAR
       It is advisable to wear strong boots on the incident
       ground because of the danger from debris, broken glass
       and water.  Rubber-soled boots  are essential as at
       times explosive atmosphere can be present and a spark
       from nails or studs could have a lethal effect.     In
       many instances the Incident Officer will not allow
       anyone within the 'inner-zone' who is wearing footwear
       that Could constitute a risk.
F IRST-AID
       Even those who have no knowledge of first-aid can be
       used for the elementary purpose of putting on 'plasters'
       to minor injuries. There are two types of first-aid
       kits which are recommended. The first is the ' Emergency
                                       13
      Officers First-Aid Case' which is full of useful equip-
      ment and should be used only by a competent 'first-aider'.
      The second is a home-made case.     A fishing tackle box
      with various compartments is an ideal case. Minor first-
      aid material can then be purchased and placed into the
      various squares as if they were tailor made. The useful
      thing about this type of kit is that one can see at a
      glance if any of the material has been used and so can
      be replaced at once.
                                                    SEE   FIGURE    7 A T B A C K OF M A N U A L
HELMETS
      As a means of identification and because head protect­
      ion is essential in most major incidents.               Opinion is
      heading in favour of standardising safety helmet col­
      ouring and marking as a means of identification.              Some
      colours are already conventionally accepted and for
      guidance it has been recommended, unofficially by both
      Police and Fire Brigade Authorities that The Salvation
      Army should have a white helmet with the words -
      S A L V A T I O N a r m y - on the front or side and a red  shield
      type of sticker on the back, it is of paramount import­
      ance that all our helmets are of the same colouring
      and marking or we could be mistaken for someone else.
      The list below is a good guide of other 'services'
      whilst on duty.                       see figure 7 at back of manual



          H E L M E T C OL O U R   MARKING                   ORGANISATION
          B L UE                   POLICE                    POLICE
          W HI T E                 AMBULANCE                 AMBULANCE        SERVICE
                                   SERVICE
          RED                      FIRE                      FIRE SERVICE
          GREEN                    MEDICAL                   H O S PI TA L - DOCTORS
          YELLOW                   UTILITIES                 GAS,    W AT E R ,   ELECTRICITY
          GREY                     P . O. CO MM .            POST OFFICE
                                                             COMMUNICATIONS
          O R A NG E               A.I.B.                    ACCIDENT        INVESTIGATION
                                                             BRANCH
          WHITE                    SA LV AT I ON ARMY        THE    S A L V A T I O N A RM Y




      C orps/Institution In cid en t B ox'
      As the call for assistance can come at the most inapprop­
      riate of times, speed is essential, and one thing which
      can slow us down is the confusion caused by not knowing
      where all our equipment is.It is often the smaller type
      of equipment that is mislaid. To overcome this problem I
      would suggest that every Army Centre makes up its own
      Incident Box.            The box itself could be especially made
      or a large cabin trunk would serve the same purpose. The
      box should be painted bright yellow with the words :
      ’i n c i d e n t b o x ' painted on in red.
                                                    14
CONTENTS OF       6   Blankets
iilCIDENT BOX.    4   Helmets
                  4   Overalls
1       A         4   Handlamps
                  4   Identification lapel badges
                  4   Tabards
                  1   First Aid Kit
                  1   Bible
                  1   Dispo
                  1   Box - containing felt tipped pens, pencils,
                              scribbling pads, drawing/safety pins,
                              sellotape et c . , and coins for making
                              telephone calls, plus any other item
                              which would serve a useful purpose.


        Experience would teach what would be needed, but the
        above list is the basic which should be kept.


CONTENTS OF       Tea
INCIDENT BOX      Coffee
                  Dried Milk
       B'         Sugar
                  Sandwich filler
                  Paper Cups
                  Paper Tissues
                  Plastic Cutlery


        The names and addresses listed below are given to
        assist those who find it difficult to obtain equipment:-



       Sources o f supply
URNS - Contact: Tea Service Equipment Ltd.
                102/108 Kirkdale, Sydenham, London SE26
       Ask for information regarding 2, 5 and 8 gallon
       standard model multi-pot urns with infusers.

FIR ST -A ID - Contact: J.S.Clayton & Co Ltd.,
            Morewood Close Estate, London Road,
            Sevenoaks,   Ke n t .
       Ask for the First Aid Catalogue. This firm gives
       a good discount.

O VE RALLS - Contact: Alexandra Overalls Ltd.,
           Alexandra House, Kings Square, Bristol.
       Ask for their catalogue

HANDLAMPS -- Contact: Dynalite Light Model No. 915
                         Cogswell & Harrison Ltd.,
                         166 Piccadilly, London W.l.

TABARDS -   Contact:  F.Parker & Co. Ltd.,
                      9 Bonhill Street, London EC2.
            Ask for details of their 'Wavelock' fluorescent
            waist-coats with the ' s a l v a t i o n a r m y ' marked on
            it.

                                      15
CORPS EMERGENCY GROUP

               R E G I S T R A T I O N                        FORM
          P L E A S E P R I N T IN C A P I T A L L E T TE RS T H R O U G H O U T


NAME:

HOME ADDRESS:                                            BUSINESS ADDRESS:



TEL.NO:                                                  TEL.NO:

AVAILABILITY:               DAYTIME / NIGHT / 24 HOURS

Are you prepared to use your vehicle? YES / NO.
                      Tow bar fitted? YES / NO.
Type: Private saloon     Van    Mini bus    Estate Car______
       Lorry______

EQUIPMENT - Do you hold any of the following that would
            become available for use? If so, please
            indicate numbers:-

Thermos urns           Dressing Gowns                Clean Blankets_               _Slippers_
If you have a deep freeze could you hold bread for emergency
use? Please indicate numbers:-    Bread______
Could you hold other provisions at home for such use?
If so, please indicate :-
Butter/Marg    Paste    Tea                     Coffee           Soup         Sugar____
Any other filling  (specify)


TRAINED PERSONNEL
Please indicate your profession,________________________
Have you received training for any of the following?:-
Nursing         Counselling______ First Aid_______
Are you willing to undertake mortuary work?_________
Are you willing to attend training sessions for any of the
above?    YES / NO.


The Group registration is renewable by the CORPS OFFICER at
12 monthly intervals.

I intend to participate in The Salvation Army Emergency
Group and agree to observe the rule that if unavailable
or withdraw my services from the Group I will do so with
the agreement of the CORPS OFFICER. I understand that I
shall be expected to attend practice call-outs from time
to time.
Signed,                                                            Date




                                              16
THE FIRE / INCIDENT GROUND

A ^^IDENT
I   - in c id e n t c o n tro l o f f ic e r
C-      S , A ,IN C ID EN T OFFICER
0 - SALVATION ARMY CONTROL
        g POOL OF PERSONNEL
E   - REST CENTRE FOR CASUALTIES
        AND RESCUERS
F   - OUTER ZONE
G   -   INNER ZONE




                               REQUEST FOR A ID


                               RESPONSE TO REQUEST
                                                     Fig-1
YA/89600            Nfc   DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                             Richmond House, 7 9 Whitehall, London SW1A 2N S
                                          Telephone 01-210 3000

                                       From the Minister for Health

P0H(2)1701/126


Major Trevor A Smith
The Salvation Army
101 Queen V ictoria Street
LONDON
EC4P 4EP




Thank you for your le t t e r of 26 April about the Joint Working Group on
d isa ster follow-up and counselling. I am pleased that The Salvation Army
welcomes the establishment of th is Group and the work i t intends to do.

Although funded by the Department of Health, the Working Group i s being
administered by CRUSE-Bereavement Care and the membership was determined
following consultation between CRUSE and the various Local Authority
A ssociations. I know they faced a d if f ic u lt task in attempting to ensure wide
representation but at the same time keep the s iz e o f the Group manageable.
However, I understand that the Group intends to undertake an extensive
consultation exercise with organisations involved in helping victim s and
r e la tiv e s follow ing d isa sters and w ill naturally be seeking views and comments
from The Salvation Army. I have also been assured that the role played by
m inisters of r e lig io n in times of d isa ster w ill be f u lly taken into account,
^incidentally, you may be in terested to know that the Director o f CRUSE,
Derek N u tta ll, who i s a member of the Group i s , in fa c t, an ordained m inister.
I was most in terested to read your booklet "The £ole of The Salvation Army in
the Emergency Services" and I know o f the rapid and very h elp fu l response
The Salvation Army has made in recent d isa ste r s. I am sure that your
experiences w ill be a valuable source of information for the Working Group.

I have passed th is correspondence to the Working Group and thank you for the
in te r e st you have shown.




                                                            DAVID MELL0R
POH(2)1701/126
Major Trevor A Smith
The Salvation   Axwy
[CM              UicVom
Lovvdovx
£ C A P -4-E P
Thank you for your letter of 26 April about the Joint Working Group on disaster
follow-up and counselling.   I am pleased that The Salvation A m y welcomes the
establishment of this G-roup and the work it intends to do.


Although funded by the Department of Health, the Working G-roup is being
administered by CRUSE-Bereavement Care and the membership was determined
following consultation between CRUSE and the various Local Authority Associations.
I know they faced a difficult task in attempting to ensure wide representation
but at the same time keep the size of the G-roup manageable.   However, I
understand that the Group intends to undertake an extensive consultation
exercise with organisations involved in helping victims and relatives following
disasters and will naturally be seeking views and comments from The Salvation
Army.   I have also been assured that the role played by ministers of religion
in times of disaster will be fully taken into account.    Incidentally, you may
be interested to know that the Director of CRUSE, Derek Nuttall, who is a
member of the Group is, in fact, sin ordained minister.


I was most interested to read your booklet "The role of The Salvation Anqy in
the Emergency Services” and I know of the rapid and very helpful response The
Salvation A m y has made in recent disasters.   I am sure that your experiences
will be a valuable source of information for the Working Group.


I have passed this correspondence to the Working Group and thank you for the
interest you have shown.




                                                  David Mellor
G 0/2310P/2




PLEASE NOTE           PLEASE NOTE      PLEASE NOTE




Before returning this case to
correspondence section can you please
ensure that the f i n n l m inute has been
completed.

The final minute should at all times be
held on the top left hand side of the file.




                                    Correspondence
                                    Section
                                    Room 226
                                    Richmond House


I ^   e* -< sfrs >—
                                                    SOCIAL SERVICES INSPECTORATE
                                                    DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                                    Richmond House
                                                    79 Whitehall
                                                    London SW1A 2NS

                                                    Telephone 01-210 5569




 M iss C B r i s c o e
 D ir e c to r o f S o c ia l S e r v ic e s
 M e t r o p o l i t a n B orou gh o f K n o w sley
 M u n ic ip a l B u ild in g s
 H u y to n
 M e r se y sid e
 L 3 6 9UX                                                                  1 Ju n e 1989




 D ear C a th e r in e


 T h a n k y o u f o r y o u r l e t t e r o f 24 M ay.           I was p le a s e d t o h ave t h i s
 a d d i t i o n a l i n f o r m a t i o n d i r e c t l y from y o u and I h a v e h a d a f u r t h e r
 w o rd b y t e l e p h o n e w i t h D a v id M ason s i n c e y o u w r o t e .

 I q u i t e u n d e r s ta n d t h a t t h e a c t i o n n e e d e d c r e a t e s p r o b le m s o f
 p r i o r i t i e s and r e s o u r c e s f o r y o u .   The a u t h o r i t i e s c o n c e r n e d h a v e
 w r i t t e n t o t h e S e c r e t a r y o f S t a t e a b o u t t h i s , and I o u g h t n o t t o
 a n t i c i p a t e h i s r e p l y b y c o m m e n tin g m y s e l f a t t h i s s t a g e !

 B est w ish e s.


 Y ours s i n c e r e l y




W B UTTING-'
C h ie f I n s p e c to r                                      Aw
S o c ia l S e r v ic e s   In sp ecto ra te
                                                                Ma


                                                           /

Copy t o :
                                          (S S I)
                                          (C S l)
                M i s s H ey              (S S I)
                                          (RLIE)
                                          (S S I)
                              OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES

                              Municipal Buildings,
                              Huyton, Merseyside L36 9UX.


    Metropolitan Borough of

    KNOWSLEY
                              When telephoning please contact: Miss C. Briscoe
                                                               Tel: 051-443-3439 (Direct Line)

       CATHERINE BRISCOE
          Director of Social Services




       Mr. W.B. Utting,
       Chief Inspector,
       Social Services Inspectorate,
       Department of Health,
       Richmond House,
       79 Whitehall,
       LONDON,
       SWlA 2NS

       Dear B il l ,
       Many thanks for your kind letter of May 10th. The follow up to the Hillsborough
       disaster has been very stressful for all of the Merseyside Councils and has fallen
       particularly heavily on Social Services though I must acknowledge that our fellow
       Departments, the Health Authority and the Voluntary Agencies have helped and
       encouraged all of us.

       Our staff in Knowsley, both those directly involved and those covering the normal
       services, have been superb. The Departmental Management Group led by my Deputy,
       David Rimmer, and heavily supported by the Chairman of Social Services,
       Cllr. George Howard, deserve particular praise in organising the initial response
       to the disaster while I was on leave in the States.

       However, our concern now in common with other authorities in Merseyside is how to
       keep the necessary support services going for the bereaved, for survivors and for
       others affected, for what appears from the evidence of other disasters to be a
       period of 2-3 years at least. In Knowsley we have identified at least 120 cases
       where support will be needed in the longer term and we are still receiving regular
       referrals from the Merseyside Hillsborough Helpline and direct from sources in the
       Borough. Our Council has, despite being in the middle of a long term strategy to
       reduce its expenditure, allowed us to increase our establishment to try and keep
       up with the in-house work but we, with all the other authorities involved, are
       deeply concerned about the funding needed for the cross-Merseyside follow up
       work. As you are probably aware David Mason, who has provided a magnificent lead
       to Merseyside post Hillsborough planning, is now working on finding funds for this
       very necessary follow up task. The report of the Inter-Agency Planning Group by
       Professor Howard Parker from Manchester University proposed a regional unit to
       supply:-




                                                                                       /contd...
£( i54-
Mr. W.B. Utting
Social Services Inspectorate                                 24th May 1989




-     an ongoing helpline;
      co-ordination of counselling help to deal with referrals within the region
      and from across the country and make sure help is available when and where
      required;
      a database to match needs and resources as well as to provide essential
      monitoring of use of services;
      a public relations and information function;
      a centre for staff training and support;
      a quality control and assurance role to ensure that services for bereaved
      people, survivors and others affected across the region are of comparable
      accessibility and quality.

I'm sure that you will already have been made aware of the difficulties for the
Merseyside authorities in finding finance for this work. Any help that you could
offer in suggesting paths for funding and in supporting applications for funding
would be a considerable encouragement to a somewhat "battle-weary" but still
active and together group of Social Services Departments.

Yours sincerely,




Catherine Briscoe
Director of Social Services




c.c. Departmental Management Group
     David Mason
                                                      I (w u u u l      dbULCMX&^l ojdfc~TU<>



                                                                               n t f      a   f t   .
To:   M rs H a l l                              F rom :   W B U ttin g
                                                          C h ie f I n s p e c to r
                                                          S o c ia l S e r v ic e s     In sp ecto ra te
                                                          3 1 May 1 9 8 9

                                                C o p y t o : Mr                         (C S 1 )
                                                              M is s    H ey             (S S I)
                                                              Mr                         (RL1E)
                                                              Mr                         (S S I)


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


I a tta ch    a c o p y o f Mr M a s o n ' s r e s p o n s e t o       my l e t t e r    of   1 0 M ay.

2.     I sh o u ld be p le a s e d t o spend a day in L iv e r p o o l - o th e r
th in g s b e in g eq u a l - b eca u se I have str o n g p r o fe s s io n a l in t e r e s t
in b e rea v em en t and g r i e f c o u n s e l l i n g .  I h a v e t o l d Mr M a s o n t h a t
I c o u ld v i s i t o n ly i f t h i s was r e g a r d e d a s n o t b e a r in g on t h e
a p p lic a tio n fo r cash!      Do y o u a n d c o l l e a g u e s c o n c u r ?




W B UTTING
C h ie f I n s p e c to r
S o c ia l S e r v ic e s In sp e c to r a te
Room 5 1 9 / 5 2 2 , RH
T e l. No. 210 5569
                                                     SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
                     City                            David Mason
                                                     Director of Social Services
                     of                              Hatton Garden
                     Liverpool                       Liverpool.    L3 2AW

                                                     Telephone:     051 2>2ckx2£h2idcx£3i^a[
                                                                         225-3800
  Personal.
                                                     Your R e f :
  Mr W.B. Utting,
  Chief Inspector,
                                                     Our Ref:        DM/PJC
  Social Services Inspectorate,
  Department of Health,
                                                     Date:           16th May, 1989
  Richmond House,
  79, Whitehall,
  L o nd on,
  SW1A 2 N S .




  Dear Bill,



       Thank you very much for your letter of the 10th, which I received on
  Friday.   I did try to call you back on Monday,  but was advised that you were
  not well.   I hope you are soon restored to health.
           •


       I realise that colleagues in the North West Region have been keeping
  you advised of our work, and have been pleased to receive their support
  and sound advice.  Your congratulations are most welcome, and I will ensure
  that they are conveyed to staff here in Liverpool.

       Our speed of response and reaction to the   tragedy has been possible
  because of the tremendous effort that has been made by colleagues throughout
  the Department and the other agencies.   It has not been a Liverpool venture,
  but a collaborative piece of work involving other Local Authority Departments,
  the voluntary sector, as well as colleagues in Health and Probation.

        1 am sure it would be much appreciated, if you felt able, to visit
  Merseyside to see for yourself the work that is being done or, alternatively,
  if one of your Civil Service colleagues from the Centre was able to do
  this.   There has been a recognition by many groups of the effort of staff,
  and the support we have received has been excellent.   Acknowledgement by
  the Inspectorate and the Department of Health would, in this context, I
  feel, be helpful.

       Again, many thanks for your letter, and the personal message.



                                  Yours sincerely,




                            DIRECTOR OF SOCIAt^SElRVICES.




When calling or telephoning please ask for
Metropolitan Borough of S E P                     T O -N
Social Services Department
Pauline M. Farrell Director of Social Services



Your Ref:                                               Social Services Department,
Our Ref:        PMF/PM                                           Burlington House,
Date:           25th May 1989                                  Crosby Road North,
Tel Ext:        3715                                            Liverpool L22 OPF


Please Contact: Miss P. M. F a r r e ll                Telephone: 051 - 922 - 4040


Mr. W. B. Utting
Chief Inspector
Social Services Inspectorate
Department of Health
Richmond House
79 Whitehall London SW1A 2NS


Dear B i ll ,

Hillsborough

Thank you for your le t t e r which I have passed on to mys t a f f and I am sure
they w ill appreciate your w ritin g.

I think we have a l l learnt a number of lessons from Hillsborough on the
importance of providing a co-ordinated approach both from statutory and
voluntary agen cies. I think the important issu e was to act quickly in
order provide th is co-ordinated approach and th is has certain ly been of
benefit to those people affected by the d isa ster.

The Emergency Team which we se t up in Sefton, has been very e ffe c tiv e ,
particu larly as members of the Team were able to v i s i t some of the
bereaved fam ilies on the Sunday night a fter the d isaster on the Saturday,
and th is contact has proved to be of enormous value, p articu larly to the
bereaved fa m ilies.

As you know, i t is d if f c u lt l to bring together statutory agencies but much
more d if f ic u lt to bring together voluntary organisations, and it was
in terestin g to note at a training day that we held yesterday for the whole
of Merseyside, that there was such a united response.           I suppose that we
also f e e l a sense of achievement in that Loval Government has been able to
respond both quickly and e ffe c tiv e ly .! 1
David Mason and I are hopeful that we w ill be able to ra ise funds for a
Regional Unit although we do appreciate i t is a very d iffc u lt task in the
lig h t of the demands of other p r io r it ie s .

Thank you for your good wishes




            o f Social Services
                                                                                                                tlllrf




     Mr                                                       Form: ___________ pSl
                        jO tva^a.     (jj>j^
                                                              Date: 25 May 1989

                                                              Copies to: Mrs                       SSI
                                                                         Mr                        CS1C

     DISASTER FOLLOW-UP: THE AFTERMATH OF THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

     1.   We have amended the draft reply to the letter from the leader of
     Liverpool City Council as agreed.

     2.   Attached to the Liverpool letter was a report on a joint approach to
     continued follow-up action, including a "Regional Unit" estimated to cost
     around £350,000 a year for 2 or 3 years (not clear w h i c h ) . Government funding
     is requested to meet this cost.  It is not clear whether the authorities are
     also looking for Government funding towards extra staff to help individuals
     and families, estimated to cost not less  than £1 million ayear and apparently
     additional to the cash required for the regional unit.

     3.   Assuming the LAs applied to DOE for  "Bellwin" funds DOE will no doubt
     seek our advice and we need to decide on our line.

     4.   We also need to consider setting up an evaluation of such support
     services.  We will need to establish objectives, the activities to be
     evaluated, and possible sources of finance (it would be premature to mention
     this outside the office until we have an agreed set of proposals and we may
     need to consult Ministers f i r s t ) . We are led to expect a research proposal
     from Professor Parker but I assume that if we are going to pay for research we
/    will want to decide on the nature of that research and go out to tender.

     5.   I suggest a meeting with SSI and MED, which you may like to chair, which
     could consider both issues.  If you agree, and subject to comments from copy
     addressees, we will set arrangements in hand and attempt, with SSI, an outline
     proposal for research.

                                                                      run



                                      (V
     CS1                                       |   (KAa/v       OJK   oJJL   db-fl-Af
     Room B1602A AFH
                                                                  VJt'                    Vua             ,
     Ext 7563                                                            )
                                                                                         H                j^~
                                                                                              -l


                                                                             7 ..             »%■
                                                                                        s u


    r/ > ^ 1                r
    bv*

                                                       fit
          t^7    T                                      W/s
        SOCIAL SERVICES INSPECTORATE
        D E P A R T M E N T O F HEALTH
        North Western R egion        Warwickgate H ouse
                                     Warwick Road
                                     Old TrafTord
                                     Manchester M16 ORU
                   Telephone:        061-872-6724

With compliments
                       I   \s\   For your Information

                       □         For necessary action

                       |    |    For observations

                       |    |    As requested
6-05-aei     is : 3 a     from
                                                                                ID       0512253916
 ■»      I




                                      INTER AGENCY MEETING

                                     FRIDAY, 12TH MAY, 1989.




                    PRESENT:


                    M r . ( i n        the Chair), Social Services, Lancashire.
                    Mr. D, Mason, Director of Social Services, Liverpool.
                    Ms. C. Wilkinson, Assistant Director of* Social Services, Liverpool.
                    Mr.             Social Services, Liverpool.
                    Mr,             Social Services, Knowsley.
                    Mr.           Social Services, Wirral.
                    Ms.I           I Social Services, Wirral.
                    Mr.|         British Association of Social Workers.
                    Ms.               British Association of Social Workers
                           (Social Services, Somerset).
                    Mr.              Personal Services, St. Helens.
                    Ms.              Director of Social Services, Sefton.
                    M r , S o c i a l Services, Cheshire.
                    Mr  . \       Merseyside Probation Service.
                    Ms. M.J. Gibson, Social Services Inspectorate.
                    Mr.r             City Solicitor1s , Liverpool.
                    Mr.             3ity Solicitor's, Liverpool.




                                                                                                                                CCfC
 Mv>
                                                                                                               (9-f-
 rt/>

 i    A S Z U s ***,                  f   a   X   S       T    '        &       U        U       A     ,        Ccy<4Uf   ft>


  [fat**. OJtJL           hi     ©                    ^       pojfKuAJeJ                 Ut/e/-*

                          ^                           0,4          A lS *       /«?              CM.

  It <b> «>S firt&L            a I    thiAAjq/L   6J4.


 4JEU/£c4yt(        WUL       sUt*JiJc                              C       X        O       V    *        .    CL?
                              U i      C*s(- 6 eb-oA W fk . tU.                                                -X e*.
                                                                                     k   M I                              V '«»'•
im m e d ia t e




  28-2171 (L17)
1G-05-S3    10;39     FROM
 <      *                                                       ID   0 5 122 5 391G            P-   2




     159.   David Mason.

            The meeting wished to record i t s thanks and appreciation to David
            Maaon, the outgoing Chair, fo r h is magnificent work on behalf o f
            th is Group, p articu larly in the very d i f f i c u lt weeks immediately
            follow ing Hillsborough.

     160.   F.A. Cup Final T ick ets.

            I t was reported that a block a llo ca tio n o f 500 tic k e ts had been
            reserved by Liverpool Football Club for the fam ilies of the deceased/
            injured. Families of the deceased are e lig ib le for a maximum of
            fiv e £18 t ic k e ts , two o f which are complementary. Once fam ilies of
            the deceased have been s a t is f ie d , any remaining; tic k e ts from the
            n llocation w ill be available fo r the fa m ilies o f those injured.
            Authorities are asked to n o tify , by 5.00 p.tn. on 16th May, __________
            (Liverpool Social Services Department) 051-225-3805 o f the                         A ll to
            requirements o f fa m ilies for t ic k e ts , so that the dispatch o f the          n o te,
            tic k e ts can be arranged in time fo r the match on 20th Hay.
            I t was agreed that                     |would approach the Trust Fund
            urgently about whether the Fund would meet the coat o f the non-
            conplementary tic k e ts , tr a v e llin g and other expenses, and
            disseminate the information to A u thorities.

     161.   B.A.S.W. - S ta fflin e .

                               (Somerset) addressed the meeting about the work
            undertaken in contacting core groups o f s t a f f in a l l Authorities -
            with apologies to Cheshire which has y et to be contacted - and the
            warm response o f the groups. She indicated that the s t a f f have a ll
            expressed trib u tes and a caring concern for those managing the
            response to the c r i s i s . The p articu lar ch a ra cteristic o f core groups
            has been s t a f f tired n ess, wanting ‘tim e-out1 and a wish to share
            experiences with other core groups. Without ra isin g expectations
            too high, the p o s s ib ilit y o f a “trainin g away day* u t ilis in g
            available accommodation in Somerset had been mentioned. The p otential
            was also there to involve non—so c ia l work s t a f f who may b en efit from
            sharing th e ir jo in t experiences, together with the fa m ilies o f so cia l
            workers.
            Serge Paul reported that arrangements had already been made for a
            group o f co-ordinators to have a few days break sh ortly, to enable
            them to share th eir experiences o f the tragedy. L eaflets were being
            rewritten in more appropriate language. In addition, a contract i s
            expected to be completed soon fo r the serv ices o f an Individual to
            manage and co-ordinate S ta f f lin e , but th at a short delay o f about
            2 weeks i s anticipated before that person can take up the duties o f the
            p o st. B.A.S.W. undertook to advise A uthorities on 15th May o f the
            arrangements that w ill operate during t h is 2 week period.

            In thanking B.A.S.W., i t was agreed that -

            (a)               would produce a paper fo r consideration by th is
                  Group on 19th May on the f e a s ib il it y o f proceeding with the
                  suggestion o f a 'train in g away d ay'; and

            (b)   the points raised about involving other s t a f f and fam ilies
                  be noted at t h is sta g e.

     162.   D isaster Fund —Financial Im plications.

            Further to the request o f th is Group o f 5th May, Authorities are                 All to
            asked to consult th e ir Financial O fficers and bring back to the                  note.
lG -05-eSi   10:40      FROM                                     ID   0S122S391G            P .    3
        r-
                                        -   2-



             meetinfi on 19th May the response to the question raised by the
             Welfare B enefits Advisors about the R ffects o f the D isaster Fund
             on local authority means-tested p rovision s.

    163.     Finance.

             Copies o f le t t e r s o f 6th May from a l l the Leaders o f the core
             A uthorities to the S ecretaries o f State for the Environment, Health
             and Social Services seeking fin a n c ia l support, together with a
             le t t e r o f 5th May from David Mason to the Commission o f the European
             Community, were circu lated . Pauline F arrell informed the masting
             that she was also following up some p o ssib le E.E.C, lead s.
             Maire Gibson informed the meeting o f her recent discussions with
             o f f i c i a ls at the Departments o f Health and Environment and
             although the le t t e r s had not, at that sta g e, been received, they
             had spoken about them and she perceived a generally sympathetic
             response. There was a d e fin ite response so far as any bid for funds
             for a research in it ia t iv e and she had alerted Howard Parker to put
             together an appropriate 2 page submission.
             David Mason, in undertaking to submit a schedule to a future meeting                 $avid
             o f a l l requests he had made or explored for fin a n cia l support,                Mason
             expressed h is lack o f optimism that the request to Ministers would
             be p o sitiv e ly received.
             The meeting noted the current p o sitio n and agreed that the suggestion
             that M.F.b/M.E.P. s be approached, be not pursued.

    164,     Offers o f Help.

             A note f r o m L i v e r p o o l Social Services Department)
             about o ffers o f help, together with a categorised l i s t o f o ffe r s,
             was circu la ted .

             I t was agreed that -

             (a)   each Authority give d eta iled consideration to how best to
                   respond to the o ffe r s , and report th e ir individual views to         A ll to note,
                   th is meeting on 19th May; and

             (b)   Pauline Farrell be requested to pursue with                 the           Pauline
                   progress that has been made towards esta b lish in g a group of           F a r r e ll„
                   Community Liaison O fficers/oth er appropriate o ffic e r s to s i f t
                   through the o ffe r s o f h elp, and report the outcome o f th is
                   meeting on 19th May.

             The meeting a lso noted that the National Round Table had offered a
             5 bedroom, 10 bedded house, by the sea, in Exmouth for fa m ilies on
             the follow ing dates, v iz : -

                   20th May - 3rd June.
                                                                                             All to note,
                   5th August - 11th August.
                   9th September - 30th September,
                   7th October, onwards.

             Assistance with travel and other expenses had a lso been offered.
             I t was agreed that Carole Wilkinson be requested to make the necessary
                                                                                             Carole
             arrangements for the f i r s t fam ily n o tifie d to her by an Authority
             on 15th May to be offered the 20th May date.                                    Wilkinson.

             I t was a lso agreed that given the volume o f o ffe r s o f help, the
             message should be conveyed to ind ividu als and fa m ilies that i f they
             need p ractical help or assistan ce of any s o r t, they should be              All to note
             encouraged to ask.
1S-05-S9 10:40       FROM                                         ID    0512253gls             p




   165.   N ew sletter.

          An example o f the suggested layout o f a new sletter for fa m ilies,
          r e la tiv e s and victim s o f the Hillsborough d isa ste r , was circu lated .
          The meeting agreed that the production o f a regular new sletter
          would be b e n e fic ia l and that a small group o f people should be
          established with re sp o n sib ility to progress the matter. The aim
          would be fo r the fam ilies involved to take on r e sp o n sib ility for the
          new sletter as a se lf-h e lp group in due course.

                           agreed to assume r e sp o n sib ility to thn Group for th is
          matter and Authorities are asked to submit nominations {social                         All to note
          workers, fa m ilie s, in-house press o f fic e r s e t c , . . . ) to th is meeting on
          19th May for membership of a small 'e d ito r ia l board*.

          The meeting a lso requested that a copy o f the journal produced a fter
          the 'Herald' tragedy be circu lated with the Agenda for the 19th May
          meeting.

   166♦   Reimbursements to S ta ff.

          The meeting noted that the query raised by the Personnel O fficer
          (Sefton) about reimbursements to s t a f f , had now been resolved.

   167,   Planning Group.

          David Mason reported that Howard Parker had requested certain
          information to a s s is t him -

          (a)     in h is 2 page submission to the Department o f Health for
                  funding for research work (which t h is meeting agreed on
                  2nd May should be undertaken by Howard Parker); and

          (b)     in h is preparation for the further work he i s carrying out
                  for the Group on q u ality assurance and cross-Authority
                  evaluation.

          The information requested by Howard Parker ie -

          (i)      copies o f the Minutes o f previous meetings o f th is Group;

          (ii)     s t a t i s t i c a l information rea d ily av ailab le from the database
                   about numbers e t c . . .

          (iii)    im pressionistic information about whats happening in
                   Social Services Departments in terms o f demand for services
                    as a r e s u lt o f Hillsborough; and

          (iv )    any other information which A uthorities may consider useful
                   and have read ily a v a ila b le.

          I t was agreed that in ordsr to a s s is t Howard Parker allA u th orities
          should ensure, eith er through the o f f ic e s o f the Probation Service,
          Research and Information O ffice, Merseyside Probation Service,
          Rainford H all, Crank Road, Crank, Rainford (telephone 051 920-9201)
          or through th e ir representative on the new Planning Group, that the                    All to not
          information requested i s passed on to Howard Parker by 17th May,
          the date o f the f i r s t meeting o f the Planning Group. I t was also
          agreed that the p recise arrangements for the meeting on 17th May
          (tim e, venue e t c . , . ) be confirmed by the Probation Service and
          n o tifie d to the Planning Group members.
16 -0 5-& 3    10:41     FROM                                      ID   0 5 1 2 2 5 3 3 1 6         P .     5
   '




                                            —4—

       #      ____________
              ____________ enquired whether there was any early in tention to
               reconvene Members o f Authorities on the orig in a l recommendation of the
               Planning Group, when agreement in p rin cip le was given at Liverpool
               Town Hall on 29th April tothe establishment o f a Regional Unit. The
               fe e lin g o f the Group was that to reconvene in the absence o f firm o ffers
               o f fin a n cia l assistan ce would be inappropriate.

              (Note;    Since the meeting, the date for the Planning Group has been
                        confirmed for 24th Hay)*

       168.    L ea flets.

               A uthorities are asked to note that packs containing copies o f -

               (i)     the young persona le a f le t ;
               (ii)    the c r i s is le a f le t ;
               (iii)    posters and lapel badges                                                           All to
                                                                                                           note.
              can be c o llected a fter 12 noon on 15th May from the 3rd Floor,
              Hatton Garden.

       169.    D isaster Fund.

               I t was reported that a health o f f i c i a l in Crewe had been approached
               by the lo ca l Health Authority, which in turn had been approached by
               the M.ft.H.A., asking for the names o f those injured at Hillsborough,
               fo r the use o f the Trust Fund. I t was agreed that                 be asked
               to in v estig a te t h is .

       170.   Training O fficers.

              Some A uthorities (Wirral, S t. Helens, Sefton) referred to th eir
              in tention /w ish to u t i l i s e acme places an the so c ia l workers training
              sessio n s with                        for Training Off ic e r s . I t was agreed
              lhat as the courses had been estab lish ed w ith ________________ for
              so c ia l work s t a f f , he should be contacted and advised that a lim ited
              number o f persons at the sessio n s would be Training O fficers and not
              so c ia l work p ra ctitio n ers.                agreed to inform
                         of this.

       171.   Helpline Database.

              Carole Wilkinson reminded A uthorities to submit as soon as p ossib le
              to                 (Liverpool Social Services Department) copies of                         All to
              referra ls d ea lt with by them fo r inputting onto the database.                           lo te .

       172,   H elpline.

              The meeting noted that there i s s t i l l a steady stream o f c a lls to the
              H elpline during the day and that a fter 7.00 p.m. there are very few
              c a ll s and fewer s t i l l between nidnight and 7.00 a.m. The meeting
              noted the in tention to reduce the s ta ffin g Of s h if t s to r e f le c t demand         Carole
              and no objections were raised to the proposal that c a ll s to the                          Wilkinson.
              H elpline between midnight and 7.00 a.m. be transferred autom atically
              to the Emergency Duty Team.
1 6 - 0 5 - £ jS    10 :4 2   FROM                                      ID   0 5 1 2 2 5 3 9 1 6
   *          >m
                                                -5 -
       ^73.        Secondmenta o f S ta ff
                           A le t te r from David Mason to the A.D.S.S, requesting secondments
                   o f s t a f f to cover vacancies for the next three months minimum in
                   core Authority d is t r ic t o ffic e s arid h o sp ita ls, was circu lated . The
                   request i s to be considered by the A.D.S.S. Executive shortly and                   David
                   David Mason agreed to c o n t a c t — who w ill be attending the                     Mason
                   Executive meeting - about the matter.             Pauline F a rrell indicated
                   that so far as p ossib le secondments from the voluntary sector are
                   concerned^ she had nothing to report at t h is stage but that enquiries              Pauline
                   are continuing.                                                                      F arrell

       174,        Football Supporters * Association
                        The meeting noted the terms o f a l e t t e r o f 3rd May 1989 from the
                   Football Supporters’ Association about the r o le o f the Association
                   at the forthcoming o f f i c i a l Inquiry headed by Lord Ju stice Taylor.

       175.        Requests fo r Information
                        The meeting considered i t s response to requests which are now
                   being .made by various outside organ isation s/in d ivid u als for the names
                   and addresses o f all bereaved fa m ilies.     I t was agreed that aB the
                   primary duty o f the Group i s to protect the fa m ilies involved, the              All to
                   information should not be made a v a ila b le.    In any event, to make             note
                   information availab le would n ecessita te an approach to the fam ilies
                   to obtain th e ir agreement and the group does not propose to make that
                   approach.
                          David Mason reported that he had received an approach from the
                   lo ca l media who wish to make contact in a h elp fu l and unobtrusive way
                   to people wishing to ta lk in public about th e ir Hillsborough experience,
                   almost in the sense o f a ’rig h t of r e p ly '. I t was agreed that any
                   information that A uthorities may have about persons who would wish to
                   ta lk to the lo ca l media be passed to David Mason on the b a sis that the David
                   names would not be released to the media but that an appropriate and        Mason
                   d iscrete lin k would be made.

       176. Memorial Service
                        A copy, extracted from 'The Methodist Recorder', o f the sermon
                   preached by the Rev. Dr, Canon John A, Newton a t the ecumenical                    All to
                   service in Liverpool Cathedral for the victim s o f the Hillsborough                note
                   tragedy was circu lated and i t was agreed th a t A uthorities may wish
                   to consider making copies availab le to bereaved fa m ilie s. David Mason
                   was requested to contact the B.B.C. about the p o s s ib ilit y o f video           David
                   copies o f the Memorial Service being produced.                                     Mason

       177. Inquiry - Lord J u stice Taylor
                            Carole wilkinson reported that              (S h effield ) had informed
                   her that arrangements had apparently been made fo r transport to depart
                   d aily at 7.30 a.m. from the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool, to the
                   o f f ic i a l Inquiry headed by Lord Ju stice Taylor.    Social work cover
                   in S h effield has been arranged by S h effield SSD.       The arrangements         A ll to
                   for transport have not been confirmed and A uthorities wishing to                   note
                   have precise d e ta ils should enquire through the Helpline from
                   15th May.

       178,        Sheffield Staff
                        :         (Sheffield) hopes to attend this meeting on 19th May to
                   raise the matter of links between staff and, if this is confirmed,
                   the Group requested that one hour be set aside before the 4.00 p.m.
                   Tnter-Agency meeting for informal discussions.
                               S O C IA L SERVICES INSPECTO RATE
                               D E P A R T M E N T OF H E A L T H A N £) SOSt A L S C C U R IT Y
                               Richm ond House
                               79 Whitehall
                               London SW1A 2IMS

                               Telephone 01-210 5569




Ms P Farrell
Director of Social Services
Sefton Social Services Department
Burlington House
Crosby Roa d North
Liverpool
L22 OPF                                                     10 M a y 1989



Dear Pauline


M y colleagues in the North West Region of the Inspectorate have
kept me informed of the action taken by local social services
departments together in the wake of the Hillsborough football
disaster.   I congratulate you and the staff of the Department on
the effective w o r k undertaken to provide counselling and other
support services to the bereaved families and others distressed
by the tragedy.

I was greatly impressed by the speed of the social services
reaction and by the commitment to continue to help and support
people through a possibly protracted period of mourning.     The
d irect w o r k involved is difficult and demanding. But others not
directly involved have also contributed b y providing cover to
enable the normal wor k of the Department to continue.    In that
ver y important sense, this is truly a department-wide effort,
fully in keeping wit h the spirit and achievements of social
services w o r k after earlier tragedies.

I have written in similar terms to other Directors concerned.
I kno w that you personally have taken particular responsibility
for co-ordinating the w o r k of the voluntary sector.


Yours sincerely




W B UTTING
Chief Inspector
Social Services Inspectorate



                                                                                                   l)
                                                   Copy to:                                         ) (SSI


                                                                                                   . (CS)
                                                                                                      (RL)
                                                S O C IA L SERVICES INSPECTO RATE
                                                D E P A R T M E N T OF H E A L T H A N D SOCi A -L SR5URFF-Y
                                                Richmond House
                                                79 Whitehall
                                                London S W 1 A 2 N S

                                                Telephone 01-210 5569




Mr D Mason
Director of Social Services
Liverpool Social Services Department
2 6 Hatton Garden
Liverpool
L3 2A W                                                                   10 M a y 1989




Dear David


My colleagues in the North West Region of the Inspectorate have
kept me informed of the action taken by local social services
departments together in the wake of the Hillsborough football
disaster.  I congratulate you and the staff of the Department on
the effective w ork undertaken to provide counselling and other
support services to the bereaved families and others distressed
by the tragedy.

I was greatly impressed b y the speed of the social services
reaction and b y the commitment to continue to help and support
people through a possibly protracted period of mourning.     The
direct w o r k involved is difficult and demanding.  But others not
directly involved have also contributed by providing cover to
enable the normal w o r k of the Department to continue.  In that
ver y important sense, this is truly a department-wide effort,
fully in keeping w ith the spirit and achievements of social
services w o r k after earlier tragedies.

I have writ t e n in similar terms to other Directors concerned.
I add m y personal congratulations on the outstanding leadership
demonstrated in your own response to the disaster, and on the
m anagerial effort involved in co-ordinating statutory and
v ol u n t a r y effort.


Best wishes.


Yours sincerely




W B UT T I N G                                                    Copy to            Mr
Chief Inspector                                                                      Miss Hey
S o c ia l S e r v ic e s In sp e c to r a te                                        M rs
                                                                                     Mr
                               S O C IA L SERVICE S INSPECTO RATE
                               D E P A R T M E N T OF H E A L T H A N D -S 0 € 1A L GCC t i n i T Y
                               R ichm ond House
                               79 Whitehall
                               London SW1A 2NS

                               Telephone 01 -210 5569




Miss C Briscoe
Director of Social Services
Knowsley Social Services Department
Council Offices
A r c h w a y Road
H uyton
Liverpool
L36 9UX                                                      10 M a y 1989



Dear Catherine


M y colleagues in the North Wes t Region of the Inspectorate have
kept me informed of the action taken b y local social services
departments together in the wake of the Hillsborough football
disaster.   I congratulate you and the staff of the Department on
the effective work undertaken to provide counselling and other
support services to the bereaved families and others distressed
by the tragedy.

I was greatly impressed by the speed of the social services
reaction and b y the commitment to continue to help and support
people through a possibly protracted period of mourning.     The
direct w o r k involved is difficult and demanding.  But others not
directly involved have also contributed b y providing cover to
enable the normal work of the Department to continue.     In that
v e r y important sense, this is truly a department-wide effort,
fully in keeping w ith the spirit and achievements of social
services w o r k after earlier tragedies.

I have writ t e n in similar terms to other Directors concerned.


Yours sincerely




W B UTTING
Chief Inspector                 Copy to:              Mr
Social Services Inspectorate                          Miss Hey
                                                                                         (SSI)
                                                      MrsT
                                                      Mr
                                                      Mr                                 (CS)
                                                      Mr                                 (RL)


                                Similar letter to:                         Mr
                                                                           Mr
                                                                           Mr
                                                                           Mr
                 353
                                                        It riu vn Answers                                       x                                            W ritten A nsw ers                        354

                estimate^ lo bc about t|() mj|||()n h|i,j)ci
                                                                                                                                        Natural Environment Research C o u n cil^
                P      Posed scheme. w i t h ad ditional costs o f ab«.:i;                                : :i::;;ion
                                                                                                                                .\ I r . \B o w i s : To ask the Secretary o f State fbr the
                all t h e l w " 1’ .|.,< n v c v c r -. s u d l a SL' h c ,l , e is       unlifcr.          enable
                                                                                                                            Env ir o m V n t i f he will list the research projects
                required E C standard"’"                                                                         ^          u n d e rt a k e ii \ for his D ep artm en t by the N a tu ra l
                                                                                                                            EnvironmenfxResearch Council du ri ng the past five years.
                                                                                                                               Mrs. Vir<>iniaX'Bottomley: This is a m atter for my right
                ton £ T o t a n , r l l \ U l h c L ‘a P i t i ' 1                he L k - . ’ i i m i l l i o n            lion, f riend the Secretary o f State for E d u catio n an d
                                                                                                                            Science.              \
                    S s ; iw A hi!,hcMhan                                         'jA “ '
               detailpH          i Csl\ " , a t c r a u t h o n i > h a s h e e n / i - k e d         ■ d i a ^ up                                           \
               p a rte d P l a n s V > b r i n g , h c b a l h l n ; ;                I      t; s ,        VlIR, :                                    Dom estic Property
                            ^ er     non-com plying                  bath in i>   J . hvts      up         v    I t'
                                                                                                                                Mr, William Ross: T o a>.sk the Secretary o f State for the
               S essed r ^                 ^           l;n n l lh ™         M                         :        !“ IK        E nviron ment what is his estimate o / t h c m a rk et value o f all
 I                                                                                                                          domestic rated proper!) in Epg land an d Wales, the
 a                                                                                                                          rateable value o f that proper ty an d the sums which will be
                                                                                                                            raised by rates on that proper,ty in the curr ent year.
 If                                                                                                                              Mr, Gummer; The latest in f o r m a t i o n for England and
 d                                                                                                                         \ \ ales is as follows:
 >g
 5.                                                                                                                                                                 £ b illio n
to
                                                       .M a rke t value oj/liou.sinL’ stock                                         .11 December 1986/              645-3
ce                                                     R ate a b le value ill dom estic p r o o e r t\                                    I A p ril 198,8'             3- 969
                                                       K a te in c o m e trij/in dom estic ratepavcrs in                988-89                                         7- 812
                                                                          -I---------- :
                                                                                       ---
 or
 he                                     B IS F H ou ses (N ot/in^ham )                                                         Mrs. Virginias Bottom ley: A s m y right h o n \F r ie n d the
 nd
                                                                                                                          Secretary o f S tate for the E n viron m en t said at th e first
ige             Mr. Andy Stewart: T o a$k the Secretary o f State for the
                                                                                                                          m eetin g o f the M o n trea l p r o to c o l parties in H el^ n k i last
ige          E nvironm ent w h a t progress, he has m ade in his discu ssion s
                                                                                                                          w eek it is tim e to “sharpen th e te eth ” o f the p r o to c o l.
i to         with b u ild in g societies con cern in g the m ortgageab ility o f
                                                                                                                          D u rin g the review process w h ich w as started there, and
iC ;         BISF h o u se s in NottinghaYn; /and if he will m ak e a
                                                                                                                          b u ild in g o n the im petus p rovided by the L o n d o n
ace          statem ent.                       \
                                                                                                                          con feren ce, w e shall be pressing for a significant
and
                                                                                                                          strengthening o f the p r o to c o l. T h e F . n r n p e a n C o m m u n i t y .
                Mr. Trippier: T h e A b b e y N a tio n a l and H alifax
             building societies have confirm ed to officials that their                                                   is'C allu^-f o ir a_red uction o f p ro d u ctio n and c o n su m p tio n
 ight        national len ding policies m alje\ n o d istin ction b etw een                                               o f C F C i b y 85 per cen t, as so o n as p ossib le w ith a view to
orth                                                                                                                      their c o m p lete e lim in a tio n by th e end o f the century.
             BISF h o u se s an d th o se o f tradition al con stru ctio n . T h ey
view'        treat each h o u se o n its in d ividu al m erits, len ding on
 s by                                                                                                                                             H illsborough D isaster
             normal term s up to the so c ictic s’\u s ua 1 m a x im u m loan,
i am
             subject to c o n d itio n , valu ation ] an d statu s o f the applicant!                                          Mr. Terry Fields: T o ask the Secretary o f S tate for the
 ance
             Where ow n ers w ish to carry out\ im p rovem en ts, the                                                     E n viron m en t if his D ep a rtm en t will m a k e p ro v isio n to
             societies w ill consider ap p lica tio n s fo r re-m ortgage in the                                          reim burse L iverp ool city cou n cil for special expenditure
.e for       lorm al w ay.                        /          \                                                            arising o u t o f the even ts a t H illsb o ro u g h o n 15 A p ril; and
 rt the        T h ese n ation al p olicies app ly equally to properties in                                               i f he w ill m ak e a statem en t.
^nncs        he N o ttin g h a m area. T h e ^Societies h a v e taken steps to
                                                                                                                               Mr. Gummer: N o r m a lly , local au th orities m a k e so m e
1 and        :emind surveyors, valuers and estate ateents w ith w h o m
                                                                                                                          p ro v isio n in their o w n bu dgets fo r extraordinary and
i) full      hey n orm ally deal in N o ttin g h a m o f th o se policies.
                                                                                                                          u n foreseeab le costs.
id (iii)         T h e societies h a v e a lso /p o in te d o u t that v a lu a tio n s o f
                                                                                                                             L iv erp o o l c ity c o u n c il’s officers h a v e raised orally w ith
fall to      ill kinds o f property can feasily be affectdd by m islead in g
                                                                                                                         th e D e p a r tm en t’s region al office officials the p ossib ility o f
nom ic       itatements a b o u t safety /a n d du rab ility, la n d that so m e
                                                                                                                         the c o u n c il’s seek in g special assistance. I f the co u n c il w as
!; and       ecent press an d television co v era g e m ay 'not h a v e h ad a
                                                                                                                         to seek su ch a ssistan ce, w e sh o u ld o f cou rse c o n sid er its
 giving      lelpful effect o n the m arket.                        >
                                                                                                                         request carefully.
ion.            I very m u ch welcorn'e th e p o sitiv e an d p u b lic a ttitu d e
             aken by these tw o m aj6r b u ild in g societies, w h ich I believe                                                                    English H eritage
 N orth
             •effects the p o s itio n of/o th er len d in g institu tion s, an d I am
ing the                                                                                                                       Mr. Sluion Hughes: T o ask the Secretary o f Sta*e for the
             iure that ow n ers o f B IS F h o u ses will w e lco m e this, and
lia, the                                                                                                                 E n v ir o n m e n t \h o w m a n y E n glish I Icritago properties
             ake to heart their ad vice o n factors w h ich co u ld affect the
 water*      >peration o f th e m arket locally.                                                                         w h ich w ere, pn bs^ to the form in g o f ErjgW^i H eritage in
bathing                                                                                                                  1984, o p e n all day evtecv day n o w h a y e ^ p e n in g and clo sin g
million                                            O zo ne L ayer                                                        tim es; an d i f he will 1isiNJicsc, wYfn their current op en in g
i s upon                                                                                                                 a n d c lo sin g tim es.
3 grain        Mr. Wray: T d a sk the Secretary o f State for the                                                            Mrs. Virginia Botjefnley: T liK Q e p a r tm e n t h old s n o
rom the      environm ent w h eth er H er M a jesty ’s G o v er n m e n t are
                                                                                                                         records o f o p c n im j4 io u r s at the varnkts m o n u m en ts for
              onsidering n ew steps for the p r o te ctio n o f the o z o n e layer                                      w h ich E nglish H eritage assum ed r e s p o n s i b l y o n 1 A pril
a t iw . -   ^ line w ith th e U n ite d N a tio n s call for im m ed iate urgent                                        1984. D e ta ils o P o p e n in g h ou rs since then a r e 4 m atter for
utfall       ■■etion.
                                                                                                                         English H eritage.

               I " 7 CW53.37 J o b 8-10
M A Y 1 98 9
                                       W ritten A nsw ers                                 285                             Written Answers                     M A Y 1989
                                                                                    284
le
             Vlr. Beaum ont-D ark: T o ask the Secretary o f Shu r                                                     H illsborough D isaster                       careless drh
\1
         the h o m e D e p artm en t i f he has an y in t e /t i o n o f          r                                                                                  “Offences re
         n -w s i d e l i n e s in respect o f pursuit by poKce v e h i c k T ' ^            Mr. Terry Fields: T o ask the Secretary o f State for the               Supplem ent
                                                                                          H om e D ep a rtm en t i f he w ill call for a report from the c h ie f    latest avail;
         Ltterf 3ny Pl3nS t0meCt Chi£fC°nSta^est0discus’
                                                       s'h                                constable o f W est Y ork sh ire o u tlin in g the interview ing           a b ou t the c
                 A                                          f                             criteria and procedures to be used by W est Y orkshire
e
           M r. D ouglas H o g g : P olice driver/train in g i ncluH,
o                                                                                         police in response to telep h on e calls and their
        pol.ee puYsuit m anagem ent, has recerAy been r e v i e w ^ ?
7                                                                                         investigations fo llo w in g the H illsb o ro u g h disaster o n 15
        a w o r h n i p a r t y set up by the A s so c ia tio n o f CW ef Pol b>                                                                                        Mr. Rob
                                                                                          April; and i f he w ill m ak e a statem en t.
        Officers. IVunderstand that its report will be nn br i                                                                                                       H o m e Dep;
        w ithm the L x t few weeks. We sh&ll co nsi der it careful                           Mr. Douglas H ogg: T he interview ing critera and                       have ever 1

                                                   /
        when it is published            /               u caretully                       procedures are a m atter fo r the investigatin g officers in               clinic.
                                                                                          consu ltation w ith Lord Justice T aylor, I un derstand that
                                     B r eath T e s ts                                                                                                                  Mr. Don
                                                                                          anyone w h o telep h on ed the police o n the special telep h on e
                                                                                                                                                                     m ale and 1
                                                                                          lines and w h o has relevant in fo r m a tio n w ill be interview ed
            M r. Robertson: T o ask the,S ecretary o f                  r       ,                                                                                    prisoners h;
                                                                                          by the in vestigatin g team .
;       ; ° mC D e P a r t m l t i f he will piace in the Library copies' J                                                                                          clinic.
i      the representations that h e / h a s received f o l l o w X h                         Mr. Terry Fields: T o ask the Secretary o f State for the
>      recent c o n su lta tio n a b o u t pofice pow ers to ston m o t f ■                                                                                             Mr. Rob
                                                                                          H om e D ep a r tm en t i f he will call for a report from the c h ie f
                                                                                                                                                                     H o m e D ep
       an    adm inister b r \a th tesfe; and h o w m a n y 0 f thos-                     constable o f W est Y orkshire, as to o n w h at basis an d by
                                                                                                                                                                     were unabl
       representations su pp orted ( a ) c o n so lid a tio n o f existing                w hom th e d ecision w as taken to a llo w o n ly o n e w e e k for
       po w er s as no c h a \ g e , b ) unfettered d ^ t i o n                                                                                                      for their re
                                                                                          members o f the pu b lic to c o n ta c t W est Y ork sh ire police,
       adm inister breath t e s k an/l ( c ) sp o t checks by the police                  by special ’p h o n e lines, after th e H illsb o ro u g h disaster;           Mr. Doi
       adm inistered o n a ranirtoift basis.                                              and i f he w ill m a k e a statem en t.                                    availab le ai
                                                                                                                                                                     c ost. A su n
        • r f r; D ou S,as H o g g : V o llo w in g the reply given bv m i                    Mr. Douglas Hogg: T h e officer in charge o f th e police
      nght hon. Friend to n L hon. Friend the M em b er for                                                                                                          13 per cen
                                                                                          investigation team , in c o n su lta tio n w ith Lord Justice
      I * r b , North (Mr. K „ i l \ „„ I February, a , c o t a T . £                                                                                                rem anded
                                                                                          Taylor, decid ed to o p e n the sp ecial telep h o n e lines for
                                                                                                                                                                     th ose frorr
      w e have received son k ^,400 letters from individuals'                             three days initially. O w in g to the h eavy resp on se o n the
                                                                                                                                                                     c u sto d y be(
       etters from o r g a m s a tio n s k n d p e tition s o n the subject o f           first three days the lines w ere k ep t op e n for a further three
                                                                                                                                                                     unsuitable
      po lice pow ers to require rAadside breath tests O f these                          days. T h e num ber o f calls had lessened c on sid erab ly by the
      ? „ 7 h e T ate y                   W      r t for extend                           sixth d ay an d it w as n o t th o u g h t necessary to keep th e lines
              T      o f u n fett/r ed discretion, ran d om breath testing                open an y longer, T h e fact that the lines w o u ld c lo se o n the
     or other form s. T h J e m a i n d e l su ggest that there should he                 sixth day w a s w id ely pu blicised.                                          Mrs. M:
     n o c h a n g e to current p o w er k W e shall con sid er these                         It rem ains op e n to a n y o n e w h o believes th at he or she       the H o m e
                                                                                          has relevant in fo r m a tio n to c o n ta c t th e secretary to the       concerning
     S e T i ^ h T 3 ; ymdudinY                    hether the^ should *                                                                                              G aelic-spe:
                                                                                          inquiry at room 662, 50 Q u een A n n e ’s G a te, L o n d o n
                                                                                          SW 1H 9 A T .                                                                 (2) wh£
     theMH n AnnnW if erton: T o a s M h e Secretary o f State lor
     the H o m e D ep a r tm en t (1) w h ith e r his p rop o sed new                                                                                                D epartm er
                                                                                             Mr. Terry Fields: T o ask the Secretary o f State for the               interested
     w o r k in g party Jon sm all sh o p s a L Su n d ay trading will
                                                                                          H om e D ep a r tm en t i f he w ill call for a report from the c h ie f   paid by Sc
     m e ud e representatives o f the N a t i L a l C h am ber o f Trade
                                                                                          constable o f W est Y ork sh ire as to h o w m a n y telep h on e          television ]
        j         6 W7 “ ak e a statem ent o u tlin in g the constitution                 calls have been received o n the sp ecial telep h o n e lines set
    a n d p u rp o se /Sf his p r o p o sed n ew f o r k i n g party on small                                                                                            Mr.       F
                                                                                          up by W est Y ork sh ire p olice, in v estig a tin g even ts at
    sh o p s a n d Su nd ay trading.                \
                                                                                          H illsborough o n 15 A pril; and i f he w ill m a k e a statem en t.       Represent;
         M r. Reiribn: N o w o r k in g party hasVeen established hu i                                                                                               program m
                                                                                            Mr. Douglas H ogg: A total o f 2,6 6 6 calls were received               com m en ts
         proposer to h old a m e etin g oVi 24 M ay with
                                                                                          on the special te le p h o n e lines du rin g th e six -d a y period.      G overn m e
    representatives o f the S h o p p in g H o u r s R e fo rm Council at
    its request and o f the A s so c ia tio n o f D istrict C ouncils to
                                                                                                                   O ffences (Leicestershire)
    seek a / w a y forw ard o n s h o p p i n g \ hours reform
    R epresen tatives o f the N a tio n a l C h a m b lr o f Trade will                      Mr. Tfcedinnick: T o a sk the Secretary o f Stated for the                    Mr. Fly
    n o t be' present,                                  \
                                                                                          H om e D ep a r tm en t h o w m an y offences tjitfre were in               D epartm ei
                                                                                          Leicestershire's^ 1987 and 1988; an d if/Ke w ill m a k e a                 (b ) H onf
                            N a t io n a l S ta d iu m                                    statement,                                                                  B anglades
    M r . Terry Fields: T o ask the Secretary o f State for the                                                                                                       since 197S
                                                                                             Mr. John PattenNI refer the h o n /M e m b e r to th e reply
   o m e D e p a r tm e n t w h a t representations his Department                                                                                                    countries ;
                                                                                          given to a q u e s tio k from tne h on . M em b er for
has received c o n cern in g p r o p osals to build a national                                                                                                        requests re
                                                                                          Leicestershire, N orth-W b^t (NJ-r A sh b y ) o n the 13 A pril at
sta d iu m to im p r o v e the safety o f sp orts spectators in the                                                                                                   citizens o f
                                                                                          colum n 713.
light ol even ts at H illsb o ro u g h o n 15 April; and if he «.ii                                                                                                        Mr.     F
m a k e a statem ent.
                                                                                                                                                                      Inform atic
    M r. Hurd: M y D e p a r tm en t has n o t received am                                                                                                            statu s in t
                                                                                              Mr. David P orter/T o a sk the Secretary o f S tate fo r the
r ep resentations a b o u t p r o p o sa ls to build a national                                                                                                       1987, by '
                                                                                           H ome D ep a rtm en t h o w m a n y p e o p le have been ( a)
stu dium . R e sp on sib ility for the safety and com fort ■'                                                                                                         O ffice st
                                                                                          charged w ith a n / ( b ) c o n v icte d o f road traffic offences
sp ectators rests w ith the ind ividu al sports ground opera to:                                                                                                      K in gd o
                                                                                          connected w ith /th e use o f m o b ile car telep h on es.
or even t organiser, w h o m u st c o m p ly with the terms an*:                                                                                                      1 3 /8 7 '
c o n d itio n s o f an y safety certificate in force for the crourul                           Mr. John l*atten: T h e availab le in f o r m a t i o n relates to    Librf
in qu estion .                                                                             proceedings' at m agistrates cou rts for all offences o f                  SUIT



                                                                                                143 CW53/3 J o b 1-5
                                          Ref:   GSS 9/1


 Mr W B Utting                            From: M r s __________
 Chief Inspector, SSI                           SSI, NW Region
 Roam 519/522
 Ridhmond House -
                                          Date: 8 May 1989

                                          Copy: Miss C Hey
                                                Mrs
                                                MrT
                                                Mr
                                                Mr
                                                Mr
                                                Mr


 PTT *TfiBQRQQSH DISASTER - OQgEDNGS


  1.   Further to iry minute of 4 May, please find attached the estimated costs
       for the support unit from the Merseyside authorities.




v Inspector
                ESTIMATED COSTS "HILLSBOROUGH"              SUPPORT UNIT


                                             1989/90      1990/91       1991/92

                                             From         Full          To

                                             1.7.89       Year          30.6.<

RUNNING COSTS                                £000         £000          £000

Salaries                                      140           185              46

Volunteer Expenses                i            33            44              11

Office Accommodation,                 etc.     26            34                  9

Supplies and Services                          12            14                  4

Transport                                         6             8                2

Telephone                                      11            15              .4

Printing,       Stationery etc.                   8          10                  2

Central Support                                _8            10                  3

C ontingency                                   30            30              15

                                             274           350               96

            i .
            i
                                                            ~       ■   —   •—




EQUIPMENT ETC         v

Typewriter, W o r d p r o c e s s o r )
Computer Hardware                     )
Software                              )      40
Phone System                          )
Office Furniture                      )



        '       t'        f   ^              314;     .   f 350              96




HLAAAB
I' '




       Mr W B Utting                                    Our Refi   GSS 9/1
       Chief Inspector
       Room B 5 19-522.                                 From:               ~
       Richmond House                                           Inspector
                                                                SSI NW Region

                                                        Date:   4 M a y 1989

                                                        Copies? Miss C Hey
                                                                Mrs |
                                                                Mr
                                                                Mr
                                                                Mr
                                                                Mr
                                                                Mr




       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


       1.   A memorial service at the Anglican Cathedral in Liverpool was well
             received and appears to have been appreciated.

       2.   There continues regretably to be some sadness that a member of the Royal
             Family has not made contact with the helping agencies.  The visit of the
             Prince of Wales was to the Anfield Stadium.  Normal business is beginning
             to resume in Merseyside though there is still considerable activity
             relating to Hillsborough and the aftermath.

       3.   The five Merseyside authorities and Lancashire and Cheshire are recruiting
            more social work staff to fill gaps left by staff involved in ongoing work
             with families affected by the disaster and Liverpool city council have
             advertised for an additional Assistant Director (Operations) to assume
             responsibility for some aspects of management in order to free others to
             continue with Hillsborough ’w o r k ’.

       4.   The training programme continues and NWASSA (North West Association of
             Social Services Authorities) has agreed to fund a training officer to
             assume responsibility for ongoing training after the consultant <|       |
                   ]of Centre for Crisis Psychology) has left the area.  There is to be
             a ’training for trainers' strategy.  I enclose a copy of the report to
             NWASSA (Appendix 1 ) .

       5.   The working party set up to formulate recommendations for a co-ordination
             strategy relating to the delivery of helping services has reported.  This
             was accepted by the local politicians of all local authorities concerned
             (copy attached Appendix 2) - costings to follow.

       6.   The problem now is one of funding the proposed strategy.    Directors of
             Liverpool and Sefton Social Services Departments met with a representative
             of Merseyside Task Force (D of E) which I understand was helpful relating
             to the process re possible funding.  Mr          |and I had briefed
            Merseyside Task Force in advance of the meeting and we are to meet Mr
                      from Merseyside Task Force on 8 May.



                                            - 1 -
Merseyside Task Force   has advised a letter should go toSecretary of State
for the Department of   Health copied to Nicholas Ridley; John Moore and Mrs
Thatcher requesting funding.   This has been prepared and will be signed by
the politicians in Liverpool.   An approach is also being made to the EEC.

It would appear that £50,000 has been promised from private industry to
fund a memorial drop-in centre in Liverpool.

Mr M a s o n 5 Director of Liverpool SSD is keen to link with the D of H
sponsored joint working group on disaster follow-up and counselling.       He
intends to contact Tony Allen - Chief Executive, of Berkshire County
Council who I understand chairs the working party.          (NB    This must be the
forum I heard about.         Sorry for the confusion caused!)

A request is likely to be made for research following Hillsborough.
Howard P a r k e r 3 Professor of Social Work at Manchester University would be
keen to undertake this and has asked me to make enquiries about the
possibility of funding from the Department.        Professor Parker is already
known to David Mellor because of earlier research relating to drugs
misuse.    Professor Parker has attempted a literature search on articles
and research on "disasters" and has outlined to me the nature of the
research he would wish to recommend.        It appears to me to be very
releva nt.
                                                                            NEWS



      Social W o rk Today rep o rters look at the social services response to the Hillsborough stadium disaster


             Liverpool moves quickly                                                                                       Social workers
           to help bereaved and injured                                                                                      respond to
                                                                                                                            plea for help
    iverpool Social Services reacted able to organise transport to and           K nowsley, St H elens, Cheshire               ighty social workers in Shef­
 L  immediately once personnel       from Sheffield, and they w ere able
    heard of the disaster at Hills­to tell people that funeral co sts
                                                                                 and Lancashire, w here many
                                                                                 Liverpool supporters came from.
                                                                                                                           E   field and throughout South
                                                                                                                           Yorkshire responded immediately
borough.                             would be m et by Liverpool City                Many people in Liverpool had           to a radio appeal to help provide
  A team of five social workers      Council.                                    started visiting Anfield to pay their     counselling for family and friends of
was dispatched from Alder Hey           E ven more calls came from               resp ects. A drop-in centre was           football fans who died in the
Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, and  people and organisations offering           opened on Monday morning in a             Hillsborough tragedy.
arrived in Sheffield at 9 pm on      help. Som e calls cam e from people         sports centre near the ground.              Many of them worked right
Saturday night.                      who w ere uninjured but w ere                  A steady stream of people called       through last Saturday night and all
   “It was very much under control   deeply distressed.                          in to talk to social workers exper­       day Sunday supporting families as
when w e got th e re,” said Owen                                                 ienced in counselling.                    they went through the distressing
                                              BY MIKE O W EN
Hagan, who led the team from Alder                                                  In charge of the drop-in centre        ordeal of identifying bodies or
                                               IN LIVERPOOL
H ey. “We saw our role as one of                                                 w as Ann.Gegg, Divisional Principal       trying to find out what had
assessm en t of what was needed to      T he department    also instigated       Social Worker at the Royal Liver­         happened to people they knew.
be done back in Liverpool.”          a series of training programmes for         pool Hospital. She said: “Some had
   On Sunday morning, more than      social services staff which will run        been there and just wanted to talk                 BY PHIL C O H E N
100 Liverpool social workers         over the next few w e e k s . This was      about it.
voluntarily went into work. A 24-    done with the help of the Centre               “M ost had friends or relatives            T h e appeal, put out by Sheffield
hour helpline was set up so that     for Crisis Psychology, se t up as a         who had died. Som e just wanted to        Social Services through local BBC
anyone affected by the tragedy       consultancy by Michael Stewart              vent their anger,” she said.              and independent radio, brought in
could ring up and talk about it.     after the Bradford fire to offer               N o w , social services staff are      staff not only from the city itself
   Many relatives of the victims     specialist help.                            looking to the future. They expect        but also Doncaster, Rotherham,
rang up. In many ca ses, they w ere     Liverpool Social S ervices was           to be working with som e of the           Barnsley — som e ev en drove over
seeking practical support and        co-ordinating with neighbouring             bereaved families, not for several        the Pennines from Liverpool and
assistance. Social workers w ere     departments in Wirral, Sefton,              w eek s or months, but for years. A       Tam eside when they heard the
                                                                                                                           call.
                                                                                                                               They reported to Hammerton
AMA considers                                                                                                              police station near the ground and a
                                                                                                                           senior social worker then deployed
disaster plans                                                                                                             them, either to Hillsborough b oy s’
                                                                                                                           club which had been opened as a
                                                                                                                           relief centre, or to other em er­
     he AMA’s Social Services
T    Under-secretary, P eter W est­
     land, said a working party had been
                                                                                                                           gency facilities at Kelvin commun­
                                                                                                                           ity centre and the Sacred Heart
                                                                                                                           church hall.
established to consider the local
                                                                                                                               “What w e arranged was a place
authority resp onse to disasters
                                                                                                                           to receive the relatives. Then we
like Hillsborough.
                                                                                                                           linked them up to a social worker
    Mr Westland said the idea of
                                                                                                                           simply to stay with them through
establishing a national disaster unit
                                                                                                                           the identification p r o cess,” said
was not generally favoured and did
                                                                                                                            Neil Kay, Sheffield’s Director of
not have AMA support either.
                                                                                                                            Social Services.
    T he matter was originally raised
                                                                                                                                He said the task w as harrowing
at the annual Social Services Con­
                                                                                                                            for his staff, som e of whom looked
ference in N ew castle last year. Mr
                                                                                                                            after up to four families each.
Westland said this w eek that the        Thousands gather outside Liverpool's Roman Catholic cathedral last Sunday              “We used the staff as they came
working party was considering            for a Requiem Mass for the dead and injured o f Hillsborough.                      forward. Som e people had more
whether or not authorities should
                                                                                                                            staying power than others. By
have a small group of trained
people who could work together.               Helpline planned in Notts                                                     Sunday w e w ere able to take som e
                                                                                                                            people off,” he added, saying that
    T h e group would be ready to
                                                                                after the disaster and are suffering        other volunteers w ere kept in re­
                                             alks w ere going on this
deal with local em ergen cies and to
 assist other authorities as the need
 arose. T he working group is
                                         T    w eek b etw een Barry Newell,
                                         Nottinghamshire’s Deputy Direc­
                                                                                 from shock,” said John Goodwin,
                                                                                 spokesperson for the council.
                                                                                                                            serve until the first batch got tired.
                                                                                                                                Deputy Social Services Director
                                                                                                                            David Snaith said social workers at
 exp ected to make recommenda­           tor of Social Services and N otts          Television pictures of the
                                                                                 sc en es at Hillsborough brought           the Royal Hallamshire and North­
 tions about training and the need       F orest FC officials with the aim of
                                                                                 back terrible m em ories for people        ern General hospitals bore som e of
 for a data base.                        setting up a telephone helpline for
                                                                                 in Bradford, following the fire             the heaviest brunt of the after-
     Since Saturday’s tragedy an         supporters and families.
                                                                                 there at the Valley Parade ground          math.
 appeal had been su ggested . And           Also at the m eetings was Dave
                                                                                 which killed 56 people in 1985.                His staff also went to the Hills­
 m ember authorities would make a        Whitham, a senior social worker
                                                                                     Bradford Social Services made           borough stadium to help people
 concerted attempt to learn the          from Q ueens Medical Centre in
                                                                                 counselling services publicly avail­        who had been at the game, as well
 lessons of Hillsborough but it          Nottingham who was closely in­
                                                                                 able in case of need, and had ten           as ground staff em ployed by Shef­
  was too soon to say what form this      volved in post-trauma counselling
                                                                                  social workers on standby at a link-       field W ednesday. Later, families
  would take, Mr Westland said.           after the M l motorway air crash.
                                                                                  centre which hou ses several               started to arrive from Liverpool,
  S David Jones, BASW General                Social Services Director David
                                                                                  support and counselling groups.            as did Liverpool’s Director of
  Secretary, revealed on Monday           White offered whatever help and
                                                                                     T h e department sent both              Social Services David Mason.
  that a number of BASW m embers          support was needed to his Liver­
                                                                                  Liverpool and Sheffield Social                Sheffield city police said there
 had contacted him to se e if they        pool colleagues but was told they
                                                                                  Services an information pack deal­         had been close liaison with social
  could offer support to frontline        were coping with the crisis.
                                                                                  ing with the lesso n s learnt from the     services staff with a force welfare
  workers coping with the aftermath s        “Many N otts F orest supporters
                                                                                  Bradford City fire.                 A      officer counselling officers.      A
  of Hillsborough.                  A ^ -1iad helped in the first aid operation

20 APRIL 1989                                                                                                                                SO CIAL W O R K T O D A Y
To: Mr          (RL1E)            From: W B Utting
                                        Chief Inspector
                                        Social Services Inspectorate
                                        28 April 1989

                                  Copy to: M r [             (SSI)
                                           M i ss Hev          II
                                           Mrs
                                           Mr                  II
                                           Mr                 (CS)


HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

I spoke w i t h you about my writing to D i r e c t o r s of Social Services
in M e rseyside along the lines suggested by Mr                       in his
minute to me of 2 7 April.

2.  I am happy to do this but need to know that it will not
conflict w i t h any other actions or communications by Ministers or
senior officials.

3.  There are seven social services departments involved.  I
attach a draft of a letter to the Director of Social Services for
Liverpool, who has been most heavily engaged.  I will scale this
down for the others.




W B UTTING
Chief Inspector
Social Services Inspectorate
Room 519/522, RH
Tel. No. 210 5569
                                  ^ > 1




D ear




My c o l l e a g u e s      in     t h e N o r th W est R e g io n o f t h e              In sp ecto ra te            have
k e p t me in fo r m e d o f t h e             a c tio n    ta k en by lo c a l           so c ia l      se r v ic e s
d ep artm en ts        in     t h e wake o f t h e H ills b o r o u g h                fo o tb a ll      d isa ste r .       I
c o n g r a t u la t e you and t h e              sta ff    of    th e    D ep artm en t on t h e             e ffe c tiv e
w ork u n d erta k en t o             p r o v id e c o u n s e llin g       and o t h e r       support se r v ic e s
to   th e bereaved               fa m ilie s      and o t h e r s     d istr e sse d        by th e       traged y.


I was g r e a t ly          im p ressed b y th e            speed o f           th e   so c ia l    se r v ic e s
r e a c tio n     a n d b y t h e c o m m itm en t t o            c o n tin u e t o       h e lp    and su p p o rt
p e o p le    th rou gh       a p o s s ib ly       p r o tr a c te d p e r io d       o f m o u r n in g .       The
d i r e c t w ork in v o lv e d           is   d iffic u lt       and d e m a n d in g .           But o th e r s n ot
d ir e c tly      in v o lv e d h ave a ls o           c o n tr ib u te d by p r o v id in g co v e r to
e n a b le    th e    norm al w ork o f t h e              D ep artm en t t o          c o n tin u e .      In th a t
very     im p o r ta n t s e n s e ,       th is     is    tr u ly    a d e p a r tm e n t-w id e e f f o r t ,
fu lly       in   k e e p in g w ith       th e     sp ir it     and a c h ie v e m e n ts         of    s o c ia l
se r v ic e s     w ork a f t e r      e a r lie r     tr a g e d ie s.


[I   a d d my p e r s o n a l         c o n g r a tu la tio n s      on t h e      o u tsta n d in g      le a d e r sh ip
d em o n stra ted        in      y o u r ow n r e s p o n s e t o        th e    d isa ste r ,      and on th e
m a n a g e ria l     effo rt       in v o lv e d    in    c o -o r d in a tin g       sta tu to ry       and
v o lu n ta r y      effort.].
                                           v                                                                             <C Ti°
                                                           NEWS FEATURES


      By MIKE O W EN
      he huge counselling operation
                                         OPERATION MERSEYSIDE
T     set up in the aftermath of the     He stressed that it was a national
      Hillsborough disaster was disaster with the deaths spread
                                      over a very wide area. The city of
      described as “a massive preventa­
tive, mental health programme” by Liverpool had borne the brunt of
                                                                              for Wirral Social Services. “We
                                                                              need continuity and consistency,”
                                                                              he added.
                                                                                 Referrals had been broken down
                                                                                                                      reactions.”
                                                                                                                         Sefton Social Services had set
                                                                                                                      up a specialist team of five, opera­
                                                                                                                      ting from the top floor of an old
David Mason, Liverpool’s Director media attention but the shock has           into five categories: bereaved,         people’s home in Waterloo. It had
of Social Services.                   hit neighbouring districts just as      injured, people at the match, rela­     received 250 referrals and had 17
   He said last week that thousands hard.                                     tives and others.                       bereaved families in the borough.
of people had been traumatised by        In Wirral, 70 referrals had been        Core team member Les Lomax              In some cases, worried parents
what they had seen at Hillsborough. made to the social services depart­       said: “Bereaved families have           had contacted them after noticing
The effects on many were clearly ment and a self-help group for               found it quite helpful to know that     changes in the behaviour patterns
evident now, but they may not survivors was being set up. Nine                somebody is going to embark on          of sons who attended the game.
show in others for many months to people from Wirral died in the              something of a long-term nature            Team leader David Alexander
come.                                 disaster.                               and support them through their          said that ideally he would like to
   Mr Mason said people had a            A drop-in centre had been opened     bereavement.”                           trace and contact every person in
choice. They could look upon the at Tranmere Rovers football club                He said that eight or nine survi­    the borough who had been to the
counselling operation as a relativ­ and a specialist core team was            vors had expresed an interest in        match, even though this would
ely cheap preventative measure or operating from Birkenhead town              forming a self-help group.              probably run into several thousand.
“someone, somewhere can start hall.                                              Knowsley Social Services have a         Team leader David Alexander
planning a massive increase for the      “It was decided to pool workers      specialist team of six social workers   said experience from previous
demand in services as people react into a specialist team rather than         operating from the former staff         disasters, such as Bradford and
to the trauma they have experi­ fragment them”, said Jim Black,               house of an old people’s home in        Zeebrugge, was that some survi­
enced.”                               Assistant Director of Mental Health     Huyton. They had 120 referrals,         vors did not seek social services
   David Mason: huge counselling operation set up                             which included 16 bereaved               help until many months later.
                                                                              families.                                   Social work teams from all areas
                                                                                 Many survivors were having            were clearly drawing on the training
                                                                              difficulty coping, they reported.        they had been given since the dis­
                                                                               Guilt was a recurring theme. One        aster by Michael Stewart, from the
                                                                               survivor blamed himself for the         Centre for Crisis Psychology.
                                                                               death of the person next to him at         The demand on social services
                                                                               Hillsborough. “I breathed his air”,     departments in the Merseyside
                                                                               he told the social worker.              region was great before the disas­
                                                                                  Others were feeling guilt because    ter, and they responded magnifi­
                                                                               they had stepped over bodies in         cently to the tragedy. But it remains
                                                                               the crush.                              to be seen whether central govern­
                                                                                  Social worker John Mullen said:      ment will provide the additional
                                                                               “We have been reliving their            resources necessary to maintain
                                                                               experiences with them, and emph­        the high standards that have been
                                                                               asising the normality of their          set.                               A



                 c-t.              VO              ""Vo
                                                          Cv      /v\s^ i<h r7                                     CTf          U-t,
       N E W S F O C U S                                   HILLSBOROUGH




THE TASK THAT CONFRONTS:
In his second report on the scale of the social work                                                It was clear within hours o f the tra­          A great deal, o f m oney has also I
                                                                                                 gedy      that   what      h ap p en ed    at   offered. O ne caller wanted to p ut
                                                                                                 Hillsborough was a stab to the heart            a “B and Aid-style” cdncert of mus
response to the Hillsborough disaster, Peter Morris                                              not ju st o f Liverpool alone b ut to the       an d poetry. T h e re wore also offers o
                                                                                                 Merseyside region as a whole. A re­             accommodation from residents in
                                                                                                 gional response was called for.                 Sheffield. However, the M others’
visits the social workers at the sharp end                                                          In norm al times, getting represen­          Union and the Union o f Catholic
                                                                                                 tatives o f seven local authorities plus        Mothers had very quickly sewn up the
                                                                                                 representatives o f the voluntary sec­          accommodation sitUajCfon.
                                                                                                 tor ro u n d a table is a jo b in itself, let      Sf)cial workeirs in the region were
                                                                                                 alone getting them to agree to a com ­          also swept along in the tide o f com­
                                                                                                 mon policy. Yet, by the m orning                passion. “1 h^ve' been p ro u d to be as­
                     erseyside is digging      that it’s not true, they’re not clinically        after, a regional co-ordinating group,          sociated with the response which
                     in for a long haul in    depressed, they’re not becoming                    consisting of Cheshire, Liverpool,              showed social work in. its tru e light,”




 M
                     the wake of the           schizophrenic. T h e ir feelings are a            Knowsley, Lancashire, St Helens,                Walker said. “Social workers have p ut
                     Hillsborough disas­       norm al reaction to an abnorm al situ­            Sefton, Wirral a n d the Liverpool              in hours and hours o f lheir time. No­
                     ter. Social workers      ation.”                                            Council for V oluntary Service, was up          body has refused to d o anything.”
                     across the north              O ne woman who came to his team’s             and running. By the evening the re­
                     west region are talking innotice
                                                  term swas
                                                          of two
                                                              fixated on the photographs         gion’s “helpline” had been ushered              N E A R EXPLOITATION
                     to three years to consum  o fe the
                                                     the disaster
                                                          smoke in the newspapers. At            into existence.                                    A cautionary • note, however, was
                     o f hum an grief and distress
                                               first which    bil­ the pap er into the bin
                                                      she threw                                     “It was a real lesson in how quickly         sounded by director Mason. “Good­
lowed u p so suffocatingly that fateful        to try to rid herself of the fixed men­           things can be do n e,” B ernard Walker,         will lasts but asfto ri time,” he rem ark­
Saturday afternoon in the Sheffield            tal image but that did not work so she            an area social services officer with            ed. “O n the Sunday m orning every­
 stadium.                                      then retrieved them and b u rn t them.            Knowsley an d his d e p a rtm en t’s rep re­    body wanted tp do everything. But
    T h e task that confronts them is, in          So concerned are A lexander and               sentative on the regional group, said.           there is a p oint:a t which goodwill be­
 the words o f Liverpool director David        his team about the clanger o f bottling             T h e response o f the city’s voluntary       comes exploitttion. We are worried
 Mason, a preventive mental health             up unpleasant thoughts and feelings              sector, one o f the oldest, richest and           that we were je ttin g close to that.”
 service cam paign on a massive scale.         that they intend to try to identify              strongest in the country, according to               Although there is an agreed region­
T h e people who are to be targeted in        every person from Sefton who was at                Edward M urphy, chief executive of              al policy, thef jseveii SSDs have intro­
 the cam paign are not so much the             the match. It will be a m am m oth op­           the Council for Voluntary Service,                duced their o.Wn- variations to the
 families who lost relatives but the          eration. Sefton encompasses many                  was equally impressive. By M onday its            com m on them e'iri responding to the
 thousands o f survivors who escaped           areas, such as Bootle and Crosby,                own co-ordinating com m ittee was in             crisis. While Liverpool SSD is farm ing
 physically unscathed. A nd the gam ut         Maglnill and           S outhport    where       business. M urphy, however, was                  o ut calls frotp/'flglreaved families and
o f em otions unleashed by their ex­           Anfield supporters are thick on the              mindful o f a warning given to him by             survivors to Sts 'tKsirkt offices, other
 perience may in the e nd do far worse         ground.                                          the director o f the counselling service         SSDs have sol u p separate teams of
 harm to them than any physical in­                                                             CRUSE, th a t disasters can bring                social workefs/Jboused in a variety of
jury.                                          BIGGEST LOSS                                     about an inter-agency rivalry which               improvised premises.
   As Val Sheldon, the leader of                   In fact, Sefton lost 17 people at            has more to d o with kudos than kind­                Wirral SSfi’s core team, for
 Knowsley’s crisis intervention team,          Hillsborough, th e biggest loss sustain­         ness.                                            exam ple, has mqyed into Birkenhead
set u p immediately after the abandon­        ed by any district on Merseyside. Hie •              “We have taken that w arning to               T ow n Hall, a m inor architectural
ed football match, said, how does              n u m b e r o f supporters to be identified *    heart,” he said. “We have stressed that          gem, which has stood: virtually em pty
som eone come to terms with having                               thousands? *                   ou r function is to play a supporting            for the past.-erght years. O ne o f the
unwittingly walked over a dead child               T h e conviction that it will take          ■role to the local authorities."                  first jo b s o n ’th e plate of team mem ­
in escaping from the terraces?                 years before the region rids itself of              T h e public and professional re­             bers Les Loijjgx an d T ed Knowles was
   “People are telling us that they’re         the images o f the disaster im printed           sponse to the tragedy can only be                to heave desks/ a n d tables into the
only alive because others died,” she           on its collective mind is widespread.            com pared to that which prevailed                echoing building. “We felt that setting
said. “T hey can’t rid themselves of the      Ju d g ed by what happened in the                 du rin g wartime when people were                up a specialist: ^eam would cause the
belief tha t they breathed the air of the      afterm ath o f o th er recent tragedies at       united in a com m on purpose. If any­            least am o u n t o f disruption to the
people who died. O ne man said after­          Zeebrugge, B radford and H unger-                thing, the problem in the first few              mainstream ss^gyice';" Jim Black, as­
wards: ‘1 was a coward, 1 ran away.’.          ford the conviction is well-founded.            days was iii turning away volunteers.             sistant d ire c to r(m e n ta l health) with
T h e survivors are full of guilt and              At B radford people are still calling       T h e re was a real danger, as M urphv            Wirral, said. “T h e team will remain
feelings o f helplessness."                    for help, three years since the fire            eloquently put it, o f “a great sponta­           in being for g h i ’n itialsix months. O ne
   T h e most urgent task of the re ­          swept th ro u g h the football stadium.          neous surge o f assistance overwhelm­            o f its plans is Jo s e tu p a self-help sur­
gion’s social workers is to capture                “People feel num b immediately              ing us".                                          vivors’ group.”
those feelings before, as David Alex­         afterwards,” Liverpool’s director said.              T h e deluge of assistance has been              Sefton's core team lias been p ut up
ander,      the   leader of Sefton's          “ Information wasn’t absorbed. Seeing            channelled through the helpline                   in the attic of a seafront old people’s
Hillsborough core team, put it, “psy­         som eone next to you die is a massive            which received twice as m any offers              hom e and Knowsley’s crisis interven­
chological ro t” sets in.                     shock that has a desensitising effect.           as appeals in its first eight days. Many          tion team his. been squeezed into an'
   “T h e re are a lot o f people going        People are going to protect them ­              o f the offers were o f holiday accom­            em pty staff sliouse adjoining an o ld1
around saying: ‘1 am going m ad’,"            selves from that experience for a very           modation ranging from time shares in              people’s horjie. Knqjivsley's six-strong
A lexander said. “We have to tell them         long time."                                     Spain to caravans in north Wales.                 team hoped tp put on a 24-hours ser-j

6                                                                                                                                                                 rOVfMI’VTTYCARE
    - O v v v YYX oc-v-'t-eVt-|   d'aU'VCL                                  c ;V •••'••••’
                                                                                         V
        £+.                  nr7                                                                   NEWS                   FOCUS




                                                                                                     is th e ‘h e lp lin e ’ w h ich is b ased in a
                                                   '
                                                                                                     day c e n tr e fo r th e m en tally ill. It is
                                                                                                      m a n n e d ro u n d th e clock with three
                                                                                                     co u n se llo r s o n at n ig h t a n d 10 d u r in g
                                                                                                     th e day.
                                                                                                         T h e c o u n sello rs, w h o n u m b e r m o r e
                                                                                                     than 100 w o rk in g fo u r h o u r -lo n g
                                                                                                     sh ifts at a tim e, in c lu d e n o t o n ly social
                                                                                                     w orkers b u t social w ork stu d e n ts a n d
                                                                                                     social work lecturers. T h e calls, R uth
                                                                                                      Eley, o n e o f t h e tw o co -ord in ato rs
                                                                                                     said, split r o u g h ly 5 0 - 5 0 b etw een re­
                                                                                                     q u ests fo r h e lp a n d o ffe r s o f assist­
                                                                                                     an ce. S o m e o f th e c o u n s e llin g calls at
                                                                                                     n ig h t h a v e lasted as lo n g as tw o h ou rs.
                                                                                                         O n e o f th e m o st h eart-b reak in g re­
                                                                                                     q u ests th at th e h e lp lin e co u n sello rs
                                                                                                     h a v e rece iv ed from b e r e a v e d fam ilies
                                                                                                     is to a rra n g e for th e p rovision o f Liv­
                                                                                                     er p o o l FC su p p o r te r s’ c lo th in g like
                                                                                                     ca p s a n d scarves in w h ich to bury
                                                                                                     th eir d e a d relatives. T h i s has b een
                                                                                                     n ecessary sin ce, m u c h to th e d ism ay
                                                                                                     o f th e fam ilies, th e victim s h a v e b een
                                                                                                    r e t u r n e d from S h e ffie ld n a k ed , sim ­
                                                                                                     ply c o v e r e d in a sh r o u d . T h e ir c lo th ­
                                                                                                     in g, as w'ell as an y j e w e lle r y an d rings,
                                                                                                     h as b e e n reta in ed by th e p o lice for
                                                                                                     fo ren sic e x a m in a tio n . A s Eley said,
                                                                                                    th e retu rn o f victim s w ith o u t c lo th in g
                                             vice but had to give it u p as unrealis­               as well as th e c o v e r a g e o f th e trag ed y
                                             tic. The regional ‘helpline' at H a t to n             in th e tabloid p ress has a d d e d to th e
                                             G a rd e n in Liverpool now provides                   ord ea l o f fam ilies.
                                             r o v e r from 5pm . They have fo u n d                    T o e n a b le th e social w orkers o n th e
                                             that local docto rs o n the whole have                 fr o n tlin e to u n lo a d s o m e o f th eir ow n
                                             been very helpful in n o t pro v id in g               p r o b le m s arisin g fro m w o rk in g with
                                             tranquillisers to the survivors since                  t h e b erea v ed an d survivors, a special
                                             they simply d e f e r th e task o f in te g r a t­     sta fflin e c o -o rd in a ted by B A S W has
                                             ing painful experiences. “B ut o n e                   b e e n esta b lish ed . A party o f h a lf a
                                             m an who went totally out o f control                  d o z e n social w ork ers from S a n d w ell
                                             h a d to have tranquillisers,” She ld on               in th e wrest M id lan d s w ere in L iver­
                                             r e p o rte d .                                        p o o l fo r tw o w eek s to g e t t h e stafflin e
                                                  H e r team s h a r e d th e c o m m o n in­       o f f th e g r o u n d .
                                             itial fin d in g th at it is th e survivors                M o u n tin g a c a m p a ig n t o d ea l with
                                             r a t h e r th a n th e berea v ed w ho a r e suf­    a d isaster o n th e sc a le o f H illsb o r o u g h
                                             fe rin g m o r e severely. As o n e o f h e r          is costly n o t o n ly in m a n p o w e r b u t in ~
’                                            colleagues r e m a rk ed , b e re a v e m e n t is     m o n e y . It is easy t o f o r g e t t h e social
                                             a socially institutionalised e x p erien c e          w ork ers o n th e b ack stage w h o are
                                             which is s u r r o u n d e d by rituals such           h a v in g to carry o n with th e u sual
                                             as th e funeral. But t h e r e a re n o such          social w ork tasks b e se ttin g a d e p a r t­
                                             parallels for the survivor tryin g to blot            m e n t, ch ild p rotectio n work in p ar­
                                             out from his m ind the sight o f s o m e ­            ticular. Y et they c a n n o t b e e x p e c te d
                                             o n e dying in front o f him. A n o t h e r           to c o v er for co lle a g u e s w h o m ay be
                                             team m e m b e r re p o r te d the first signs        away from their d esk s fo r u p to six
                                             of the local c o m m u n ity sh a r in g its dis­     m o n t h s o r m o re. Wh-ere: 'the m o n e y .
                                             tress in as m u d ) as o n e o f th e be rea v ­      is c o m in g fro m to p a y f o r th e c a m ­
                                             ed families h a d received a sy m pa th y             p a ign n o -o n e q u ite knotfs. M ason
                                             c ard from a m o t h e r who h a d lost a             says t h e g o v e r n m e n t h as n o t b e e n in
                                             sun.                                                  touch with him. W h ether any approach­
                                                  The c o m m o n th re a d j o in i n g u p the   e s h a v e b e e n m a d e - i n t h e r e g io n to
                                             u n i o n s teams th r o u g h o u t the region       t h e g o v e r n m e n t, h e ’s n o t saying:

                                                                                                                                                      7
^NEWSFOCUS                                                                                                 o4^£L                           V
                                                                                                    2,7                                   X




 THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:
 Sheffield and Liverpool social services were stretched                                               he saw me, he ju st stopped dead and           T h e re was just one single telephone
                                                                                                     started sobbing, really sobbing.”               in the d u b . Information between the
                                                                                                        In both Sheffield and Liverpool,             club and the nearest police station at
 to breaking point. Peter Morris finds out why from,                                                  there has been no real let up in the           H ainerton Road had to be passed by
                                                                                                     calls for assistance arising from the           runner.
                                                                                                     tragedy. This comes as no surprise to              Direc tor Kay accepts that organis­
 directors N eil Kay and David Mason                                                                  Liverpool, which announced late last           ation at the bens' club reception
                                                                                                     week that it had set up two outreach            centre was less than perfect, “lncvi-
                                                                                                     centres, one in the city itself and an ­        tablv. initially, it was bound to be cha­
                                                                                                     o ther across the. water on the Wirral,         otic,” he said. ‘’We had a large num ­
                                                                                                     courtesy o f T ran m ere Football Club          ber of relatives and friends alrcadv in
                                                                                                     an d Wirral social services. Director           the city and thev descended on the
                                                                                                     David Mason said that they were still           police station at Hamerton Road. O ur
              n the afterm ath o f the            in the early hours o f Sunday morning              “overwhelmed by the massive needs               role was supporting the police. The




 I
              Hillsborough horror, it has         to see for himself the scale o f the dis­          o f people suffering grief and dis­             boys' d u b was not ideal for rccciving
              become d e a r that the toll 011    aster.                                             tress.”                                         people but it was im portant that it was
              the social workers who spent           A mongst those social workers who                  T h e continuing dem and upon his            dose to the police station. 1 am sure
              hours and hours helping the         were unable to respond to the calls                dep artm en t did come as a surprise to         it was the right decision.'' T h e lack of
              stunned and stricken rela­          for help, a sense o f guilt is prevalent.          Neil Kay who thought that by the                telephones, lie added, was eased by
              tives and friends o f the dead     soccer
                                                  Diane Day, acting g ro u p principal at            Monday after the disaster, the work             the use of radio telephones possessed
 supporters was enorm ous.                        the Royal Hallamshire Hospital in                  would begin to run down. “So far, it            bv the departm ent.
     In Sheffield, where 80 social                Sheffield, was away from the city over             hasn’t worked out that way,” he said,              I’art of the problem at the boys’
 workers, a quarter o f the city's entire         the weekend. She says she and a n ­                “a lot o f work is still com ing in.”           d u b was the sheer overwhelming re­
 social workforce, as well as num erous           other colleague who was also else­                                                                 sponse of the public to the appeals for
 other social services personnel, work­           where felt had about not being there               DISPERSED RELATIVES                             help. T here were upwards o f 100
 ed ro u n d the clock on that fateful            at the height of the crisis. O ne conso­              T h e reason why is to do with the           people at one time in the cramped,
 weekend, director Neil Kay declared              lation was that tlicv were both fresh               fact that somewhere in the region of           warren-like d u b , helpers o f all de­
 a m oratorium last week on all but es­           and able to relieve their exhausted                 25 to 30 o f the supporters who died           scriptions including Scout leaders,
 sential work on the football tragedy.            colleagues when tlicv did get hac k to             did not come from Merseyside where              Salvation Army m embers and clergy­
    “Over the weekend and afterwards,             Sheffield.                                '        their families would be supported by            men. When |on Pilling, Sheffield SSI)
 the sheer tiredness and emotional ex­               Like Liverpool, Sheffield lias also              Liverpool social workers, but from             assistant director, arrived to take
 haustion o f o u r staff has been very          set u p a t e le p h o n e help line a n d has      areas u p and, down the country. T he           charge, having been at a football
 evident,” the Sheffield director said.          established a 10-strong task team led               initial contact m ade by Sheffield social       match himself in Manchester that
 Some social workers were seeing as              by     the        divisional      officer    for    work staff has been developed by the            afternoon, he felt quite helpless at
 many as five different lots o f bereaved        Hillsborough Dan I’crks. All 10 soc ial             dispersed relatives who are still look­         first. “I thought, ‘W here do you
 families one after the othe r in an e nd­       workers on th e team have b een reliev­             ing towards them for fu rth er assist­          start?’” he confessed. T h en he recall­
 less stream. “ It is hard to imagine the        ed of th eir norm al duties.                        ance with such arrangem ents as at­             ed the advice o f a friend o f his from
 impact that has on a social worker                  The team is c h a rg e d with collec ting       tending inquests.                               Kent SSD, who helped in the
 without anybody around to tell about            a n d tran s f e r rin g vital in form atio n to       O ne post-mortem that the Sheffield          Zeebrugge ferry disaster, that it was
it," Kay added.                                  Liverpool, id entifyin g the n e ed for             d ep artm en t is carrying out is into the      vital to make contact quickly with the
    O n the following Monday, Kay in­            counselling, a r r a n g i n g counselling          way it reacted du rin g the immediate           main source o f information. He
vited his social w'ork staff to take time        a n d superv ising the oil going work               afterm ath o f the disastrous football          quickly established contact with the
off to recover or to talk through their          with families.                                      fixture. A basic grade social worker            police superintendent in charge.
traum atic experiences with col­                    High on the list for counselling are             who responded to the television ap ­               In both Sheffield and Liverpool,
leagues. Routine social work tasks, he           tlie dozens o f polic e officers who were           peal for assistance said that the scene         the response o f the public was gratify­
added, would have to take a back seat.           traumatiscd bv their experiences in­               at a boys’ club com m andeered as a re­          ing " -'th people n ot only offering
“This week we’re not worrying about              side the Hillsborough stadium. 15ut so             ception point for relatives was one of           their time but also practical assistance.
that,” Kay said. “I’m telling staff to           far thcx have declined social services'            “chaos and confusion”. “It d idn’t               At the Royal Hallamshire Hospital,
do what they can do.”                            offers of help.                                    seem to me that it was u n d er the con­         Diane Day said that the telephones
    In Liverpool, it is a similar story for          1 lie wife of one police constable             trol o f a clearly functioning m anage­          were ringing non-stop with offers of
the Merseyside social workers who                told o f the state in which her husband            m ent g ro u p ,” he said. “T h e re was a       overnight accommodation in people’s
have been coping with a flood o f calls          came hom e on Saturday evening after               typical social work assumption that a            homes. O ne person rang in to invite
on their special telephone helpline              spending the day pulling people out                plan would evolve and that organis­              anyone to make use o f their bath.
from families needing help to visit              of the crush not knowing if thcx were              ation and discipline were less im port­          Someone else tossed his car keys to
their injured relatives in hospital at           dead or alive and passing them on to               a nt than caring.”                               helpers to let them help themselves
Sheffield and from families who have             the pitch for resuscitation. "When he                 T h e chaotic scene which confront­           to the use o f his car. Social workers
returned hom e in a state o f shock,             got home at about Npm." the wife was               ed the families when they started ar­            helped provide transport, driving
i e r | x x il social workers have been          reported as saving, "lie left the car              riving did n othing to en g en d er tr u s t'.   some families from the mortuary to
trundling back and forth across the              strewn in the middle of the road,                  between themselves and the social                the city hospitals. In another instance,
I’t-miincs and director David Mason              doors open and engine running, and                 work staff, he added, and described              social workers drove two families
tr.ncllcd to the South Yorkshire city            came run n in g down the drive. When               the com munications as "appalling”.              hom e to Liverpool and an o th er fam-

                                                                                          i.                                                                          COMMUNITY CARE



                                                                                                                     \
o               NEWS            FOCUS




£ FROM CHAOS?
                 ily back to Chester. Food and blankets
                 were provided by staff at local old
                 people’s homes. “T h e response from
                 the staff was trem endous,” said Shef­
                 field’s director.
                     T h e identification of bodies took
                 place in Sheffield Wednesday’s gym­
                 nasium which is situated un d er the
                 stands. A system evolved over the
                 evening, in which relatives arriving at
                 the gym were met by social workers
                 paired with clergymen who stayed
                 with them until after the identifica­
                 tion. Instead o f putting relatives
                 through the ordeal of seeking out
                 their dead son o r daughter/from the
                 bodies laid out behind a curtained-off
                 section of the gym, the police showed
                 them photographs o f the deceased.
                 Once they recognised someone in a
                 photograph, the body was separated
                 from the rest for positive identifica­
                 tion.
                     T h e social work staff were anxious,
                 once the indentification process was
                 over, to take families to a nearby
                 church hall in o rd er to prevent them
                 getting mixed u p with newly arriving
                 relatives. T h e plan did not work out
                 perfectly, since the relatives were
                 naturally very reluctant to take their
                 leave o f the body o f a m em ber o f their
                 family.
                     A local CP who was in the make­
                 shift m ortuary found the presence of
                 a party o f social workers from Derby,
                 who were on hand at the M 1 air crash
                 at Kegworth, comforting. “Most social
                 workers who were at the mortuary
                  had some beareavem ent work experi­
                 ence but being in on som ething right
                 at the beginning is different from
                  most o f their experience,” he said.
                  “T h e main difference is the scale of
                  it.”
                     T h e reaction of the families varied
                  enormously. “Some were obviously
                  distressed and others were dazed,”
                  the doctor continued, “I didn’t see
                  any anger, ju st bewilderment.” He
                  spent a long time with one particular
                  woman who simply could not believe
                  that h er young, healthy son had lost
                  his life in the stadium that afternoon.
                     Looking to the future, Neil Kay
                  said that it was intended that the les­
                  sons from the disaster would be p ut
                  down on paper. But he added,
                  “T h ere are no blueprints. You have
                  to move on your feet. Every disaster
                  is unique.”

                                                           7
                                                                                                                                            PARLIAMENT
✓'“S
                                                                                               DISASTERS




 Recognition — but at
 what price?
                                                                                                                                               T here is also the question of how far
                                                                                                                                             they are prepared, or able to go on
                                                                                                                                             clearing u p the chaos which ensues
                                                                                                 O f course, the new found role of
 From the Bradford fire to Hillsborough, social                                                                                              from other people’s actions — or lack
                                                                                               social workers has not been without its       of them.
                                                                                               problems. T h e media has been slow to
                                                                                               pick u p and report on what is done           TRAGEDIES
 workers have helped pick up the pieces. Tim Lunn
                                                                                               after a disaster.
                                                                                                                                                  As the frequency of disasters has in­
                                                                                                 They talk o f social workers “running
                                                                                                                                               creased, so too have the allegations and
                                                                                               a helpline” without explaining that it
 looks at the implications                                                                                                                     evidence that in many of them the
                                                                                               has been set u p at breakneck speed and
                                                                                                                                               causes lay in mismanagement and in­
                                                                                               that its work will last for years.              competence. T h e government — and
                                                                                                  More seriously, local authorities can
                                                                                                                                               particularly the Prime Minister — insist
                                                                                               lose out financially when a disaster
                                                                                                                                               on calling these events tragedies, as
                                                                                               happens in their area. Resources have           though they were unavoidable acts of
                                                                                               to be diverted from other important            God.
                                                                                               work, while calls to central government           B ut the Fennell inquiry into the
                                                                                               to make u p the losses generally fall on
                                                                                                                                               King’s Cross u n d erg ro u n d fire point­
                                                                                               deaf ears.                                     ed to material, avoidable reasons for
                                                                                                 T h e King’s Cross helpline was even         the 31 deaths there in 1987.
                                                                                               forced to turn to the local disaster fund
                                                                                                                                                 T here have been, in addition, vari­
                                                                                               for money when resources ran out and
                                                                                                                                              ous allegations that a callous disregard
                                                                                               the counselling work faced prem ature
                                                                                                                                              for hum an life mixed on occasions with
                                                                                               curtailment.
                                                                                                                                              an over-eager eye for a quick buck
                                                                                               DISASTER UNIT                                  played their part in the Zeebrugge dis­
                                                                                                                                              aster, the Clapham crash and the
                                                                                                   Needless to say, local authorities are     deaths at Hillsborough.
                                                                                                unhappy that prom pt reactions to u n ­
                                                                                                                                                 These allegations have not been
                                                                                                foreseen events on their doorsteps
                                                                                                                                              proven, but their existence raises im­
                                                                                                leave them out of pocket. Some believe
                                                                                                                                              portant questions. Social services may
                                                                                                that a national disaster unit, funded by
                                                                                                                                              rightly welcome taking a role which in­
                                                                                                central government and ready to turn
                                                                                                                                              volves their skills and professionalism
                                                                                                u p wherever disaster strikes, provides      and wins public approval. But are they
                                                           *J                                   the answer.                                  to do so uncritically?
                                                                                                   T h e political lobby favouring such a
                                                                                                                                                 O ther emergency services have a ma­
 titsborough football stadium after the disater                                                 unit has grown in the last two years and
                                                                                                                                            jo r input into deciding what should
                                                                                                it will doubtless win more converts fol­
                                                                                                                                             and should not happen when large
                  he growing roll-call of         board and responded practically to the        lowing the events in Sheffield.
                                                                                                                                             numbei-s o f people congregate in par­




 T
                  disasters has had a per­        latest knowledge of the psychological            But it is a far from universally pre­
                                                                                                                                             ticular places, whether it be football sta­
                  versely beneficial effect       effect of disasters, and they have had        ferred option. T h e ACC, for example,
                                                                                                                                             diums, underground stations or boats.
                  on social services. From        to put up with serious personal stress        thinks it would be pointless to add a
                                                                                                                                                They may have a hard job enforcing
                  Bradford SSD’s first in­        to fulfil their suddenly received respon­     new layer of bureaucracy when the
                                                                                                                                             their wishes, particularly when the
                  novative steps after the        sibilities.                                   agencies which respond to disasters
                                                                                                                                             places concerned are controlled by pri­
                  football stadium fire to        Liverpool’s                                  and their aftermath are, in county
                                                  RECOGNITION                                                                                vate, unaccountable interests, but their
 rapid response to the deaths and injur­                                                       council and metropolitan areas, already
                                                                                                                                             involvement is guaranteed.
 ies last week at Hillsborough, social               Against a background of continual         u n d er the same corporate manage­              Is it not time then that social services,
 workers have been at the forefront of            sniping from journalists and politicians     ment.
                                                                                                                                            considering their critical role following
 services for those caught up in these            about the role of social workers in child        T h e association believes that the
                                                                                                                                            a disaster, had a similar input into try­
 dreadful events.                                 abuse cases — not to mention the gen­        necessary planning, co-ordination and
                                                                                                                                            ing to prevent disasters happening?
    In between, they have taken in the            eral downer that most people (includ­        expertise are there to be used, and that
                                                                                                                                                If they don’t there is a danger that
 H ungerford shootings, the King’s                ing, one suspects, much of the Cabinet)      the key issue is resources, not manage­
                                                                                                                                            social workers will find themselves
 Cross underground fire, Zeebrugge,               have on social workers — it has been         m ent o r control.
                                                                                                                                            stuck in a rut, periodically — and at
 Piper Alpha, the Clapham rail disaster,          a refreshing change to hear praise and           Doubtless, the debate about the pros
                                                                                                                                            great personal cost — clearing up other
 l.ockert>ie and the M 1 aeroplane crash.         recognition of the work of SSD/SWDs.         and cons of a national disaster unit will
                                                                                                                                            people’s messes, but having no chance
    On each occasion, the SSD/SWDs in­              T heir involvement in the aftermath        continue though the government has
                                                                                                                                            to help stop them happening in the
 volved hjve provided a speedy and                of disasters has, if nothing else, provid­   so far been reluctant to adopt the idea.
                                                                                                                                            first place.
 professional response, equivalent in             ed an incontrovertible reason for their      However, it is not the only issue which
 importance to that o f the emergency             existence. In these ruthlessly reforming     local authorities and their SSD/SWDs
 services. Their staff have taken on              times, that is no bad thing.                                                                                                         9
                                                                                               are going to have to addresgsss**®^

 97    appt   *                              _
                                                  —                          ‘        4
                                                                                                                 \
                                                                                                             C O M M E N T


                                                                                 V-




 ATION                     PLEASE                                                Time to reflect
scial        with o r having experience of                                                 earning the lessons from disasters has an awful




                                                                                 L
 looking     similar groups undergoing                                                     predictability as each o f these events has yielded
jing a       assessment/training for                                                       its toll o f dead, injured and bereaved (see News
people       independent living.                                                           Focus, pages 6 and 7; and Parliament, page 9,
lities and   GARY GRIMBLEBY                                                                this week). T h e end of a week’s official m ourning
sidential    Deputy manager                                                                in Liverpool, with the symbolic closing o f the
jes of       Lincolnshire House Association                                                Anfield gro u n d this week, marks not only the beginning of
             Lincolnshire House                                             the massive task o f meeting grief on such a scale — one likely
             Brumby Wood Lane                                               to last for years — but also a period of reflection.
■ted to      Scunthorpe                                                        And they have been learned. Despite the adm itted problems
lvolved      South Humberside DN17 1AF                                      in Sheffield, the m ustering a n d organisation of resources from
                                                                            within and without their own ranks by both Sheffield and Liv­
                                                                           erpool SSDs have been no less than heroic.
                                                                               T h a t so much information has been disseminated and ab­
DQSW         We are currently supporting                                   sorbed and passed on again along that sorry chain linking a
id           an adult with learning                                        channel ferry with a football ground, and others in between,
>toject      difficulties to self-medicate.                                shows a remarkable ability for bureaucracies to learn.
leeds of       We would be pleased to                                          W hat caused the events in Sheffield will remain for the police
icularly     hear from anyone who has                                      and Taylor inquiries to show. But it is not out o f place for
             any suggestions, information,                                 social workers, who joined with police colleagues, to reflect a
1 to hear    a working knowledge; or                                        little on how the media (and the force itself) have reacted to
10 would     know o f any literature                                        what may turn out to be a terrible professional misjudgement
;e or        regarding this subject.                                       on the police’s p an . If, as seems quite probable, a police officer
             GAIL MOORE                                                    decided the fated gates would be opened, there has been no
             ELAINE ALDRED                                                  media witch h unt to blame that officer. N or should there be.
             Support workers                                                But, to give one example, a front page story in the Daily Mail,
             Staffed Housing Service for People                             un d er the b an n er headline “My anguish", can only — rightly
             with Learning Difficulties                                     — evoke sympathy for a decision which will haunt the officer
             St Giles Hospital                                              for the lest o f his life. Yet Diana Lees, the social worker in
             St Giles Road                                                                                         the Colwell inquiry, Martin
             Camberwell, London SE5                                                                                Ruddock,             Kimberley
                                                                                                                   Carlile’s social worker and
                                                      The job of the social worker is no less                      too many others in the inter­
                                                                                                                   vening 13 years, also have had
                                                      important, no less demanding,
oiling

tnd
Disabled
             Cottingham Road
             Hull
             HU6 7RX                              I   arguably long-lasting
                                                                                                                   to live with the judgem ents
                                                                                                                   they made. T hey did not
                                                                                                                   cause the death of either
                                                                                                                   child, though from the press
                                                                                                                   coverage, both in 1974 and
                                                                            1987, you would have been forgiven for believing otherwise.
 1986,                        We welcome                                    No talk of their anguish, ju st as there are no press photo­
 as a                         letters for                                   graphers secreting themselves in the front gardens of police­
                                                                            men or harassing the chief constable’s elderly parents, as hap­
t the Act           inclusion on this page.                                 pened to a director of social services’ m other in one case.
1 with              They should be typed                                       Again, the national press has carried the now notorious
iccess              and double spaced, and                                  claims, leaked by an anonymous police officer in the South
try, 1                                                                      Yorkshire force (and, in fairness, roundly criticised by the Mer­
                    include the fu ll name
>ted to                                                                     seyside police) that drunken Liverpool fans urinated on police­
                    and address o f the
ed                                                                          men and picked the pockets of the dead and injured. T h ere
ups that            author, which we can
                                                                            appears to be no evidence at all to support this. It may well
  local             omit if requested. Send                                 have been a singularly tasteless and ill-chosen way for the police
 ■ duties           to:                                                     to try to divert any suspected criticism of their actions on the
 le                 The Editor, Community                                   day. But T he Sun has headlined it as “T h e tru th ”. But there
hey have            Care, Carew House,                                      is no disowning statem ent from the Home Secretary, a notable
                    Wallington, Surrey SM6                                  comparison with T ony Newton’s refusal, when Health Minis­
 ■y                 ODX. Alternatively, you                                 ter, to repudiate a Tory MP who referred to Cleveland SSD
 ■m any             can dictate your letter to                              as similar to “an o th er organisation with the initial SS, which
  t any             us over the telephone.
                                                                            also took away children”.
  found                                                                        T h e police, like nursing and medical staff, are still seen as
                    Ring 01 -6614861/4699
 te Act.                                                                    foot soldiers of compassion in such circumstances; it is their
                    on Wednesdays between
                                                                            hands which are shaken by the Prime Minister, they to whom
                    3.30pm and 4.30pm.                                      royalty smiles. T h e jo b o f the social worker is no less important,
                                                                            no less dem anding, arguably long-lasting. Social work demands
                                                                           every credit for Hillsborough, but it needs to reflect on some
                                                                           o f the less obvious lessons to be learned.

                                                                                                                                         11
Mr W B Utting                              Ref: GSS 9/1
Chief Inspector
Room 519                                   From      Mr B D Harrison
Richmond House                                       ACI
                                                     SSI NW Region

                                           Date      27 April 1989
                                           Copies:   Miss C Hey
                                                     Mrs
                                                     Mr
                                                     Mr
                                                     Mr

TTTT.T.qRaRQUGH FO Q TB A T.T. DTSASTTTR

1.    You agreed it would be appropriate for you to write to the
      Directors of the 7 Merseyside authorities who have co­
      ordinated so effectively the services to offer support to
      the bereaved families, those involved in the tragedy and
      those affected by it.
2.    The Directors involved are:
      Mr David Mason,      Liverpool (Liverpool Social Services
      Department, 26 Hatton Garden, Liverpool L3 2AW). He has co­
      ordinated all the services and has shown outstanding
      leadership and a full appreciation of the scale and
      implications of the disaster.     He has co-ordinated with
      great effect the range of statutory and voluntary services
      and created an organisation which can handle the 1600 calls
      to the Helpline and the 3600 offers of help to date.
      Pauline Farrell, Sefton (Sefton Social Services Department,
      Burlington House, Crosby Road North, Liverpool L22 OPF) has
      been a reliable and supportive colleague who has taken
      responsibility for co-ordinating the support from the
      voluntary sector (over 70 organisations).
      Other directors:
      David Rickard, Wirral
      Wirral Social Services Department, Social Services Centre,
      Cleveland Street, Birkenhead, Merseyside L43 6BL.
      Tom Foster, Lancashire
      Lancashire Social Services Department, Council Offices
      Park Hotel, East Cliff County Offices, Preston, Lancs
      Tim Brown, Director of Personal Services, St Helens
      St Helens Personal Services Department, Century House,
      Hardshaw Street, St Helens, Merseyside WA10 1RN

      Neil Singleton, Cheshire
      Cheshire Social Services Department, Commerce House,
      Hunter Street, Chester CHI 1SR
           Miss Catherine Briscoe, Knowsley
           Knowsley Social Services Department, Council Offices,
           Archway Road, Huyton, Liverpool L36 9UX - kept in touch
           although on holiday in US.

      3.   All have made staff available to undertake specific tasks
           and attend the regular Inter-Agency co-ordinating meetings
           (daily last week, Monday, Wednesday, Friday this week).
      4.   The staff of all Departments have been unstinting in their
           help and support, either directly involved or providing back
           up for normal work.
 ..         c                   -                  i
•«'                                                             £
?5.        There is some feeling that less recognition iias been
           forthcoming for the work in Merseyside which -is co-           i
           ordinating a national service and there have been adverse
           comments on the fact that no Government Minister has visited
           the area to commend and acknowledge the remarkable way in
           which service! have been organised and provided by the 7
           social services authorities working jointly!together with
           Probation, the health authorities and the voluntary sector.




                                                ^ ^4 ^ *   rv* VV
Mr W B Utting                      Ref: GSS 9/1
Chief Inspector
Room 519 Richmond House            From:         Mr B D Harrison     ACI
                                                 SSI NW Region
                                   Date:         27 April 1989
                                   Copies:       Miss C Hey
                                                  Mrs
                                                  Mr
                                                  Mr
                                                  Mr
TTTT.T■S'BOROUGH FOOTRAT.T, nTSASTER f
1.    Two meetings of the Inter-Agency Committee have been held so
      far this week. The concerns have included:
      (a) Publicity for services available              through    leaflets,
           posters, media interviews.
      (b) Helpline - over 1600           calls    to   6.00   am   26 April-
           staffing arrangements.
      (c) Database - to collect and record -information from all
           sources.
      (d) Drop in centre:       staffing, permanent location.
      (e) Training - of managers, elected members, LEA staff,
           social worker counsellors, health service staff.
      (f) Appeal Fund - advice to Trustees.
      (g) Staff counselling -            BASW service     now in place:
           STAFFLINE telephone           service with     follow up (see
           attached).
2.   Long term issues being tackled are:
     Staffing
     Approval given by some SSDs for employment of additional
     staff..
     Training
     North West Association of Social Services Authorities
     (NWASSA) approved at a special meeting the appointment of a
     Training officer for 3 years to train the trainers.
      Support Unit
     Prof Howard Parker's group is presenting a costed proposal
     for a long term organisation to handle the data base,
     Helpline, Referrals co-ordination, training and staff
     support and public relations over a 2 year period
     (experience of other disasters is that referrals continue
     well over 2 years). Detailed statement will be available
     shortly.
             Research and Evaluation
            Applicability of lessons learned from this experience to
            future planning and response.
             Funding
            '■From public and private sources
     3.   SSI has approached Merseyside Task Force and a meeting has
          been arranged for 8 May to brief them so locally DOE will be
          in a position to               a view on possible funding
          applications                       ■/
                                    9 l7     ,
     4... Local counsellors are ‘ being kept fully informed by
          individual- Directors and through NWASSA and so far a
        ^concerted approach is being maintained.
,           .v-y-W. Vi;?, -J- ■
     “ , —                      -1,




                                                          rvmrnmrn.
                                                .i   ■■
                                                                         :'1'- “• ' 'V.r;       -■
                                                                 .vV..



                                                                                            •        -■r v-;v
                                                                                                         ~~




    ■rw.-
     A personal message to staff currently working on or whose work
         has been affected by the Hillsborough Disaster.


                        STAFFLINE   051 949 0542


Since the Hillsborough Disaster on Saturday 15th April the work load
for Social Workers and other professional colleagues has increased
enormously. Many of you will have had direct or indirect experience
of the trauma caused by this disaster and many of you will have
counselled and will continue to counsel people who have been touched
by this tragedy.

Both the British Association of Social Workers and your colleagues up|
and down the country became aware that this work is demanding of yourselves
and V ou in turn may want the opportunity to talk to someone.

Consequently STAFFLINE has been set up which will provide a confidential
service to yourselves by Social Workers trained in staff support from
outside the immediate area. Initially it has been set up with the
direction of            pSS Dip.Coun. from the Royal School for the Blind,
Leatherhead and assisting him will be seven Social Workers from Sandwell
Social Services. The latter have been trained as members of a
departmental support group. .

STAFFLINE will initially be open weekdays from 11.00.a.m. - 7.00.p.m. with
an answering machine outside of these hours. Arrangements can be made to
see you by appointment at one of the counselling centres and there will
also .be an opportunity to meet STAFFLINE Staff at the HELPLINE and
ADVICE Centres at the end of key shifts.

Please do not hesitate to use STAFFLINE if things get difficult;   it is there
to help you.
                                                   ~CP\
          SOCIAL SERVICES INSPECTORATE
          DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                          ALEXANDER FLEMING HOUSE
                          ELEPHANT AND CASTLE
                          LONDON SE1 6BY
                          Telephone: 01 407 5522

With compliments
                        For your Information
     oC             □
     ¥              □   For necessary action

                        For observations

                        As requested




                                               V
                                                                               4^


                                         Ref: GSS 9/1

Mr W B Utting                            From: Mrs M J Gibson
Chief Inspector, SSI                           SSI, NW Region
Rm 519/522
Richmond House
                                         Date: 24 April 1989
                                         Copy: Mr D Brand DCI, AFH
                                               Mrs P      Ad, AFH
                                               Mr D Gilroy Ad, YHR
                                               Mr J Whitfield SSI, YHR
                                               Mr B D Harrison Ad, NWR
                                               Mr B Stimpson Ad, EMR

HUjtSBQRCOGH POOTBMI. RTADTTM DISASTER
NCKTH WEST RESPONSE

1.   Induction/awareness training for SSD, health and education staff has
      begun and continues. Two presentations by Michael Stewart (The Centre
      for Crisis Psychology) have taken place for Merseyside politicians
      (members).
2.   Workshops for SSD staff who will be counselling in the future start in
      the week beginning 24 April.
3.   It is hoped to appoint a NW training co-ordinator to continue the
      strategy when the "consultant11 leaves Liverpool.
4.   Inter authority co-operation continues of a very high quality.
5.   Relations with health and education are good.
6.   There are problems currently in relation to co-ordinating sensitive/
      confidential material on the data base. Obtaining information from the
     police and from Trent RHA is problematic.
7.   Continued request for help for staff from industry, solicitors etc.   t
8.   BASW are setting up an office in Merseyside to co-ordinate counselling
      services to support front line workers ie a staff service.
9.   Systematic information is being collected on "offers of help" and
     requests for help. All offers of help have been acknowledged.
10. Permanent premises are required for the drop-in centre currently located
    at a sports centre. Possible sources of funding are being explored.
11. Costings of immediate and longer term strategy by North West authorities
     is being undertaken and will be put to local politicians for approval
    before any bids are made to D of E.
12. There are plans for the Merseyside Directors to meet with Neil Kay from
    Sheffield.
TO:                                   From:
Mr B Utting
Chief Inspector                       SSI
Social Services Inspectorate          Y &   h   Region

                                      c*c. Mr D Brand, DCI/SSI, AFH
                                           Tlrs P Hall, ACI/SSI, AFH
                                           Mr B Harrison, ACI/SSI, n.W. Region
                                                         SSI, AFH

DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM# SHEFFIELD
SATURDAY - 15 APRIL 1989

1* There would appear to have been a very good, immediate response from
   Sheffield SSD and neighbouring South Yorkshire SSDs to th is disaster*        A
   high number of social workers volunteered th e ir services and formed
   c r i s i s intervention teams a t 3 places: namely a t the Hallamshire
   Hospital, the City General Hospital and a t a specially formed c r i s i s
   contact centre in Sheffield.
2*    The teams worked a l l though the Saturday night and on Sunday morning
     fir Gilroy (ACI) heard from Neil Kay, the Director of Social Services in
     Sheffield, th a t during the night they had been able to make sure th a t an
     individual social worker and clergyman was available to every bereaved
     family. I t i s understood th a t out of 94 bodies 20 were s t i l l unaccoun­
     ted for on Sunday morning and th at around 70 people were s t i l l in
     hospital including 18 in intensive care. (By f i r s t thing Monday morning
     i t is understood from Neil Kay and media reports th a t nearly a l l of the •'
     bodies have been accounted fo r, 56 people are s t i l l in hospital
     including 17 in intensive care)*
3.    fir Gilroy has linked with Brian Harrison (ACI, North Vfestem Region) as
     the emphasis in matters i s now likely to s h i f t from Sheffield to
     Liverpool. I t is understood th a t Mr D Mason, Director of Social ’
     Services# Liverpool, had travelled to Sheffield on Saturday night and
     had briefed himself on the s itu a tio n . Mrs Gibson (SSI, North West) was
     to attend a c r i s i s meeting in Liverpool on Sunday morning with the
     Director and his senior s t a f f to decide on an action plan re services
     th e re .
     9 30 AH - MONDAY
4*   I spoke to Neil Kay to get an update on the s itu a tio n . He informed ms
     that they had continued with th e ir provisions throughout Sunday. Early
     on Sunday evening he had allowed his tire d social work s t a f f to go how©
     and a team of social workers from Doncaster had relieved them u n t il
     11 pm when they had shut the contact centre down. They were now picking
     up fu rth e r work a t the local Divisional Office in Sheffield. A fu rth er
     meeting with Liverpool SSD representatives was being held t h i s morning•
17 APR    ’83   3:      FROM S.S.I'.   LEEDS             TO   h FH           P A G E .003




         5. Neil Kay praised the way his staff and social work staff frcm other
            local authorities had responded to the situation. He knew for instance
            that as well as the team from Doncaster, social workers from Derbyshire,
            Barnsley, Thamesside and Liverpool had been involved in Sheffield. Some
            who had been visiting the area just called in and spontaneously offered
            their services.

         6. As far as Neil Kay knew there were no fatalities concerning people from
            Sheffield,

         7. I trust firs Hall and fir Pearson will inform Division re these matters.
            Please contact one of the people named below should you require further
            information regarding matters in Sheffield:

                      Hr D Gilrov (ACI)
                                     heffield Liaison Inspector)
                                     (Civil Emergencies Inspector)




         Inspector
         16th Floor
         West Riding House
         67 Albion Street
         LEEDS
         LSI 5AA
                                                                           S2-/


     /vu^
Mrs Pi/'Hall                                    From:
ACI - SSI
B508 - AFH                                      Date:    21 April 1989

                                                Copies: Ms C Hey - DCI
                                                        B Stimpson - ACI



HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - NOTTINGHAM HELPLINE

Nottinghamshire SSD in conjunction with Nottingham Forest Football Club set up a
helpline on the Wednesday morning following the tragedy to take both telephone
calls and personal calls at the ground.   The social work team headed by David
Witham, Group Principal Social Worker at the Queens Medical Centre is based in
one of the executive suites at the Nottingham Forest City Ground and is avail­
able from 9.00am - 8.00pm.

The working day is split into three shifts with three social workers on each
shift and good administrative support.   The helpline will remain open through­
out the weekend and there will be a review of the situation on Monday as to
whether there is a need to continue the service or to what degree.   From
Wednesday morning to Friday afternoon the helpline had received over 200 tele­
phone calls or personal calls and social workers have served to filter many
referrals through a well organised network in conjunction with the independent
sector, so that counselling services are available through the Nottingham
Counselling Centre, Relate and the Samaritans.
David Witham headed up the social work support service following the Ml/Kegworth
air disaster and the experience from that disaster has given knowledge of what
not to do and what works.   The counselling service and helpline in this situa­
tion is much different from the airline disaster but just as there were intense
states of distress, one week to the minute after the air crash so the team is
standing by in readiness for people having a reaction on Saturday afternoon
shortly after the 3.00pm kick off.   On Sunday night at 6.30pm in one of the
city centre churches there is a memorial service when a dozen people, many of
whom are connected by the chaplaincy at the QMC will be in attendance to assist
anyone in distress. Over 2,000 copies of the standard major disaster leaflet
which has been personalised and individualised for the present situation have
been distributed so far.

Since David Witham personally knows the two group hospital principal social
workers in the Sheffield hospitals he made early contact with them to share with
them the experiences of social work teams and helpers following the Kegworth
disaster.   He is aware that          |is coordinating a similar exercise from
the Children's Hospital in Liverpool but there has not been any formal link up
between Sheffield, Nottingham and Liverpool.          believes that it will be
important for the three coordinators to get together to share lessons learned,
just as the coordinators from Leicestershire, Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire and
Northern Ireland did following the air disaster on the Ml.    He is very much
aware of how the helpers easily become consumed by the emotions of the people
who were helped at Kegworth but acknowledges that the brunt of that heavy
emotion is more located in Liverpool, to a lesser degree at Sheffield and
perhaps even less in Nottingham.




Inspector - SSI
East Midlands Region

0602-475511 ext 327/312
    i ahead

    ne Bill
    Id until
    aylor’sl
               . Calls pour
    idMr
  to this
 oes not
 :e. One

 iargaret
 jovem-
                 Forest helpline
  d when
  beralise                                     B y J O H N BRUIMTOIM
      was
    b ac k -•   A WOMAN Forest fan has had her life wrecked
    sends a     Hillsborough tragedy, social workers revealed today.
    ■ mraent.      The special helpline set-up for Forest supporters caught up in
i    other      soccer disaster on Saturday was officially launched today.                                                    mmm
   night’s
  turd to                                  Devastated by Sheffield
   if the
  nil was         But a dozen o r so calls poured in last night, some from people who
 t would        were devastated by w hat they had seen in Sheffield.  *
   he had         One wom an confessed th a t she could not go on and was struggling to
 gnostic”       pick up the pieces o f her life:
 jme and           David Whitham, social       ough, he was seeking to get
 mmitted        services manager at the        away from the media lime-
 3   after      Queen’s Medical Centre,        light.
 lold the       said: “She was mortified         • “ 1 have got to concen­
,’d.            by what she had seen.- : ,     trate now on Nottingham
   similar         “She had been -fairly       Forest and the fans, A lot
;ay that .      paralysed by it all.”'"..      of people are still very
pared to                                       upset.”
,-fore, in         Though she had family
                around her, she found she          But he would not be
                could not talk to:, them       drawn on issues his club
            • about the appalling scenes.      still has to face — the
                                               strong possibility that the                         mm;**
                  The    woman        needed
             ' someone to talk to —            FA Cup semi-final will be
            . hence helpline. Supporters       replayed, as the FA wants,
           , can also visit the City           at Old Trafford, and there--
                Ground to sit in the stands    fore the clear indication
           ' to help them rehabilitate         that soccer’s ruling body
                themselves in a football       wishes to go ahead with' 5
              .'stadium.                       the Cup Final itself.
                                               " “Any comment from the                             “-
                   Another call came from      City Ground             .
            ■SaV Nottingham : vicar, who       said Mr Roworth, stressed^                                              Philip
         [ft heeded advice to help him                                                             :v^isWi^K:
                                               , “Nothing can' happen:
      . I j ’ytreat parishioners 'w h o        until the FA makes a di           QDave Tebbutt, who was dragged out of the crowd at Hillsbor-
:c h®QSfe^weie.at the FA Cup semi-             sionJ                                         ough.with his completerr>atch ticket ^ . 'AX
                                                                                                      \v                      t/ S\   v.
    •o& §a>fS.r My. Whitham :.sai±
     7 §||ff^#;-will talk to everyoneKwhp J;:
 waSasiill wants to call, whether -th^S f
   thegJIDsgwere at the match or saw i t ' '
ould:g..go|j: on television.^: ,-v.;            .
:med th a ti *“ Saturday could be the ^ '
   suchlsaifi watershed, when\ people
allow, a* relive the events of thepre-fjS jr ■
 crush-tost vious week.” , j ’.:        .     ,
                   The team-of three social.:                                                                                                                            ivttr
ontroliing i workers, with ... back-up                                                                                                              ......        -tr-
e renewed! from the voluntary sector,
  Football will man the phones and LIVERPOOL                                    IRoad, Bilborough, said he        like there were, , brick          fell from the fence. Aftei
 be aban- see visitors to the-ground             Dave. Tebbutt played for iarrived early with Forest-             walls pushing in - bn me         that I passed out.” -:
                from 9am until 8 pm. ■...        his Nottingham Sanoafc ,,             but waited until ten       from all four sides.          When he came round, Dave
: council •                                      league team jiast a a#y jjg, minutes before kick-off to        “The police were telling us         was wearing an oxygen
is said it             Experience.               after being dragged from,          ’ . for the Leppings          to move .back, but we             mask and a feiiow Liver­
I pending          Mr Whitham -added that        the terrace at                 .Lane end.                        were stuck. People were           pool supporter stayed
le judicial care counsellors were now            ough.                                                            being sick and passing            with him until be.-couk
  Hillsbor- in a better position to help He passed out after t„ „ |acket          .      —Jut to have his                                           stand.
                                                                                        dealt with when the       out and dying all around
 which 95 tragedy victims. following             policeman dragg«« ag® , jfjate opened and he was               - me.                           “I went round • to -- belf
sir lives,      the     experience     gained                                                                                                       people, but I couldn’t
                                                 out of the cage where        U ^ept forward. ■ . .         :   “A lot of people were say­          carry people . on <th<
city coun­ through horrors' such as              was convinced be        ..                                       ing ‘We’re all going to
ament the Zeebrugge, Lockerbie and               die and was given osy$m                 seconds I; found                                           boards because my leg!
                                                                                                                  die’: I thought there was         were so weak,1* - -sate
leme was Clapham.                                on the pitch.                  myself pinned to the wall         no chance of getting out.
                    The helpline number is                                   ... J®™,. the wire by the            Then a young policeman
                                                                                                                                               ■" Dave.
     of the Nottingham810081. ■. - Bat               despite
                                                  was determine*             f “ Ocaline and I must have          said to me ‘You’re going
                                                                                                                                                Dave’s parents watched th<
m Taylor           Meanwhile, the pressure                                                                                                          horror unfold on TV
                                                  out fo/the Miles*0 0 8                  there for      15        to make it’:                 . . knowing .their son bad :
:nce hap- on Forest chairman Mr
 the town Maurice Roworth was                                                                                   “He got his mates and they          ticket for the Lepping!
II not stop      beginning to tell today.         is managed              inzTW y *rn*s were in the air,           lifted me over. They told        Lane end.
 hing each         Four days after witness­                                 » wmwne’s elbow was in                 me to jump, but my legs      “We were worried sick, foi
e.”              ing the horror of Hillsbor- Today, Dave, of gUborocga           my stomach, and it felt          were like jelly and I just        over three hours we sai
                                                                                                                                                    by the phone fearing th<
                                                                                                                                                    worst,”     said     Dave’;
                                                                                                                                                    father Leslie.
                                                                                                                                                “ He rang us at 6.30pm, th<
                                                                                                                                                    relief was overwhelming.”
                                                                                                                                                As Dave wandered aroun:
                                                                                                                                                    the pitch he saw as ok
                                                     h* st the front* but ended up        on nights and only heard about the tragedy                classmate, Andrew Bull
>e Yates passed out in the            She wasn't *»&■
rraces, and twice feiiow fans         there after the a.rg^ ._ ^ ; bat sfee? ssean«i      at 4.45pm when he woke up.                                18, also a Liverpool fan.
                                                                                              m                        Slat/ierSpeciafin
                                                                                                                           Qemmk^iles
                                                                                                                       EAST MIDLANDS
                                                                                                                       CERAM ICS 3? EEmq
                                                                                                                        542-546 ManifltW Road. Shtrwood.
                                                                                                                                 ‘Nottingham. •
p — REGULAR HOME DELIVERED COPIES 18p
                                                                                                                       \JfcndnM m doesit6kierfj




                                 yfo-.                                                                                    ..
U\ v - X & & !& & & £ & ■■■ «**«»*“-wNwsp5'wt4»s>       - ' “p   . -                ,         .   1                         tJ
~ w i w f itit.•j idfeu:.. .                                                                              '^‘?-J
              ^ CU^K'. 'j. - * T™":.- - "...V-
.«*%                                r-.'v-r®'J>\'
       •i^li'5j&-ri«          ,                     ^   ^’" ^',




 leffield coroner D r Stefan Popper, who started -                  - ’M B B B W B H B B B W B B B h M M M M H B W t                       ,.- ..--in
 ling inquests, on the victims yesterday, was today
 cted to issue interim death certificates to allow
 rals to take place.                                      —                . 3s
 ndertakers were starting to take the bodies of
  rpool fans back to the city, with some funerals due
  'riday and others next week,
  entification evidence on 50 people was given at the
  est yesterday and the process was continuing today.
   • Popper has indicated he will not start a full 'SI
   ing until after the official inquiry led by Lord         '<jf%
   se Taylor.
   ie 95th victim of the tragedy was I4-year-old Lee
    ol, from Bootle, Merseyside, who died on Monday
   , only hours after the Prince and Princess of Wales
    :t* e d h is fight for life in Sheffield’s Northern
    ra l Hospital.                     ,
    « R q y l Kmpte yesterday sent a message o f con-
    >ceto a u pareau.                           , ,t    .
     Lo*d Jttttice Taylor set out the second day o f his                                                ”   I
                    tragedy at the Liverpool-Nottinghani         ,,        ......... ......... ........
    *             MmMinal, the question of ID cards for ^ B 2 W
                             Government with a growing                                                      ^                                           •-

  ?                           * • ««bj«ta ti* judge win be                                                ,' ' ■ ■ „    n ,,,.......... *.......        1 *
   i th e - s n n n a n u ig possnlity   tnat be could       g   S     #   .-   '         ^ M b                  ■WBB &k         -    •'
   mend tg tin tf the tc h e m e ^ ^ ;
   r of the Commons decided unanimously ‘at                  • D a v id W h ith am , so cial se rv ic e s m a n a g e r a t th e QM C. a n d se n io r
   >hn Wakcham yes- \ *a n e mergency -'meetingT             -so c ia l w o rk e r Trisha H allarn fro m th e R ush cliffe a re a o ffic e , help-
      told; the House ' last night to , tend a               c a lle rs o n th e em e rg e n c y h elp lin e a t th e C ity G round. # See story
     th e . Government       delegation to ' jee the                                          - on Page Seven             :
    sd to vgo ahead          Home Secretaty and                    v                  ’^ •
    le ID cards.             appeal to him to with-            • •          **
                                                                                 i7X &

A




                                             Ref:   GSS 9/1



    Mr W B Utting                            From: Mrs M J Gibson
    Chief Inspector, SSI                           SSI, NW Region
    Rm 519/522
    Richmond House
                                             Date: 21 April 1989

                                             Copy: Mr D Brand DCI, AFH
                                                   Mrs P Hall ACI, AFH
                                                   Mr D Gilrov ACI YHR
                                                   Mr              SSI, YHR
                                                   Mr B D Harrison A C I , NWR
                                                   Mr B Stimpson ACI, EMR




    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - MERSEYSIDE RESPONSE

    1.   Activity on Merseyside continues and indeed is escalating.    The effects
          of the disaster are spreading and being revealed in schools, in industry
          and amongst staff of the Merseyside authorities, particularly Liverpool
          who are providing most of the front line support.     Support for victims
          is being provided through the help line, through the Supporters Club at
          Anfield Football Club and at a drop in advice centre.

    2.   The Merseyside response continues in a fairly co-ordinated way and help
          is now being received from other local authorities. Cheshire and West
          Lancashire are very much involved.

    3.   The help line is being well used.

    4.   A data base is set up with advice from Kent.     There are problems in
          coping with all the information, extra help has been sought.  Separate
          information is hopefully being kept on offers of help in order to link
          up victims with potential sources of support etc.    Good co-operation
          with the RHA concerning data so f a r .

    5.   Some tensions are arising between the local authorities because of local
          politicians wanting to maintain a high profile and to be seen to be
          doing things.   There was a particular problem over a promise from the
          leader of Liverpool City Council that the City Council would pay for all
          funeral expenses.   Problems of recouping this money from the disaster
          fund are being explored.

    6.   Awareness workshops are well underway.         Health authority,    middle
          mangers, senior managers and politicians.       Three day workshops for
          counsellors (social workers) taking place soon.   Plans for a longer term
          strategy are being drawn up.

    7.   Special meeting of NWASSA called for Tuesday 25 April to discuss
          disaster and make a request for the funding for a training co-ordinator
          attached to the regional training unit.

    8.   Leaflets for general public are being produced.
*
*


    9.    Distress in children   in   schools   now   a problem.   A   leaflet   has   been
          produced.

    10.   An attempt is being made    to co-ordinate training for teachers etc on a
          Merseyside basis.

    11.   Staff offering help to victims are themselves in need of support and
          attempts are being made to set up a comprehensive debriefing and support
           service for them.  Psychologists through the RHA have offered help and
          are being trained.   BASW have offered to co-ordinate the offers being
          received to undertake support for counsellors.

    12.   Voluntary sector meetings continue and seem to be co-ordinated well.
          Attempts are now being made to constructively use their offers of help.


    13.   Concern about the welfare of staff at the Liverpool Football Club,
          particularly players who are heavily involved with families etc. They
           are only youngsters themselves and very vulnerable.

    14.   A planning group has been set up.        Chaired by Howard Parker from
          Manchester University, formerly a lecturer at Liverpool University.   The
           intention is to devise a co-ordinated long term strategy.    This should
          lead to some costings of the nature of the longer term strategy. He has
          been seconded for 2 h days a week over the next trfree weeks.

    15.   Effects of the disaster are being felt in local firms, absenteeism etc.
          There are plans to liaise with Chambers of Commerce in relation to
          possible training and support.




           lui
                                                         Ref:    GSS 9/1

  All HQ and Regional ACIs                               From: Maire J Gibson
                                                               SSI, NW Region

<£«-•   /ttv                                             Date: 21 April 1989

                                                         Copy: Mr W B Utting
                                                 fo-iy         Mr D Brand
                                                               Mr
                                                               Miss C Hey




  HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

  1.    Merseyside authorities have formed a planning              group   to devise    a long
        term strategy in response to the above.

  2.    This  is to    be   chaired   by   Professor      Howard    Parker   of    Manchester
        University.

  3.    He and I have some reservations about the preliminary thoughts which are
         around concerning the nature of such a strategy and the level of
         staffing required.  We acknowledge however that this arises really from
         our ignorance of any existing literature on this subject.    Information
         received to date relates to psychological impact but it has been hard to
         obtain any 'hard data' on levels of staffing and nature of services
         required.

  4.    There have been a number of disasters recently, as we know only too
        well, and there must be considerable experience around and other local
         authorities actively considering this issue or involved already in a
         longer term response.

  5.    I would be grateful to receive:-

        a)     any reports available,      particularly     if    they   can be   shared with
               Professor Parker.

        b)     names of people with whom Professor Parker could make contact.

  6.    Information, however brief, would be much appreciated                     as   soon   as
         possible.  Names of people would be particularly useful.

  7.    If I am not available please pass them to my secretary Mrs

  Thanking you in anticipation.




  Inspector
                                                                                   V   .
>
                                                                                       8
               NORTH WEST ASSOCIATION OF SOCIAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES


                                  25th APRIL 1989


              REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR OF SOCIAL SERVICES FOR LIVERPOOL




                             THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



    PURPOSE

    1.   To inform members of the services provided on a regional basis by
         North West Social Services Authorities to the victims of the
         Hillsborough disaster on 15th April 1989. Additionally to seek
         financial support from N.W.A.S.S.A..for all publicity material and
         staff training initiatives that can be made available across the
         region. Finally to seek continuing support for the involved seven
         Authorities to providing a long term service to victims.

    INTRODUCTION

    2.   Members will require no introduction to the scale of the disaster
         that occurred at Hillsborough.   Whilst immediate priority has been
         afforded to the bereaved families and the casualties; it is clear
         that all those people attending, playing and officiating in the foot­
         ball match, plus their circle of family and friends must be regarded
         as victims.   The issue for the Authorities must ultimately be the
         quality of life of the survivors and those closely associated. The
         nature of the service needed mu^t be regarded as preventive mental
         health.

    3.   The epicentre of the tragedy will probably be revealed, when accurate
         data emerges, as being Merseyside with adjoining parts of Lancashire
         and Cheshire. However, the facts already available and the nature of
         ttie support for Liverpool F.C. dictate the Hillsborough disaster be
         regarded as a national disaster. The response to the needs of the
         victims must therefore also be viewed in that context.

    4.   It is for that reason that the seven Directors of Social Services
         whose departments are involved, with the full support of their Councils,
         have adopted a joint approach to the issues.   The services provided
         across the region include a 24 hour Helpline, a co-ordinated approach
         to counselling, a number of drop—in and advice centres and a co-ordinated
         voluntary effort.   A similar approach has been taken to information,
         publicity, public and press relations, database, training, finance and
         administration.

    5.   To date finance has been made available.   However, members should be
         aware that effectively the services provided have been achieved through
         a combination of secondments, staff goodwill, free arrangements and
         reorientation of priorities. Such arrangements cannot continue and it
         is the intention of the seven Authorities, together with the Mersey
         Regional Health Authority, the Probation Service and the Voluntary
         Sector to work towards permanence.
.   •                                      -2 -



    ROLE OF N.W.A.S.S.A.

    6.   It was realised soon after the disaster by both the seven Directors
         and the Professional Adviser to N.W.A.S.S.A. that the whole region
         would be affected in a number of ways. Firstly, that the members and
         officers of the Authorities most directly impacted on would require
         the support of regional colleagues.   The initiative of the Chair of
         N.W.A.S.S.A. a   n   d   i  n    this direction are much appreciated.
         Secondly, that any publication produced as a consequence of the disaster
         could benefit the services across the region.   The Chair of N.W.A.S.S.A.
         (through his Professional Adviser) has already authorised the publica­
         tion of "Coping after Hillsborough" (copy attached).   Authority is now
         sought for further relevant publications (posters and leaflets) to be
         similarly regionally published (list is attached).   Thirdly, training
         directed at crisis intervention work and counselling could valuably be
         provided across member Authorities.   Those seven Authorities involved
         have already directly commissioned immediate staff and member training
         through a retained consultant» For the longer term staff training
         needs it is suggested that N.W.A.S.S.A. should consider funding a
         Training Officer, If such an officer were recruited soon that person
         themselves could receive training from the consultant and continue with
         ongoing work.

    CONCLUSION

    7.   The seven Directors wish to acknowledge support already received from
         N.W.A.S.S.A. in meeting the needs of the victims of Hillsborough.
         This report seeks further long term support and highlights publication
         and training as areas where specific resources are requested and where
         regional benefit could be derived.

    RECOMMENDED

    8.   That the North West Association of Social Services Authorities

           i)     Note the contents of this report and recognise the long term
                  support needs of the seven Authorities most directly involved
                  and convert such support into appropriate practical assistance.

          ii)     Confirm the funding of the publication "Coping after Hillsborough"
                  and authorise that the leaflet "Were you at the Match?", posters
                  for schools and "Advice on How to Cope with a Crisis" be
                  similarly published.

         iii)     Fund a Training Officer post (approximate cost £18,000 with
                  on costs) to be based at an appropriate agency.

    ATTACHED

    9.    i)      Copy of "Coping after Hillsborough".

         ii)      List of publications with approximate cost per 1,000.




    DM/EP
    24.4.89.                                         Director of SocialServices
                                                         City of Liverpool
                                            (on behalf of Authorities involved with
                                             responding to the Hillsborough disaster)
    Cheshire         liverpool        fg
    County Council   CztyC&rt-cU.                     County               ^C O U N C IL
                                           KNOWSLEY
                                                      Council   StHelens

c/o 26 HATTON GARDEN
    LIVERPOOL
    L3 2AW                                                        Telephone: 051

Your ref:                                  Our ref:                              Date:




                                            HILLSBOROUGH PUBLICITY


               The following publicity material has been produced for people
               needing help following the Hillsborough tragedy.

               1.     "Coping after Hillsborough".   Leaflet for adults containing
                      advice on how to cope with a major personal crisis. Based
                      on a leaflet by the Prince Henry's Hospital (Australia) and
                      used after the Bradford City, Piper Alpha and Zeebrugge
                      disasters. The leaflet has been adapted for our use, and
                      the language simplified.   Carries Helpline number.   25,000
                      printed so far.   Cost per 1,000 - £37.00.

               2.     "Were you at the Match?"   Leaflet for use with young people,
                      encouraging them to talk about their feelings about what
                      happened at Hillsborough, and how it affected them, their
                      friends and families. Carries Helpline number and details
                      of Drop In Centre. 30,000 printed. Cost per 1,000 - £26.66..

               3.     Poster for Schools, in same style as "Were you at the Match?"
                      leaflet, carrying Helpline number.   1,000 printed.   Cost
                      per 1,000 - £150.

               4.    "Advice on how to cope with a crisis".   Much simplified
                      version of advice in "Coping after Hillsborough", printed
                      in the Liverpool City Council supplement in the Weekly Star,
                      distributed to all homes in Liverpool (approx. 200,000).
                      A similar piece was circulated to all freesheets in the
                      Merseyside area, but at the time of writing we do not know
                      how many published it. Cost - nil.

               5.     In preparation:                                        ^
                                (i)    Hillsborough Helpline leaflet sticker,
                                       carrying telephone number. Cost per
                                       1.000 - £4.40.

                              (ii)     Poster for general use, in same style as
                                       "Coping after Hillsborough". Cost per
                                       1.000 - £100.      (2,000 printed).


When calling or telephoning please ask for:
                                                             L jJ o    ( \



                                           f   Q s U U lW ^ S -d      ^ iG




                                                       c^x         il j u    ^




           A F T E R    H I L L S B O R O U G H




    A Report and Recommendations for Co-ordinating and

             Delivering Helping Services of the
               Directors of Social Services
                   of the areas affected




 Prepared by Officers from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire
 Liverpool, Sefton, St. Helens and Wirral in consultation
 with Merseyside Probation Service, the Voluntary Agencies,
 Mersey Regional Health Authority and Merseyside Emergency
 Planning Unit, under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard
 Parker.

                         APRIL 1989




HLAAAB
AIM
          To c o n s i d e r th e f e a s i b i l i t y i n c l u d i n g c o s t i n g s o f
e s t a b l i s h i n g a r e g i o n a l u n i t in o r d e r t o m a rs h a ll and
o r g a n i s e t h e a l l o c a t i o n o f a v a r i e t y o f r e s o u r c e s so t h a t
h e l p can be made a v a i l a b l e in th e r i g h t p l a c e a t th e r i g h t
tim e t o p e o p le a f f e c t e d by th e " H ills b o r o u g h " d i s a s t e r .        In
t h i s c o n t e x t ''Region*' i s th e seven l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s .
METHOD AND FORMAT
         A w orking p a r t y o f s e n i o r s t a f f , drawn from s t a t u t o r y
and v o l u n t a r y a g e n c ie s i n th e r e g i o n was e s t a b l i s h e d t o
r e p o r t on the p o t e n t i a l for an A s s i s t a n c e U nit b u i l t upon
t h e s e r v i c e s t r u c t u r e c r e a t e d a f t e r " H i l ls b o r o u g h " . The
group w a s c h a i r e d by Howard P a r k e r , P r o f e s s o r in S o c ia l Work
a t t he U n i v e r s i t y of M a n c h e s t e r ,

         T h e r e p o r t u se s t h e e x p e r i e n c e g a i n e d from t h e d i s a s t e r
at    " H i l l s b o r o u g h " and o t h e r r e c e n t t r a g e d i e s , and s e t s o u t
recom m endations f o r d e a l i n g w ith t h e o r g a n i s a t i o n a l ,
i n f o r m a t i o n and c o - o r d i n a t i o n i s s u e s which have a r i s e n .
S p e c i f i c a l l y , t h i s c o n s i s t s o f f a s y n o p s is o f th e key
e le m e n ts r e q u i r e d t o o p e r a t e a s e r v i c e which i s r e s p o n s iv e
t o need and h a s an o u t r e a c h c a p a b i l i t y , i n c lu d i n g th e
p r o v i s i o n o f a h e l p l i n e , c o u n s e l l i n g , s p e c i a l i s e d work,
d a t a b a s e , s t a f f t r a i n i n g / s u p p o r t and p u b l i c r e l a t i o n s . A ll
o f t h e s e e le m e n ts a r e in c lu d e d w i t h i n t h e broad aim a s
s t a t e d above, and th e r o l e o f th e u n i t a s p e r c e i v e d by th e
g ro u p .
INTRODUCTION
          The e v e n t s a t " H ills b o r o u g h " , S h e f f i e l d , on 15th A p r il
1989, a r e a g r a p h i c i l l u s t r a t i o n o f t h e e x t e n s i v e damage t o
p e r s o n a l w e l l - b e i n g which can be p r e c i p i t a t e d by th e traum a
o f a m ajor d i s a s t e r . T h is a p p l i e s t o t h o s e d i r e c t l y
i n v o lv e d , th ro u g h i n j u r y o r b e re a v e m e n t, t h e i r h e l p e r s ,
o n l o o k e r s , and p eo p le s u f f e r i n g shock due t o p u b l i c i t y o r
a s s o c i a t i o n w ith s i m i l a r e v e n t s . The e f f e c t s a r e o f t e n
lo n g - te r m and can have a profo u n d im pact upon fa m ily l i f e
and on i n d i v i d u a l a b i l i t y t o cope w it h everyday l i v i n g .
           " H ills b o ro u g h " i s th e l a t e s t in a t r a g i c l i n e o f
d i s a s t e r s . Manchester A i r p o r t , B ra d fo rd , P ip e r Alpha,
Z eebrugge, Kegworth, Clapham and L o c k e rb ie have a l l
i l l u s t r a t e d how a major unexpected d i s a s t e r a f f e c t s th e
l i v e s o f o r d i n a r y p e o p le and th e a g e n c i e s which must p r o v i d e
them w i t h a s s i s t a n c e . We have l e a r n t a g r e a t d e a l from
t h e s e e a r l i e r t r a g e d i e s , p a r t i c u l a r l y how l a r g e s c a l e
d i s a s t e r s produce trauma and g r i e f much f u r t h e r and d e e p e r
t h a n common sen se would e x p e c t .



HLAAAB
4




             (v i)       gu id an ce and a s s i s t a n c e i n th e e s t a b l i s h m e n t o f
                         a p p r o p r i a t e l o c a l d a t a b a s e s which a r e c o m p a tib le w ith
                         t h e c e n t r a l s y s te m , t o e n s u r e speedy, r e l i a b l e and
                         a c c u r a t e in f o r m a tio n ?
             (v ii)      prom otion o f l i a i s o n and c o - o p e r a t i o n betw een a l l
                         r e l e v a n t a g e n c i e s in t h e r e g i o n ;
             ( v i i i ) review a c t i o n a l r e a d y ta k e n i n o t h e r r e g i o n s ( e . g .
                         S h e ffie ld , N o ttin g h am sh ire).
             COUNSELLING SERVICES - CONTINUING REQUIREMENTS
    10   .             I t i s c l e a r from t h e in f o r m a ti o n from p r e v i o u s
             d i s a s t e r s t h a t c o n t i n u e d a c c e s s t o p r a c t i c a l and c o u n s e l l i n g
             s e r v i c e s i s r e q u i r e d by some v i c t i m s f o r a c o n s i d e r a b l e tim e
             a f t e r t h e event. I t c a n n o t be assumed t h a t i n d i v i d u a l s
             n e e d in g h e l p w i l l b e r e q u e s t i n g o r needing i t now and
             a rra n g e m e n ts must b e m a d e t o e n s u r e t h a t h e l p i s a c c e s s i b l e
             and r e a d i l y a v a i l a b l e in th e medium and l o n g - te r m .
    XI,                The e x t e n t o f f u t u r e s e r v i c e r e q u ire m e n ts i s d i f f i c u l t
             t o p r e d i c t though some i n d i c a t i o n s o f th e range o f problem s
             p r e s e n t e d , t h e l o c a t i o n o f p e o p le needing h e l p and t h e form
             o f h e l p th e y r e q u i r e sh o u ld be a v a i l a b l e when d a t a c o l l e c t e d
             so f a r , h a s been a n a l y s e d . Some p a t t e r n s o f s e r v i c e
             r e q u ir e m e n ts w i l l be d i s c e r n i b l e and inform t h e d e t a i l e d
             p l a n n in g o f p r o v i s i o n .
    12   .             Meanwhile i t i s p o s s i b l e t o i d e n t i f y in b ro a d term s th e
             k in d s o f s e r v i c e s t h a t w i l l be needed and th e ways in which
             th e y may be p r o v i d e d . A c o - o r d i n a t e d mix o f c e n t r a l i s e d and
             l o c a l s e r v i c e s from t h e s t a t u t o r y and v o l u n ta r y s e c t o r i s
             l i k e l y t o p ro v id e t h e g r e a t e s t f l e x i b i l i t y in t h e use o f
             r e s o u r c e s ; such f l e x i b i l i t y w i l l be n e c e s s a r y g iv e n th e
             d i f f i c u l t y o f i d e n t i f y i n g th e e x t e n t and ty p e o f need, and
             e n s u r i n g t h a t deploym ent o f r e s o u r c e s i s a p p r o p r i a t e and
             a d e q u a t e l y m o n ito re d .
             P h ilo s o p h y
    13.            I t i s im p o rta n t t o e n s u r e t h a t th e s e r v i c e re s p o n se
             m eets w ith an o v e r a l l p h ilo s o p h y ag re e d by th e p a r t i c i p a t i n g
             agencies.
                      For th e consumer t h i s w i l l mean t h a t :
             (i)         There a r e c l e a r avenues f o r s e e k in g h e l p ( l o c a l l y and
                         re g io n a lly ).
             (ii)        The re s p o n s e t o t h e i r r e q u e s t s w i l l be q u ic k and
                         a p p ro p ria te .



             HLAAAB
V




    17.                However, some c a n be p ro v id e d more e f f e c t i v e l y a t a
             R egional l e v e l , e . g . H e l p l i n e , c e n t r a l i n f o r m a t i o n . In
             a d d i t i o n , some services can b e s t be m o n ito re d , e v a l u a t e d and
             c o - o r d i n a t e d a t a r e g i o n a l l e v e l . A 'n e t w o r k ' o f s p e c i a l i s t
             s k i l l s can be d e v e lo p e d by a r e g i o n a l u n i t .
    18.                The In te r-A g e n c y P la n n in g Group recommends t h a t a
             c o - o r d i n a t i n g b o d y , known a s t h e " H ills b o r o u g h Support U n it"
             be e s t a b l i s h e d f o r a minimum p e r i o d o f two y e a r s . The U n it
             sh o u ld have an e x e c u t i v e o f f i c e r , and s u p p o r t s t a f f ;
             o p e r a t e th e c e n t r a l H e lp l in e ? s e t up an e f f i c i e n t d a t a b a s e ;
             o v e r s e e th e p a t t e r n o f s e r v i c e s t o e n a b le r e s o u r c e s t o be
             used effectively? s e e t h a t districts p r o v i d e s y s te m a ti c
             s u p p o r t and t r a i n i n g f o r a l l s t a f f ? d e v e lo p c l e a r c h a n n e ls
             o f communication and form p a r t n e r s h i p s w ith a l l r e l e v a n t
             a u t h o r i t i e s and n o n - s t a t u t o r y a g e n c i e s i n t h e region? s e t
             up monitoring, evaluation and perform ance rev iew sy ste m s.

    19.                The lead authorities r e s p o n s i b l e f o r th e U n it c o u ld be
             r e p r e s e n t e d through a Committee c o m p ris in g l o c a l a u t h o r i t y
             members and o f f i c e r s ' r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f Mersey Regional
             H e a lth A u t h o r i t y , M ersey sid e P r o b a t io n S e r v i c e , V o lu n ta ry
             O r g a n i s a t i o n s , and t h e D i s a s t e r T r u s t Fund.
             Suggested 'R e g io n a l S e r v i c e s '
                  The s e r v i c e s o u t l i n e d below w i l l need t o be l in k e d t o
             each o t h e r th ro u g h t h e pro p o sed R egional U n it .
             HELPLINE
    20   .             T h is s e r v i c e c u r r e n t l y o p e r a t e s on a 24 hour day, 7 day
             week b a s i s and i s s t a f f e d by o f f i c e r s o f th e S o c i a l S e r v i c e s
             Departm ents and a v a r i e t y o f o t h e r o r g a n i s a t i o n s . Given th e
             n a tio n w id e 'catch m en t* o f p o t e n t i a l u s e r s o f t h e s e r v i c e i t
             w i l l be c o s t - e f f i c i e n t t o r e t a i n t h i s c e n t r a l i s e d s e r v i c e a t
             i t s c u r r e n t l e v e l f o r a p e r i o d o f weeks t o come and w i l l
             e n s u r e a ready a c c e s s p o i n t f o r a s s i s t a n c e w h ile medium t o
             lo n g e r term a rr a n g e m e n ts a r e e f f e c t e d . I t i s e n v isa g e d t h a t
             th e H e lp lin e w i l l become a n a t i o n a l 'one number' s e r v i c e run
             by t h e r e g i o n a l u n i t w ith c a l l s th e n r e f e r r e d t o l o c a l
             s e r v i c e s as a p p r o p r i a t e .
             C o - o r d i n a ti o n o f C o u n s e l li n g S e r v i c e s
    21.               W h ils t c o u n s e l l i n g w i l l u s u a l l y be o f f e r e d very
             ' l o c a l l y ' i t w i l l be n e c e s s a r y t o e n s u r e t h a t i n d i v i d u a l s
             a r e r e f e r r e d t o t h e most a p p r o p r i a t e agency? t h a t t h e i r
             n eeds a r e met, and t h e s e r v i c e s a r e m o n ito re d . In a d d i t i o n




             HLAAAB
♦


    #

              1.      P rovid e a c e n tr a l te le p h o n e       lin e ,   e .g .   an 0800
                      ( f r e e p h o n e ) number;

              2.      P r o v id e an a s s e s s m e n t and r e f e r r a l s e r v i c e , w hereby
                      p e o p le a r e r e - r e f e r r e d t o L o c a l A d v ice S e r v ic e s ;

              3.      C o-ord in ate      r e fe r r a ls both     from w i t h i n     and w it h o u t     the
                      reg io n ;

              4.      P rovid e o v e r s ig h t o f th e d i f f e r e n t elem en ts o f
                      s p e c ia lis t serv ices, e .g . p sy c h o lo g ists e tc .

              5.      I d e n t i f y k e y e v e n t s a n d a n n i v e r s a r i e s w h i c h may e f f e c t
                      i n d i v i d u a l s and c o n s e q u e n t l y s e r v i c e p r o v i s i o n ( e . g .
                      In q u ests, futu re fo o tb a ll gam es).

                     Thus the differing needs of p e o p l e w i l l b e i d e n t i f i e d
              a n d the a p p r o p r i a t e resources m a t c h e d u p t o m e e t t h o s e
              needs? t h i s will avoid d u p l i c a t i o n o f e f f o r t a n d c r e a t e a
              more efficient use of r e s o u r c e s .

              DATABASE REQUIREMENTS

        26.             The u n i t w i l l r e q u ir e a d a t a b a s e c a p a b le o f r e c o r d in g
              in fo r m a tio n fed through to th e ' h e l p l i n e ' , 'd r o p .in ' c e n tr e s
              and o t h e r s o u r c e p o i n t s .       The m a j o r i t y o f c o n t a c t s w i l l b e
              w i t h i n two b r o a d c a t e g o r i e s , i . e . e i t h e r r e q u e s t i n g
              a ssista n c e or o ffe r in g h elp .               C u r r e n tly th e 'H illsb o ro u g h
              H e l p l i n e ' h a s s e p a r a t e s y s t e m s d e a l i n g w i t h t h e s e two
              elem en ts.         At p r e se n t, n e a r ly 3 ,6 0 0 o f f e r s o f h e lp have been
              r e c e i v e d from a v a r i e t y o f s o u r c e s , i n c l u d i n g o v e r 600
              t h r o u g h t h e ‘H i l l s b o r o u g h H e l p l i n e ' .   About 1 ,6 5 0 r e q u e s t s
              fo r h e lp have been r e c e iv e d n a t io n a ll y , th e m a jo rity o f
              t h e s e b e in g through th e 'H ills b o r o u g h H e l p l i n e ' .             W ith t h i s
              l e v e l o f a c t i v i t y o c c u r i n g , i t i s c l e a r t h a t an e f f e c t i v e
              d a ta b a s e i s e s s e n t i a l to m atch in g n e e d s fo r a s s i s t a n c e w ith
              th e w ide range o f r e s o u r c e s a v a i l a b l e .

        27.              In r e s p e c t o f r e f e r r a l s f o r h e l p , a m anual d a t a b a s e was
              e s t a b l i s h e d a s a r e c o r d o f c a l l e r s , p e n d i n g t h e s e t t i n g up
              o f th e com p u terised sy stem .                I t i s su g g e ste d th a t t h is be
              r e t a i n e d and m a in t a i n e d a s a b a c k up i n c a s e o f p r o b le m s
              w ith th e system .

        28.              I n fo r m a tio n w h ich i s u s e f u l f o r t h e d a t a b a s e , i n c lu d e s
              b a s i c d e t a i l s su c h a s nam es, a d d r e s s e s , l o c a l a u t h o r i t y o f
              o r i g i n , r e f e r r a l to d i s t r i c t and a g e n c y , g e n e r a l
              p r a c tit io n e r s , s ig n if ic a n t d a te s , (b irth d a y s, a n n iv ersa ries
              etc).          Each p e r s o n h a s an i n d i v i d u a l r e f e r e n c e number, and
              th e r e i s a f a c i l i t y for a group r e fe r e n c e for p eop le lin k ed
              together.




              HLAAAB
       (ii)      P u b lic R e l a t i o n s i s h e a v i l y d ep e n d e n t on h a r d , f a c t u a l
                 and a c c u r a t e i n f o r m a t i o n a b o u t t h e work o f t h e u n i t .
                 There w i l l , t h e r e f o r e , n eed to be d i r e c t lin k s betw een
                 t h e management and t h e p u b l i c r e l a t i o n s f u n c t i o n s o f
                 the u n it.

       (iii)     M edia i n t e r e s t c a n s o m e t i m e s b e a g g r e s s i v e and
                 tim e-co n su m in g .      T h is c a n b e w a s t e f u l a t b e s t and
                 d am agin g a t w o r s t .      Thus c o n t a c t w i t h t h e m edia n e e d s
                 t o b e c a r e f u l l y c h a n n e l l e d and r e g u l a t e d s e p a r a t i n g
                 l o c a l and r e g i o n a l i s s u e s .

33.              I t i s su g g e ste d t h a t P u b lic r e l a t i o n s can b e s t be
       u n d e r t a k e n b y t h e Head o f t h e U n i t a l o n g w i t h s u b s t a n t i a l
       s u p p o r t from t h e Management C o m m it t e e .

       COSTINGS

34o              Since " ' H i l l s b o r o u g h " i s a n a t i o n a l d i s a s t e r , i t i s
       recommended t h a t s t r e n u o u s e f f o r t s a r e mad e t o o b t a i n t h e
       f u n d i n g o f the Unit f r o m c e n t r a l g o v e r n m e n t , t h e EEC a n d
       other sources.                C o sts a r e e s t im a t e d a t around £ 3 5 0 ,0 0 0 per
       y e a r f o r two y e a r s .         T h i s may b e g e n e r o u s o r a l t e r n a t i v e l y
       a d d i t i o n a l r e s o u r c e s may n e e d t o b e a d d e d o n .

       CONCLUSION

35 =             The a d v a n t a g e s o f c o - o r d i n a t i n g a l l h e l p i n g r e s p o n s e s
       seem c l e a r .      I t i s b e l i e v e d t h a t a R e g io n a l U n it w ou ld , in
       t h e l o n g r u n , b e c o s t e f f e c t i v e and more i m p o r t a n t l y w ou ld
       i n t r o d u c e a w h o le s e r i e s , o f s u p p o r t s and c h e c k s w h ic h w ou ld
       mean a b e t t e r s e r v i c e f o r t h o s e who n e e d i t , i n c l u d i n g t h e
       carers.




       29th April, 1989




       HLAAAB
19   APR   ’ 83   1                     NW R E G I O N                                 PAGE. 0 0 2

                                                                                                ^ 9 3
                                                                •^G ^C O C V K
                                                         M A~

                                                                                       o
                                                   Ref: GSS 9/1

                                                   Fran: Mrs M J Gibson          /Ht
      Mr W B Utting
      Chief Inspector, SSI                               SSI, NW Region
      m 519/522                                                                    fit*.
      Richmond House
                                                   Date; 19 A p ril 1989
                                                   Ocpy: Mr D Brand DCI, AfH
                                                         Mrs P Hall Ad, AfH
                                                         Mr D Gilroy Ad, YHR
                                                         Mr J Whitfield SSI, YHR


      UVERPOCfL PDOtCBMli SUVHT^TORfi TOSBgEfflt
      SEECKT P P TO 4.0QEM MGMCMf 17&BKED

      1.     I attended a meeting at 4.00pn on Msnday 17 April called for briefing
             senior representatives of the Merseyside local authorities.
      2.     It was represented by all local authorities in Merseyside together with
             representatives from West iancashire.
      3.    Mr Mason reported that life in Liverpool was dcaninated by the disaster
            and particularly time consuming and onercus had been dealing with the
            press.    It had been necessary to have three press officers in the
            building. Help was offered by the press officer frcm the EHA who was
            .present at the meeting and this clearly was going to be useful. The
            City Council had a policy of maximum publicity of activity and were
            keying into all the local papers and news stations. Kress releases were
            going to be published on a regular basis and SSI is to go on the mailing
            list
      4.     He reported that the help line was active and running and had begun to
             be very busy that day. Other assistance was required in manning this
             and further offers frcan local authorities were made.
      5.     It is repeated that the meeting with "members” of the constituent
             Merseyside authorities had supported a pan-Merseyside approach and
             maximum co-ordination* The exemption to this, sadly, had been Knowsley
             vtfio appeared to have acted unilaterally in setting up its Knowsley help
             line and advertising a counselling and professional social work
             service. This had been against the advice of the meeting on Sunday
             whicih had stressed the need not to advertise a counselling and
             professional social work service bit to offer a help line initially as
             appropriate. Hie leader of Liverpool City Council was to intervene with
             the Khcwsley members.

      6.     Training
             It was noted that the politicians had been committed to the training
             package which was then discussed in scroe detail. There was to be a
             meeting at social services training section the following morning for
             two representatives fraa each of the local authorities together with the
             training officer to plan further the detail of the programmes. There
             were to be four one and a quarter hour presentations to groups of health
             officials, senior managers, middle managers and politicians an April
             19/20/21 awi 22. The BHA were very oenroitted to this approach and the
             prrfaation rf^rt-mant had also sought involvement. Uiat evening the
19   APR   ’ 89   15:51   FROM S . S . I .   NW R E G I O N                   PA GE.003




            consultant working with Liverpool was to attend with representatives of
            the KHA to meet Family Practitioner Cccsnittees and it was planned to
            arrange training for GPs. six 3 day training workshops were being set
            up - 24-26 April, 27-29 April, 15-17 May, 18-20 May and 29-31 May and
            1-3 jure to train social workers for a longer term post trauma
            counselling role. Each with a one day follow-up. seven Merseyside
            authorities, including West Lancs, were to nominate a pair of potential
            counsellors to each workshop, thus providing workshops with 14 in each.
            The politicians had agreed to fund the package but no venues had yet
            been fixed for the three-day events.
      7.    Voluntary sector
            Pauline Farrell had met a large turn-out frc*n the voluntary
            organisations. There was a great deal of goodwill and of ccnndtment to
            working together.      There had been some slight resentment from
            organisations such as CRUSE and COMPASS who argued that they already had
            skilled counsellors, to the nation that additional training was
            required.    It had been left that ICVS would draw together a co­
            ordinating group from the large range of voluntary sector
            representatives to roast on a regular basis with Miss Farrell and
            representatives from other local authorities, including the health
            authority.
      8.   Lists of the dead and next of kin had been finally received frcsn the
           police, 93 people have been identified, one had not yet been identified
           and there was a suggestion that there was an additional dead supporter
            from Wigan although this had not been confirmed. Liverpool City Council
           had advised all the other SSDs vp and down the country.
      9-   Approach to counselling
            The approach to offering help to families was reaffirmed as being a
            personal approach with an offer of help. The point was made that sane
            probation officers had already made contact with families known to them
            and there was also discussion about the involvement of GRs, It was
            agreed that the representative frcaa the probation service should check
            out nation-wide the involvement of probation officers with bereaved or
            traumatised families to provide information for the national data-base.
            It was also agreed there should be sane co-ordination with GPs and if
            named social workers could be given to GRs it was felt that this would
            aid co-operation. The point was again made that practical help and
            immediate bereavanerrt counselling would be needed in the first place but
            the staff fron the SSDs would be trained up for longer term
            psychological support.

      10. Sheffield
            Staff frcsn Liverpool SSD had continued a presence in Sheffield and had
            picked up a great deal of anger and resentment tcwards the police and
            the Hillsborough officials. There had also been considerable disquiet
            concerning the lack of adequate facilities for the injured and families
            of the bereaved. Suggestion was that families had felt they were being
            processed and were not really being adequately supported. There was a
            great field of activity but it was unco-ordinated. The information fitxxn
            Neil Kay was that the Sheffield end was winding down although, a long
            term task force was to be set up. Social workers in hospitals were
            continuing contact with the injured in hospitals and wculd pass
            information over.
19   PPR    ’ 89   15:51   FROM   S.S.I.   NW R E G I O N
                                                                              PPGE.0 0 4
                                                                                        1




      11.    Inquests

             inquests were being held on Tuesday and Wednesday. The information was
             that these would be brief presentations likely to be adjourned. Bodies
             would be released within a few days. There had been negotiations with
             the carcnexs court to try and set up decent holding facilities for
             relatives who it was ejected would wish to travel to Sheffield. There
             had been innumerable offers of transport and the problem for Liverpool
             was co-ordinating these, it was agreed that the central help line would
             be available to assist local authorities who might have difficulties
             getting transport for families.
      12. The leader of the council has made a commitment to waiving fees for
          internment and it was hoped that similar arrangements would be available
          for residents in all the adjoining districts eg Cheshire, it was agreed
          that the members frcnt Liverpool City Council would need to liaise with
          their fellcw members in Cheshire. The chairman of the council had also
          indicated that no family should be expected to pay for burial no matter
          what part of the country they lived in. The City Council had arranged a
          meeting with funeral directors to ensure that an adequate service could
          be provided.
      13. Visits to Hillsborough
             There had been a great deal of toing and froing from Hillsborough, with
             coaches of Liverpudlians going over to Sheffield. It transpired that
             many were just going for the ride and there would be greater efforts to
             co-acdinate with the Liverpool supporters club to ensure that this
             service was not being abused.                                         ^

      14. selp lipg
             This had new been transferred to Jctonstone Street with staff working on
             a four hourly shift basis. On all the shifts, staff fron Liverpool City
             council were acting as collators and team, leaders, ccwpiter advice had
             been received fram Kent.     A team leader from Kent and a ccnputer
             consultant was setting up the 'Herald' package. Information was being
             collected, staff were being trained on hew to use the system and
             referral forms were going to be used. The KHA premised to contribute
             towards the cost. There was already seme discussion about compatibility
             of information being kept through the health system and matters relating
             to confidentiality of computerised information and safeguards concerning
             access. People were reassured that this matter was being attended to.
     15. Publicity
             Mr Mason indicated that there was a press release follcwing the meeting
             with the voluntary organisations and a press release following the
             meeting with the politicians and there was to be a further meeting with
             the press. International television had been involved and there had
             been innumerable visits from the press all day.
     16. There had been offers of publicity from various firms and offers for
         information to be available free in newspapers. Press officers could be
         contacted 225 3925.
     17. information leaflets - staff were worKing cm some information leaflets
         similar to the ones produced following the Herald disaster. NWASSA had
         agreed to cover the cost of these.
19   APR   ’ 83   15:52   FROM   S.S.I.   NW R E GI ON
                                                                             PAGE. 0 0 5




     IS. Secretariat
           There visas sane discussion about the tremendous amount of co-ordination
           secretarial and admin worfc being undertaken by Liverpool and suggestion
           made that a temporary secretary be appointed to deal with scene of the
           activity. The local authorities and the region agreed to negotiate
           between them the funding for such a poet.




     inspector
                                    S ’S   %. (      f\l oV^VVv                         ff*   ^ \ <■>. ^   K ) v4-"'L_

               <>% \




7.      Information Exchange

        7.1      H illsb o r o u g h D is a s te r

                Mrs G ib son p a s s e d on a m essage frcm Mr Mason (L iv e r p o o l) r e q u e s tin g
                v o lu n t e e r s frcm S o c ia l S e r v ic e s D epartm ents t o roan h e lp lin e s .
                F o llo w in g t h e d is a s t e r a 24 h ou r h e lp lin e h a s b e e n a v a ila b le .
                Teams o f e ig h t p e o p le a r e r e q u e ste d t o h e lp w ith d a y tim e s h i f t s .

                H elp w as a ls o r e q u e s te d f o r a member o f s t a f f w ith sa n e o a r p u te r
                e x p e r ie n c e t o h e lp s e t up a d a ta b a s e .      I t w as m en tio n ed t h a t many
                s t a f f who a r e in v o lv e d i n c o u n s e llin g a r e th e m s e lv e s s u f f e r in g frcati
                s t r e s s . Teams o f s u p e r v is o r s a r e r e q u ir e d t o d e b r ie f s t a f f .

                Mr S in g le t o n (C h esh ire) e n q u ir e d a s t o w hat h e lp S S I can g iv e w ith
                r e g a r d t o t h e lo n g -te r m c o s t o f h e lp in g w ith t h e d i s a s t e r . Mr
                H a rr iso n s t a t e d t h a t SSI a r e lo o k in g in t o t h i s c u r r e n tly .

                Mr             (Wigan) r e p o r te d t h a t a G re a te r M an ch ester D is a s te r Fund
                w ou ld b e a v a ila b le i n t h i s s it u a t io n .

                Mr H a rriso n commented t h a t SSI w ere im p ressed b y t h e h a n d lin g o f
                t h e s it u a t io n b y SSD s t a f f th ro u g h o u t t h e d i s a s t e r .

                Mr              (Oldham) r e p o r te d t h a t a m e e tin g o f NWASSA, t o c o n s id e r
                som e im p lic a tio n s o f t h e H illsb o r o u g h tr a g e d y , w ou ld ta k e p la c e on
                T u esd ay, 25 A p r il i n K now sley.

        7 .2    Mrs                r e p o r te d t h a t a v id e o w as a v a ila b le f o r te a c h in g s t a f f
                i n com m unity t o n e s , on t h e t o p ic o f AIDS.                  A cop y w as a v a ila b le
                w ith a c o v e r in g l e t t e r f o r e a c h e s ta b lis h m e n t.

        7 .3    Mrs G ib son r e q u e s te d t h a t A u th o r itie s p u t i n b id s r e g a r d in g t h e
                T r a in in g S u p p ort Programme a s so o n a s p o s s ib le .

                A T r a in in g S u p p ort Programme t r a in in g d ay i s t o                  ta k e p la c e on 22
                May 1 9 8 9 .

        7 .4    Mrs               s t a t e d t h a t a sem in ar on m en ta l h e a lth w i l l b e h e ld on
                3 May i n H uyton.                    P r e lim in a r y in fo r m a tio n had b een s e n t t o
                D ir e c to r s ; m ore in fo r m a tio n w ou ld f o llo w .

        7 .5    M iss              (B o lto n ) e n q u ir e d a s t o w h eth er   t h e r e w as an y fu r th e r
                g u id a n c e on t h e u s e o f t h e T r a in in g S u p p ort Programme f o r p r iv a te
                s t a f f , a s t h e c ir c u la r o u t a t p r e s e n t i s u n c le a r .  SSI a g r e ed t o
                t a k e up t h i s m a tte r and in fo rm D ir e c to r s .

8.      S S I Work Programme 1 9 8 9 /9 0

D ir e c to r s w ere g iv e n a p a p er o u t lin in g t h e w ork programme f o r 1 9 8 9 /9 0 .

I n s p e c to r s r e fe r r e d p a r t ic u la r ly t o sem in a rs b e in g p la n n e d :

Mrs                    s t a t e d t h a t t h e AIDS Sem inar w ou ld b e h e ld on 25 May.




                                                                  4
                                        % o

     Medfca? preparations
     SIR— In the reports on the Hillsbor-       ■.
     ough tragedy (Apr. 18), there does not     3
     seem to have been comment on the           i
     work of members of St John Ambu-           2
     lance who were on duty and would           ;
     have been totally overwhelmed by the
I    enormity of the task facing them. Criti-   :
;    cism has been made of the lack of          ,
i    “medical” equipment and resources,
|    although at least one St John Ambu-        ;
!    lance vehicle was at the ground.
       No preparation on our part would         ;
     have provided for 60 stretchers or 40 or   '

           yg™D sets t0 be ^ m ed iate ly
, available. We are not financially able
    to provide even two or three at any one
  place. In addition to the 30 or so mem­
  bers at Hillsborough on that fateful
 atternoon, many more would have
 been providing first aid cover at other
 sporting events in the Sheffield area.
   Organisers of sporting events are
 most reluctant to have other than the
 basic necessities of “medical" cover
 and even more reluctant to provide the
 necessary funds.
  .But for the accident of geographic
location, I could have been the St John
officer responsible at that tragedy. He
and his members, all volunteers, must
pe suffering the same traumas as the
police. They have my sympathy. How
many will want to go on duty again?
                         * • E. COOPER
                      Area Staff Officer, '-----
                    St John Ambulance
                  , Nuneaton, Warks
                                           Sailu (Krlfgrayb
                                                                                    screened everyone and about 40              Though it would be an enor­
                                                                                    took up our offer of longer term         mous task, he maintains that
                                                                                    counselling. Some were unable            every single person at the semi­


    Hindering
                                                                                    to stop thinking about the burns         final match should somehow be
                                                                                    and injuries for many months.            contacted. "Someone, whether
                                                                                       “More seriously, some had             it is the football club or a coun­
                                                                                     re c u rre n t n ig h tm a re s, di_s-  sellor or social worker should
                                                                                     turbed relationships, and guilt         say to each Liverpool supporter:
                                                                                     that perhaps they could have            ‘How are you. Tell me what hap­


   the process T                                                                     risked the flames more and
                                                                                     been more heroic."

                                                                                              in som e q u a rte rs th a t
                                                                                              counsellors are possibly
                                                                                                                             pened.* We should be able to do
                                                                                                                             that without offering oflence or
                                                                                                                             stigmatising anyone or making
                                                                                             HERE has been criticism them think they are weak.”
                                                                                                                                That we even think of such an


   of recovery                                                                      ' becoming too intrusive and undertaking               without dismissing
                                                                                      impeding the bereavement pro­ itself,  it as a ridiculous idea is, in
                                                                                      cess. Yet, in the main, such crit­ T hom pso    a mark of progress. Dr
                                                                                      icism is m uted. Aside from believes we            n sa y s. And he
                                                                                       which, individuals differ in their                   should, as a na-
                                                                                       needs for professional back-up.       tione, push that emotionally civ­
                                                                                                                             ilising process further forward.
                                                                                          Dr Duckworth notes: “Good “ I would say that we are trying
     The images seen on television and in                                              counsellors aim to giv^informa- to shift our national mood away
                                                                                                                           I
    the press will make it even harder for                                              tion in a low-key way about a from the emotional impoverish­
                                                                                        normal reaction after a disaster, m ent of keeping things but­
    those involved to overcome the horror                                               to let people know what they toned up, as in wartime and the
                                                                                        might expect and reassure them industrial climate of the last
   of Hillsborough, reports Christine Doyle                                             that they are not going mad. ”       century."
                                                                                           For those who do develop dis­        “ In this country we need to
                                                                                        abling guilt, recurrent flash­ give much more time for ritual,
                                                                                        backs or tremendous anger and compassion and the bereave­
           OW THE numbed, agonis­           Cross, and the Piper Alpha

  N
                                                                                        resentment, specialised psycho- ment process, as is the case in
            ing time of acute emo­          explosion among others.                     therapeutic techniques can help some other countries.
            tional suffering begins as          Dr James Thompson, senior               to lead them out of the emo­
    the m agnitude of football's             lecturer in psychology at the              tional trap of circular thinking.       Now could be the time for Mrs
    worst disaster strikes home.             University of London at the                                                     Thatcher, herself a victim in the
                                                                                           Dr D u ckw orth e x p lain s: Brighton bombing, to give the
   The appalling swiftness adds to           Middlesex Hospital, who was                “People may need to pour out go-ahead for a national disaster
    the distress as bereaved fam­          .intim ately involved in long­               their feelings to their friends. committee. This was recom­
    ilies and fans gather in Liver­         term counselling of K ing's                 But, as time goes by, good lis­ mended after King’s Cross and
    pool. -help-lines advertise their        Cross victims explains: “There             teners may not be enough. With would mean much easier provi­
    telephone numbers and crisis            were about nine to 10 thousand              counselling we may be able to sion of expert help when it is
   counsellors offer what succour           people in the crush stand. The              help sufferers change the way in most needed.
    they can.                                number who will have seen                  which they are evaluating the
       For many of the bereaved             dead people, trampled over bod­             traumatic event.
   their distress will be all the            ies, who are injured or who                   Yet neither he nor anyone
    greater for having witnessed the        experienced a near-death situa­             minimises the struggles that lie
    h o rre n d o u s te le v isio n and    tion themselves will be much                ahead for so many bereft par­
   newspaper pictures of crushed             g r e a te r th a n in p re v io u s
                                             disasters.”                                ents and relatives — which are
   bodies. The media may not have                                                       all the more poignant for the
    brought us pictures of rows of
   dead fans but, even more pain­
                                               L iverpool, ev er a city of
                                            warmth and close-knit commu­
                                                                                        extreme youth and optimism of
                                                                                        many of those who died.
                                                                                                                                      '1 8 APR 1989
   fully, says one crisis psycholo­         nities, is rising to the challenge.            Eventually, despite such trag-
    gist “we sawpeople clawing and          Through the weekend, counsel­
                                             lors and Mr David Mason, the             | edies, resilience, courage and
    gasping in the very process of                                                      compassion win through and
   dying".                                  City’s Social Services director,          I life goes on. Yet, sometimes,
                                            travelled to Sheffield, and have
      Dr Douglas Duckworth, an              since had little sleep.                   i the very people who appear
   occupational psychologist who                                                        mentally most robust and pull
   counselled police after the Brad­            By yesterday morning a walk-            through are those who may
   ford football disaster in May            in crisis centre had been set up,            need more thought and care
   1985, who was in Sheffield and           and there were regular calls to             than they may be given.
   rushed to tbe H illsborough              the telephone help-lines which                 Dr Thompson notes: “ We
   ground as the news broke, calls          were swiftly established by the             found with the King's Cross fire
   for "more sensitivity on the part         social services department.                th a t som e of th o se w ho
   of the media” .                              For the police in Sheffield and          appeared to pull through were
      He was angry as he spoke dur­         elsewhere as the inquiries get               in quite a sta te 18 m onths
   ing our telephone conversation           under way, the burden of guilt               later.”
   about “ the squalid suffering             and blame, as the “scapegoat”
   that can be caused to relatives          fingers are pointed, will be
   by pictures of the dying. Rela­          greater than in any previous
   tives I have counselled in the           disaster. Already, the South
   past have been utterly trauma-           Yorkshire police has a counsel­
 ■ tised at the possibility of even         ling contingency plan for its
 to u c h in g a newspaper which            force, which was put into opera­
' they suspect may contain a pic­           tion even as its officers were
 t u r e of their loved ones or of          pulling out survivors.
   turning on a television."                   Dr Duckworth is a psychology
                                            consultant for the South York­
      He says: “ It is quite different      shire police. On Saturday he saw -
   if you are one of the nation of          the anguish that will haunt the
   curious viewers. But for people




                                                                                                                                              2/
                                            individual policemen and, dur­
   who have any direct association           ing the coming months, he will
   it is absolutely horrific. Imagine       liaise with police welfare offi­
   bow you would feel yourself.”            c e rs and offer confidential
      More generally, psychiatrists         counselling.
  .and others believe that this                A fter the Bradford fire he
   man-made catastrophe will lead           helped to pioneer the idea of
   to even greater emotional dis­           contingency counselling for
   tress — the so-called post-trau­          police officers: “I think some
   matic stress disorder— than the           would have left the force if they
   horrors of Zeebrugge, Kings               had not received help. We
                                                                          18 APR 1989
       £7%Guardian                                                        ______ _
Up to 9,000 ‘may suffer
psychological scars’
                                   and Falklands war veterans          haps years after the event
Tim R adford                       were still coming forward.             For more than a year, Dr
$ d w o» Cor a «pand >n t             The motions of those who         Thompson has been calling for
                                   survived Hillsborough would         government support for a some
       S MANY as 9.000 people be an equal mixture of anger             form of centralised disaster

A      might eventually need and guilt. Symptoms of stress
       psychological help as a would include headaches, fa­
                                   tigue, insomnia and depression
       result of the Hillsborough trag­
edy, a leading disaster psychol­ and loss of concentration.
                                                                       counselling strategy. He and
                                                                       his and colleagues have a
                                                                       £70,000 grant from the Eco­
                                                                       nomic and Social Research
ogist has warned.                     Unconsciously, Liverpool         Council to examine some as­
   As the first 70 people yester­ fans have demonstrated one of        pects the effects of disasters.
day made use of counselling the techniques of dealing with                “I remember a while ago
services hastily opened by Liv­ the condition — through                some people were asking well,
erpool city council, Dr James mourning rituals — when they             what’s the next disaster, and I
Thompson, of University Col­ tied their scarves to the railings        said it’s going to be a stampede
lege, London, who has been in­ at Anfield.                             and it’s going to be in a tube
volved with the victims of Zee- “Compared with other societ­           station. I got the phenomena
brugge, King’s Cross, Lockerbie ies, the ones we denigrate by          but not the location.
and the Clapham rail crash, calling them primitive, our                   “It’s because we've got casual
warned that even those who es­ mourning rituals are pretty im­         about handling large numbers
caped relatively unhurt could poverished, and I think it is be­        ofpeople.”
suffer for years to come.          cause of the need to keep indus­       Alan Dunn writes: About 70
“In psychological terms, this trial production going. In other         people yesterday sought help
may be one of Britain’s largest societies many people would            from Liverpool’s day-old disas­
disasters because the immedi­ stop work, would go through a            ter counselling service and ISO
acy, the impact, the closeness lot of ceremonies,” said Dr             people offered help. A drop-in
was-so astounding, compared Thompson.                                  centre has been established at
to, say, King’s Cross.”               “The scarf tying and the flow­   the Vernon Sangster sports cen­
   He said that in the King’s ers to me seem the very least a          tre, close to Liverpool’s Anfield
Cross underground blaze, most community can do to say: we               ground.
people saw only smoke and con- recognise what has happened.               Mr David Mason, director of ,
ftision, not bodies.                We are hurt by it.” he said.        social services, yesterday
   But at Hillsborough many           “1 would say if you want to       stressed that hotline advice
people had virtually the same understand what our society is            telephone numbers (051 225
experience as those who died. like, look at this debate as to           3413/3414) were available to
 “Many people were squeezed whether the Cup Final should                anyone in Britain affected by .
and crushed, many would have carry on. Is that about simply             the disaster. Knowsley borough
 had to push to try and help which is the best way to honour            council’s emergency counsel­
 themselves. Many people would the dead? Or is it as some               ling line can be readied by dial­
 have seen those who were in people would argue about the               ling 100 and asking for the
 distress but couldn’t help money to be made from                       Knowsley borough council
 them"                              football?”                          Sheffield Disaster Line.
   Dr Thompson said that the          But he warned that other cop­        Donations to the Hillsbor­
 psychological effects of the di­ ing techniques, such as over­         ough Disaster Fund can be sent
 saster might not surface in the work, or alcohol, could become         to Account number 5000005,
 victim for up to five years. Vic­ too much for the familes of the      sortcode 089075, at the Co-oper­
 tims of trauma from the King’s stress victim and then he or she        ative Bank, 83-84 West Street,
 Cross and Clapham disasters would have to seek help, per­              Sheffield.
          t h e t im e s
                                                                17 APR 1989
                                                                         “It was a terrible experience

 Doctors attack                                                        which I hope I will never ever
                                                                       aee again. They were com-
                                                                     . pletely helpless.”
                                                                         St John Ambulance cany

 f ‘total chaos’                                                       oxygen tanks but not defribil-
                                                                       lator equipement because the
                                                                       staff are not trained to use it.
                                                                       “We provide basic first aid

 of rescue effortBy Ian Smith tad Jill Sherman
                                                                       and if it is serious we take the
                                                                       person straight to hospital.”
                                                                         Answering criticism that
                                                                      casualties were not given
                                                                       mouth-to-mouth resuscitation
Doctors who were spectators           Dr Glyn Phillips, a Liver*      but were taken out of the
at Hillsborough yesterday pool supporter, who practises               crowd and left on the field to
condemned the ‘‘totally inad- at East Kilbride, Strathclyde,          die, Mr Wells said: “They
equate” emergency facilities at said the aftermath was “sheer         were dead already. The doc­
the ground and said there was mayhem”.                                tors told us there was nothing
no organized response to the          He said he was appalled to      more we could da”
disaster.                          find there were no defibril­          Mr Wells denied that any of
     Dr John Ashton, senior lators used to give electric
lecturer in public health at shocks to victims to restart the         the oxygen tanks had been
Liverpool University, who heartbeat.                                  empty. A spokesman for the
volunteered to help with the                                          South Yorkshire Ambulance
casualties, said there was a given    Dr Phillips said he was         Service said that some but not
                                          an oxygen tank to help
total lack of leadership and no to rescuscitate                       all of its ambulances carried
overall plan at the Leppings                       victims but it     defibrillators. He emphasized
Lane end. “Everything con­ was empty.                                 that not all of the ambulance
spired to create a catas-             “There’s no doubt that this     staff were trained paramedics
<rophy”, he said.                  crowd was too big for this         who knew how to use the
     Dr Ashton went to the in* ground. Liverpool just filled          equipment. He did not know
jured behind the stand about the end they were given.                 how many staff had gone to
20 minutes after the tragedy          “The police allowed the         the Hillsborough ground.
when an appeal for medical 6ns to fill the middle terracing              The spokesman said the
 help was made. “At 3.30pm section to the point that they             machines were useful only for
there were no medical person­ were crammed in like sardines           certain heart conditions where
nel apart from one or two St and yet the two outside por­              the heartbeat had become un­
John Ambulance men. There tions of the terracing were left            synchronized. Only trained
was no equipment and there                                            paramedics would be able to
was only one ambulance”, he virtually empty.” However,                detect those conditions, he
said.                               Mr Peter Wells, divisional        said. The machines should not
     “There were people lying superviser for the St John              be used by inexperienced staff.
dead and dying and seriously Ambulance’s Woodseats                       He said: “If you use a
 injured all down the back of branch, disputed the need for           defibrillator incorrectly, it
 the terrace steps and inside the more equipment. He said it           may do some harm and could
 turnstile area. There was no­ would nave been impossible              prove fetal”.
 body in charge. It was just to get it to those who were
 total chaos.                      crushed.
     “I had to assume control of      He said that there were five
 the casualty situation myself ambulances on site, two from
 and basically divide the the St John Ambulance and
 people into three groups, de­ three from South Yorkshire
 pending on whether they were Ambulance Service, fully
 dead or not or whether they staffed to cope with any
 should have priority to go to normal problems arising.
 hospital when the ambulances         More staff and an extra
 arrived.”                        .vehicle had been called in by
                                   St John Ambulance in
     Dr Ashton said that a full anticipation of heavy crowds.
 casualty team with resuscita­ “But we could not have
 tion equipment did not arrive anticipated anything on this
  from the hospital until about •cale”, Mr Wells said.
 4.! 5pm. Although many nur­          “We just could not get to
  ses and doctors attending the them, however many staff or
  match came to help, there was however much equipment we
  no equipment.                    had. People were just pressing
     “There was no oxygen, air­ down on each other and suf
  way tubes or drips. More lives focating but there was no way
  could have been saved if staff we could get in there.”
  and equipment had arrived           Mr Wells, who was man­
  earlier”, he said.               ning one of the ambulances on
      Even when ambulances did site before the match began,
  arrive, they could not set said that he took an oxygen
  through because the police did tank up to the barrier to try. to
  not clear a path for them, Dr help the fans who were being
   Ashton said. “The whole thing crashed from behind. '
   from beginning to end had in*      "The had their hands tied to
  competence running right their tides. They were vomit­
  through the organizational ing and could not get the
  arrangements.”                   vomit out of their mouths. We
                                 ‘ tried to free the airways with
                                   our hands and give them
                                  ^oxygen”, he said.
                                                                                  fix tU M lid o yc                                              ■
                                                                                 -V W ,                                ^V3
                                                                                  Reference....   ............ ...............................
                                                                                 fx ,              /> ( k             -

                             ^ I ^ wvwolK A A s.      & W aJ t       V V -(L

                                      * \rtA A e ,M    r j
                                                                                                                                    2°{<r
             Mr Davey PS/MS(H)                                                 From:                                  SIC
                                                             w tiX
                                                                               Date: 18 April 1989

                            HAA
                                                                               Copies to: Mr                          cs
                                                                                        . Mi"                         CS1
                                                                                          Mr Brand                    SSI
                                                                                          Mr.s; Hall                  SSI
                                                                                          Mrs                         SSI
                                                                 t-h-
                                                                                              Mr Utting               SSI
             DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM: SHEFFIELD 15 APRIL 1989

             1> | J(H) may wish to. be aware of the local authority Social Service
             Departments' response to this disaster.  Information on activities,has been
             supplied via the Department’s Regional Social Services Inspectorate whoi have
             kept in close touch with the events.
                                                                                                                                      i
             Sheffield

             2.   There appears to have been a very good immediate response from Sheffield
             SSD and neighbouring S Yorkshire SSDs to this disaster*  A large number of
             social workers volunteered their services and formed crisis intervention teams
             at 3 places (Hallamshire Hospital, City General Hospital and at a specially
             formed crisis contact centre in Sheffield)«

             3«    The teams worked all through Saturday night and were able to ensure that
             an individual social worker and clergyman was available to every bereaved
             family.   The contact centre continued its work until 11pm on Sunday 16th.
             Work then continued at the local Divisional Office in Sheffield*   Meetings
             we're arranged with representatives from Liverpool SSD who travelled to
             Sheffield on Saturday, evening and inevitably the emphasis on continuing
             counselling and follow up care moved from Sheffield to Liverpool*   There
             appear to be no fatalaties concerning people from Sheffield but some
             counselling work may continue to be necessary*
             4.   Mr Neil Kay, Director of Social Services for Sheffield, praised the way
             his staff and social work staff from other local authorities had responded to
             the situtation.  A team of social workers from Doncaster had relieved the
             pressure on hard-pressed Sheffield staff and social workers from Barnsley,
             Thameside and Liverpool had all been involved in Sheffield.  Some who had been
             visiting the area just called in and spontaneously offered their services.

             Liverpool

             5.   Mr David Mason, Director of Social Services for Liverpool travelled to
             Sheffield on Saturday evening along with a team of social workers who were
             skilled bereavement counsellors from Alder Hey Hospital.  Meetings with
             Sheffield SSD took place and a help line was established lin Liverpooll which
             was manned by a team of Liverpool social workers.  It was recognised early on
             that a fully coordinated response involving the social services departments of
             all the adjacent Merseyside local authorities as well as health authorities
             would be required and an impressive degree of co-ordination and organization
             emerged in Liverpool on Sunday.  Plans were made for local authorities to
             prepare a team for outreach work on a longer term basis including necessary
             training for the staff involved.




                                                                1
PE   18-77
♦




    6.   The responses by the local authority social services departments involved
    will be considered by the Joint Working Party currently looking into the
    follow-up to major disasters and being administered by CRUSE Bereavement Care.




    CS1C
    Room B1604A AFH
    Ext 6431




                                    2
          t
%




    +
                                                                        Reference




                     Mr          3S/MS(H)                            From:                   :sic
                                                                     Date: 18 April 1989

                                                                     Copies to: Mr            :s
                                                                                Mr            :S1
                                                                                Mr Brand     SSI
                                                                                Mrs Hall     SSI
                                                                                Mrs I        SSI
                                                                                M r Utting   SSI
                     DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM: SHEFFIELD 15 APRIL 1989

                     1.   MS(H) may wish to be aware of the local authority Social Service
                     Departments' response to this disaster.  Information on activities has been
                     supplied via the Department's Regional Social Services Inspectorate who have
                     kept in close touch with the events.

                     Sheffield

                     2.   There appears to have been a very good immediate response from Sheffield
                     SSD and neighbouring S Yorkshire SSDs to this disaster.  A large number of
                     social workers volunteered their services and formed crisis intervention teams
                     at 3 places (Hallamshire Hospital, City General Hospital and at a specially
                     formed crisis contact centre in Sheffield).

                     3.   The teams worked all through Saturday night and were able to ensure that
                     an individual social worker and clergyman was available to every bereaved
                     family.  The contact centre continued its work until 11pm on Sunday 16th.
                     Work then continued at the local Divisional Office in Sheffield.  Meetings
                     were arranged with representatives from Liverpool SSD who travelled to
                     Sheffield on Saturday evening and inevitably the emphasis on continuing
                     counselling and follow up care moved from Sheffield to Liverpool.  There
                     appear to be no fatalaties concerning people from Sheffield but some
                     counselling work may continue to be necessary.
                     4.   Mr Neil Kay, Director of Social Services for Sheffield, praised the way
                     his staff and social work staff from other local authorities had responded to
                     the situtation. A team of social workers from Doncaster had relieved the
                     pressure on hard-pressed Sheffield staff and social workers from Barnsley,
                     Thameside and Liverpool had all been involved in Sheffield.  Some who had been
                     visiting the area just called in and spontaneously offered their services.

                     Liverpool

                     5.   Mr David Mason, Director of Social Services for Liverpool travelled to
                     Sheffield on Saturday evening along with a team of social workers who were
                     skilled bereavement counsellors from Alder Hey Hospital. Meetings with
                     Sheffield SSD took place and a help line was established tin Liverpool] which
                     was manned by a team of Liverpool social workers.  It was recognised early on
                     that a fully coordinated response involving the social services departments of
                     all the adjacent Merseyside local authorities as well as health authorities
                     would be required and an impressive degree of co-ordination and organization
                     emerged in Liverpool on Sunday. Plans were made for local authorities to
                     prepare a team for outreach work on a longer term basis including necessary
                     training for the staff involved.




                                                         1
ODE     18- 77 . [
*

    *
        6.   The responses by the local authority social services departments involved
        will be considered by the Joint Working Party currently looking into the
        follow-up to major disasters and being administered by CRUSE Bereavement Care.




        M Harrison
        CS1C
        Room B1604A AFH
        Ext 6431




                                        2
                                                                                                                  -




                                                        Os
r h




               LftKs InrTo               bkct%CtJ .
                                                              <



I        fojXJL            {      ktu+L         c la h ft'td      fa      iv y o ts/h v * / ;                                    etfJU js
                      ^                 t^ p c r S h     «*+ .    tfu £       < f lf c r e t.r 6 r        ts ^ h >            tL .

0


         0

/    ^       O JQ .       fiu ^ e .   fc n * * ,y                         ftu J i          it>       f l A s * .t \ % h f \          ik
    0                          ■      *       ’

                                                    ,   / H   ^                     C tA A ^ € * U ~            u j f t t        fk d ,




                                                                                                                      X i (p i

                                                                                                            $/Co(f Q
                             ps jn iH )
                                                                                                                                                 ate
                                                                                                                       it .it *   t f




                                                                                                 cc               uw^cTf

                                                                                                           Nv

                                                                                                           h *      thU
                                                                                                           tUK



  j)fS A             y         M li(m r coyly                                         S M u t**                 : £k&&jJd /f.               t? .


,.         n % (t)       *«y          *»**■         "        w           «*»«*          '• < % [                                  cuLtkv*^

 C c t c j- u J L                                                              n iiK A A L t,      h        ~ /tu i—       z ttia c b r


  a\            <Lobtiihe~s           Lew          Uz*a^                 $*yp (u 4               vn.        fL
  ft^XCAMiJL                SirisLoUt            OZ^PAJLS                 lA^/Vi^Jvvra J ( C ~ ^ ^                          hcUfUL


 AA~
                    cfotc      ftT V L X s h -     cJT^j                                               .

            • '•■'■*•.                                      ..   ,
 s W iM *                                    _

 a    .             Tie^c        a f[ U L « * < .            (*          ^cuif                                    ue^y            ftoU

m . ^ c U < r t r ^ s p ^                                   4        ^                                      Sib

S .       te fe 'fc i*                       & ■        ^                 ^                  ■         A         ,< w ^                     <%

ScVLOJt             W r t t o            ifjlUMfatsMt.-.- f o u J                            f e / W W J                  oaV

cnilt               JM hr+**A v*-                  {eaM>-f                */         >? p ia s tti               ( /M(oAMs£ust-t {b y t
CiN             6c*z/*£              Hosf>         awl               astr       &    tf&v-alUf                  ^n^ecf              csim


 c u d ^ t               c e * te            -      CUt% u i c i ^ '
                         ftUMX to<rfi±d                              aJLL                              fa fa /c /c y                       < W
 V          ,               ..   .                                                       „

                      oM l           h                               ik<U            oak          i^ cU x U ulM                    rm cU
     uvM f               om JL                                                 ****          * * * + ,( «A 4i                     to ^ € r y
      Ikj^dU ted /ctAfi\i(u .                                                  CcvcfxLtf               C€#>/*£              fc u fu *u lc (
AO<s/h, JAAvflX.                    / /          *u_             CA^         SttA^clcUj t(o fL                 ,    U )& A t          tO bi^      CcA ^ M a^Sj^

                                                 b*cOtffCA*. out                     6 ^ V tt            c                              .        M «££ flA ij f

4 J* U C        C L W < X A A J£*,d                  M i &«              t^ 1 h ^ S 4 * A j(-n J u * 4 .t               if* * * * -     tu jS L S jp d ii^           £ sh

*Jko           h*u*M*-cl                           %             S U ^ t l d                 ^          W u v * ' ^

0b*JL         Ma. dSjlhxM^Li                                             Gaa^ U xlSl i                  ai/L         CcIcAhcu^

C < M AA& fb*y                        *uU                        fe/UoUJ             Mf               Ca^f               ^CAJ4.U

 £k€j^u>Jt<L                  li         L(lKjy<ffl.                             T^e^c                  a^p^et^t                .fa          U±           *t©

                                   C c A * c e s * A A * ,y                   f^ e p O    L             fv * « -                                     t    > x /     x    , , , f

           ( /A A r Q jd U b L ^                  u j 'j '/ i i -                 tts & u j         c                   - fo     t o         f j 'j u m    tX c iL - C ' y   *,


                                                                                                                                                                    'J




 t.            tiv                               k -v u j !              $ u *-*^ vv                          S <n<u£ S e^dU ts                            Au

                              pttc\(*tt                              yGr~Cv><^                    U U              rh ^         a-U                r<ru.u4


^Jin.            i t » &              ft**-                                           (**■“- * * * > - & * » & < ,                           * W
ks b u     *.J*A              f»             &                   S(f * « J > o K         . /              kcuu           $      icfuctj c o c ^ f i

y / ijv n _     ^ )c M   £ .Q l S r "                   k a .c L              A e I l^ O      ^ c J     ftc         ~ p s* e                        ex. k a w d -


 p H U ie c t         f ^ e   ^ c        x   l ^ .               s   h   ^           o u d       S 't n ^ . c L t        c ^ c r M     u i


 Pg^Y^ilnu                    /k c u ^ 'e s s u £ a                                                   L u M f^ < j§ l k a d                       aC l

                               O     a       o    M          .           r <     ~                                 A «< ^                          " '^ y

 jfc^-~OL*lCL                                          ca^ JL(^                          a/* ‘t                                                           ^*s*c/

  fa jJ          c e ^ r i^ s -              r.
           >

   L iv e-rpo-ol

                H*       5 > a * S )d                  U tL itM t              huH ^U w                      *$ fc /t-tW                                          ju s

  U,esfa4l                     frou>dLk.c(                               A      Q W ^ i c t                                                      cuj * * * t t o y

 a l'H u a           W /A t              <*              te * e u » ^            <^              S < T U .cxl          m       c ^ ji              < S 1 l*

   u>ev€          ShU JU 4                       ^ €«*> €^ e^                                 c J ^ y .u M c M                 frtM x M & lT                        tftu
        j % x p i ( vd l .                                                                                                                 fajk.        /){cts*Q

 ^       ^            ^                             U**jc             U2 <l a       '&> i~&*4)~CL**UjijQ                               i uMsp&zft ^J


 < A L a jc A \ .              6 4 JC U O           H / l O A * .lA J L c l     (* J             A       'fe c tA A *                  L


 S cTO U l JL                  ls J c r A z J l\.                /f     IsOOsn              te L ,0 C p A t* * ~ d                                  <yw      !& & £

 ^                                    60        <J'y^ U 'v A ^ ec^              t*lpotoJir*.                     M*D</lO\4«_y


£ cTZA .O ^L              pe-'VVVtcS                         c i& f> e L */fv \A 4 s **fc                                oU C         fa *          O -c ljC U J Z A ^t


fisL^-r-** coc JjZ                                                              1            *f                                  at

 O       M       d c ^ K        h (             w   c iU     d           k              H     y tu s M         c i         * m   J           < u*      t y   ^    u   ^   .



 cJU(jf*Jt                       ^          c 0 r t civ*, a ^ h v *                            a*(j            c^cjeu^C^o-h^

    ^            £ lA j Q * /p < yzR .                  0W            C tC ^ « /o y             .                    C L ^t      iO - 0 - /^           A * CL c lfi


    ,                I tn .'U               a x l^           u ^       ts           -to                                                                          £**


 O u J tr tU L c k                     x j'tf i              **          «                                     f € M /^          & aU ‘              ( w W m 7

                                       UtA^lMC]                          { «                    &**.                 M-OSUk U                 .
/                H     tvU*-           A            fa-                                 (f*               r*.*.r<kcilU/^o                      tk-Mpam.
                                            0                                               (m J - ( A ^ 9 (

                      co o icU m o J^ C )                             cucho^                                         k        F t * I 7*fe *^ ^
                                                        j> S in fltljL c (        jl^                                             C c C L c ls m l^ p


 cSbuA±{                                        ^                               &   h *jl               cxxJ^^oL^Sti.cL^pu^^                                 #L

^                         p             oiks                 ' b ^ f n                      *>' u « M            « r          ,,<***-                        ^


                              Z9^                   ^        ^         f (d M S                                  ^               ^                                    &

^        /i/t< 4 y * “ A i                      -'* JedL                u f k j              lU a M                                                          ^

 /»e4        .
                                                                                                                                                                    VWPf


                                                                              ilr
                                                                                                                 fw   i


                                                                                                                               /?




              ijtlU            In rT o              hc%at%CtJ .



j      k o f*                  (       U.VUM.              c ia M 't U                 fa            I r y ^ / h ^ /            m   L   ujzs U            <h ( * u A

                     t&l                                                                                  ^crccf^r             ■<*.(*

                 ^ U               i               « ./£            &             f l ^ f U                      * tU * M d .


•■ ^        », j p         e ^< .              9 chacv             w&                                  f% U si                 / l > w i c f 'S / 7
i 0                        ■                   i           *                  /

        £ ,.......                                  «U /       ,     /f ~ /<                -V « K .             C    tA A ^ ^ h          U J iit         tk tJ i




pk     3u4~€_        s




                                                                                                              > 0
                                           ,                   I          1         J (w j             V ‘
                                                                                  f%             ±        3
                                                                                                                     I fA f

                                                                        jt             JuJ-               4P              —     ^                     ^         _■

                                                    ^              ^ju -                         * n
       ^ti               iIrr^
                                                                        -W * w -   ^
                                       *                                                /    '                                sv^d l

                                                                                                                                                               Jr      -
        -er
                                       ^                                          **" •

                                           ./^          •
                                                        <^o
                                                                    O K-      .
        ^            £ ~ < ry-^
                                                                                                                                        Hr
' iM                                 ps   jn in )                         x*                                                                                               e s ic
                                          /            '                • ^\sv -
                                                                                                                                        K (f- c f

                                                                                                             ct        tty
                                                                                                                   /V
                                                                                                                       hW
                                                                                                                       fa x           tb U i
                                                                                                                       /W




  j)is rtl<r oA                          /Jills (ttym&K                                         $ fat 4 urn* :_                                                           H.
                                                  '                 1                     '                                ^

          tts(f)                                  U iS^             ^     **       * ^ * -* 4        $                                                  * u ,fc r * 6 {


 OrvcaJL v^ n rvtJt frep c d y* * * * ? '.V                                               m pM U -                t*               ~fter        d ila to r.

  ^            tctuiifuf                          k*0                              $yptu<l               /«*                   fa




  7                ^                      * “          *■                                       ~ ~ ' A

                       ■»                                  -                                         '                 ‘                                * - • . . . - .

  s W ^ <fc^                    ._        .                                           .          ,                                                                .
                   ju       ^             * r * ~ *                        h                                               *          * * 3             7

  * '          te U ^                r    ^            s        ^              ^                                               * »


  c.      Y o A iil* * *                 S£b s ■ a                                                                                          *       ■       , ,               ,

 ^                                                                                        ^                                                     ^            * * * * *


          t«                                                                          ^         J    ^                         S                                          ^


  ^                                                   *>? ^                        t j /        f /* ~ ^                                                     ^

     ca*H>^                     ce*f?t                                                   //   #t*ifu<fl\                   fojujcJw*                        tua^f     **-<i

      .        7 U              fc*"rf                         birfUd                                    9         -           .-       .       J0           7            /
                            A A                   /4           - e w     « * t                   ^                ^ c U            * c tM   .< U             s r f^ c U



     l^        C                              J            c i i s / W '* - * '^
       uvfaS                                                   -,                -jit.        covcbutJ:                    ce^A*e                       caxAt^tcf n
J u o /k            JAA»faJL           Hf>n*-                            Sum c I cuj i(t> tL . U )cU l

                                              by * U > t s t < M t U                                        *-

A s ja u tr         c L * /c u * y iU              w t f L                                                  W        (                         L u x u j>        f£ l     &     b


jjlu )             fa a A t&     M     ic l                S       U     ^     t l d              **-       £ c u tu ~ /c ta y



0U »JL                                             f t c                Qa A k ^ U       x jl S   II          O K            € cM sh * * U A A L ^



                                         o a a o   L           ^ J U    cA a   J                            c a*+ £             A< C A J^ci           ^       ’Z A 'W



                                                                                                                                         A       6*            *0


                                      c c A ^ c e ^ ^ Y                        f >K* cf ( * '               f     1* ^         ^ * * $ * * * > •




  * .              ft*          N * ‘ (        K       -^ f ,                                                      i f u t u S e s t i u t s


   f U        l/ttU        j,        / > '« * ( < *                    K *n*> < *i                       tm                               0 .U            r s u u t


 ^ J h         .         it* &            I" * * -             ° ^ S                    ^S Z a ' 1              e^ u -   ^      v t ^ * -< .

 KS/xMdfid                       ft>          M    l       StfaaJcty                        .          f(        keivu                    l e r u a j *j<nfaj\

 y J L ^ .            2   >**tc«f6 r                                           t * 11* 0 * *                                         tK * * *             ^       k a ^ /d .


  > etf« r f                                               s h ^
  V                 /„                7 1 (W * e s s u & L                          ^                   C u w v c T tC                  kad              aCi            Oju ^


   S i «*•"-,                        fu J h            c       M                   * -          * » 4
                                                                                                      ^          s p M         iU     M        ^ U   j         y ^ W

    ^                     cfi-virv«.f .


      L iv         i f T Q '& t

                     hU         ^ o ^ r id             n * ic * t                   b       ^     h     w           $                            ie ^ A         * s      ^


    L e W                   l         tfO M        d U kct               ft                                              *
                          w ,ft               *.                                        ^               fsucxl                 *>c*f*ji                       J & ,

                          {k c U tc (                                                                  c tA *~ n .t*M c M                            (M < £ jzT
                                                                                                                                                                            C L SC Q
'           % o > p ifc * £ -                                                                                                                       i

    ^         ^             ^                          ^ £ /* * -C             L O <LA        € «                                     j ^ K         £



    iAfkjucJU.                        ooa^ i           *AOAA.iAJLcl                       0*y                & fecouu                               L UM^pfX^Z

    £ < j Xs U * J L                  ^ c s tfu u ii.                    /{ ~ ~ ~ U > a s i         M    c < p e p A t fr e .c /          e   a    ^    y     ca      *.   /& & £


    * ,                                    C°                                                                           L4iVc/lOr4*.y                            fti


$<riA.*A_                         pe^vyvteS                         ctej> et^ /fvsA ^^ h                                       ed L           ^             o.cfjcLLQA*~t

fisLST&j r                                       ^^euu^rrn^h^ s                                         *r                              *r              L**,(lL

    OM,t(cTSKf*l                                        u>c<Ud                     k            / * ^ t W                           cuuj                cuu           tyxttUAH


    e llj m t                         ^      eo ** clu^-O^hiA*                                        co<eJ            cvyaA *i^aJ> o\
        ^          £    u       j < z y ^ )c W ?          ^u.                                            .           P t 'A A * . t       u x& * h t               tU a .c t n



    /«V                 /**•-<■                  a x t^ c x ^ M ^ s                           *>                                                                                6**

    c ^ v L                     c k                                 ~                                                                     * * U         ‘        ‘^         d u 7

    t s u         j u   t u       ^                f s ^ i M         C     j      f r s             j f e    *   .         M    O      c r u x a        .




    cS U a J s          I




    hAMyCU                           W**1             ^
                                                                                                                                                                 fy        Gm   m u    JI
    fe        /&        * * } « * * * -




                                      M ^ JC U Jk                                                                         ^
     ju      ~                                                       ?**£>                                              * * * ^                   2 *            ■<&.

                            -    ^        -& -       -~ * y     <                               i                                                                 ’*h>

        d ftU ^C                                                                                                                                  {*>U O tr fr         7TF TT
      r      .    . J#Ai*£ w             A>ktt                           7&C*.
                    ^      ^   a   - U      (C fi* .   A ^m X JC ^T          < J * u -* U -* r


                         „i        w e      ^
TO;C               o f ------------------------- F ro n
                                                 From:
Mr B Utting                                           J S VThitfield
Chief Inspector                    ____ SSI
Social Services InspectoparC^
                     3 c t^ a ^                  Y & H Region

                                                 c.c. Mr D Brand* DCI/SSI, AFH
                                                      Mrs P Hpin, ACI/SSI, AFH
                                                      Mr B Harrison, ACl/SSI, N.W. Region
                                                      Mr R Pearson, SSI, AFH


DISASTER AT HILLSBQFOUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM, SHEFFIELD
SATOREAY - 15 APRIL 1989


1. There would appear to have been a very good, immediate response frcm
   Sheffield SSD and neighbouring South Yorkshire SSDs to this disaster. A
   high number of social workers volunteered their services and formed
   crisis intervention teams at 3 places: namely at the Eallamshire
   Hospital, the City General Hospital and at a specially formed crisis
   contact centre in Sheffield.
2. The teams worked all though the Saturday night and on Sunday morning
   Mr Gilroy (ACI) heard from Neil Kay, the Director of Social Services in
   Sheffield, that during the night they had been able to make sure that an
    individual social worker and clergyman was available to every bereaved
    family. It is understood that out of 94 bodies 20 were still unaccoun­
    ted for on Sunday morning and that around 70 people were still in
    hospital including 18 in intensive care. (By first thing Monday morning
    it is understood from Neil Kay and media reports that nearly all of the
    bodies have been accounted for, 56 people are still in.hospital
    including 17 in intensive care),

3. Mr Gilroy has linked with Brian Harrison (ACI, Worth Vfestem Region) as
    the emphasis in matters is now likely to shift from Sheffield to
    Liverpool. It is understood that Mr D Mason, Director of Social '
    services, Liverpool, had travelled to Sheffield on Saturday night and
    had briefed himself on the situation. Mrs Gibson (SSI, North Vfest) was
    to attend a crisis meeting in Liverpool on Sunday morning with the
    Director and his senior staff to decide on an action plan re services
    there.

     9 30 AM - MONDAY
4.   I spoke to Neil Kay to get an update on the situation. He informed me
     that they had continued with their provisions throughout Sunday. Early
     on Sunday evening he had allowed his tired social work staff to go hone
     and a tecuti oil social woirkeif^ firctn Etoncaste^r had relieved them until
     11 pm when they had shut the contact centre down. They were now picking
     up further work at the local Divisional Office in Sheffield. A further
     meeting with Liverpool SSD representatives was being held this morning.


                                                 1.
                                                       9*
17   APR    ’ 89   9:37    FROM S . S . I .   LEEDS,            TO   AFH        PAGE. 0 0 3




           5. Neil Kay praised the way his staff and social work staff from other
              local authorities had responded to the situation. He knew for instance
              that as well as the team from Doncaster, social workers from Derbyshire,
              Barnsley, Thamesside and Liverpool had been involved in Sheffield. Some
              who had been visiting the area just called in and spontaneously offered
              their services.
           6. As far as Neil Kay knew there were no fatalities concerning people from
              Sheffield.

           7.   I trust Mrs Hall and fir Pearson will infom Division re these matters.
                Please contact one of the people named below should you require further
                information regarding matters in Sheffield:

                          Mr D Gilroy (ACI)
                          Mr J Kennedy (Sheffield Liaison inspector)
                                         ( c i v i l Emergencies Inspector)




       Inspector
       16th Floor
       Vfest Riding House
       67 Albion Street
       LEEDS
       LSI 5AA
1?   APR   ’ 89   14:06   FROM S . S . I .   NW R E G I O N                                  PAGE. 0 0 2


%


                                                              Kef: GSS 9/1
      Mr W B Utting                                           Fran:
      Chief Inspector SSI                                             kxl ,   rtn ittsgxun
      Roan 519/522
      Mcftmand House
                                                              Date: 17 April 1989
                                                              Copy: Hr D Brand Dd, AFH
                                                                    Mrs P Hall Ad, AFH
                                                                    Mr B Harrison ACI, NWR
                                                                    Mr D Gilroy ACT, YHR
                                                                                      SSI, YHR


      TOOTBMX, msasmER. mTT«RnmrrHf sHEPPTRrn

      1.    Hie Director of Liverpool Social Services Department and leader of
             Council vent to Sheffield on Saturday 15 April with a team of social
            workers who were skilled bereavement counsellors from Alder Hey
            Hospital,
      2.     During Saturday there lots of offers of help of a practical nature
             including transport from all maimer of sources.
      3.    Sunday 16 April offers of help continued and Merseyside social workers
            presented themselves at Liverpool ssd to offer help.
      4.    One of the principal difficulties on the Sunday was lack of information
            about victims and those injured and problems in Sheffield of co­
            ordinating activity and information.
      5.    There was an additional problem of telephone lines being jammed.
      €.    The 11.00am meeting on 16 April was held for representatives of the
            Merseyside local authorities. Senior management from the Merseyside
            authorities came to this meeting and there were a number of
            representatives from other voluntary organisations and also some
             "members" of local authorities.
      7.    Help line was set up - 051 225 3413/14 with 11 lines. This was manned
            by a team of Liverpool social workers who had had brief training from
            the two consultants from the Centre for Crisis Psychology who had come
            up early that morning to provide their advice and assistance free.
            Their iriput was invaluable in quickly acquainting members of the group
            to the implications of the kind of services required.
      8.    The other local authorities agreed to assist in manning the 'help line'
            after the initial two days.
      9.    Directors quickly committed themselves to buying in consultancy help and
            acknowledged the need for a long term approach to the aftermath of the
            disaster.

      10. The Directors wanted a oo-ordinated approach but reference was made also
          to the political dimension and the possibility of '’members" wishing to
          take seme unilateral action in their individual authorities.
        1?   APR   '09   14:07   FROM S . S . I .   NW R E GI ON                         PAGE. 0 0 3

'   •

              11. Ihere were plans for a drop in centre in Liverpool,            Same local
                  authorities had already planned this in their own areas and reference
                  was made to the need to cxj-ordinate activity and information.
              12. The need to liaise with the football supporters club was acknowledged.
              13. Each local authority then went away for discussion with their own staff
                  and managers.
              14. She representatives reconvened later that afternoon. Eacii had set up a
                  central telephone number in their own local authority for the help line
                  to pass on referrals to and to receive local requests for help or
                  information.
              15. On the Sunday afternoon social work volunteers from the Merseyside local
                  authorities had a brief induction from the two consultancy staff to
                  equip then for the task that faced than.
              16. It was agreed that local authorities would consolidate a team to be
                  trained for outreach work on a longer term basis.
              17. Information about the dead was not available centrally and had only been
                  made available through informal and external sources and not through the
                  police.
              IS. Superintendent Pauline Clare, based in Southport, had been nominated by
                  the police to liaise with Sheffield police in order to provide
                  information about the victims. Regrettably by the end of the afternoon
                  although information was premised on 24 positively identified dead, it
                  had not yet reached SSD.
              19. Senior managers were made aware of the need to protect the pool of staff
                   identified to undertake ongoing work and the long term commitment was
                  recognised.
              20. The unit General Ifenager frtaa Liverpool ERA was present at all the
                  meetings. He had been liaising with the regional general manager and
                  was convening a meeting of representatives from the EHfts. He was
                  committing the Mersey health authorities to a co-ordinated response and
                  premised to make available information to the help line on patients who
                  had been transferred to Liverpool from Sheffield hospitals and also
                  patients who presented in local hospitals/casualty. It was anticipated
                  that a lumber of survivors would be transferred to the neurological unit
                  at Walton Hospital.
              21. Miss Farrell DSS Sefton agreed to oo-oniinate contact with and help from
                  the voluntary sector on behalf of the Merseyside Directors. They would
                  all send representatives to a meeting.
              22, Wirral throu^i                      was nominated to work out a plan for staff
                  training.
              23. There was a ccanmitment by the local authorities to engage the two
                  consultants frcsn the Centre for Crisis Psychology in the ongoing
                  training programme and to work alongside the local authorities in the
                  first stages of briefing planning and debriefing etc.
APR   ’ 89   14:07   FROM S . S . I .   NW R E G I O N                  PAGE. 0 0 4




 24.     Training

        I net with the two consultants ana the representative frtan Wirral to
        discuss the possible training plan.      A number of one day awareness
        training days were identified for the very near future for senior
        managers, health managers, politicians and middle managers and a
        possible multi-disciplinary day and it was agreed to suggest six three
        day workshops for groups of 12 staff initially to be made available for
        the Merseyside local authorities althou$i there was seme discussion
        about the possibility of making places available to other local
        authorities in the region or, if necessary, patting on additional three
        day courses. In order to avoid possible ccrapetition and rivalry it was
        agreed that it should be suggested to Directors that the courses have
        wtvwH membership from the local authorities.



        After what appeared chaotic and unoo-ordinated, it was impressive to see
        the degree of co-ordination and organisation which took place in
        Liverpool on the Sunday. David Mason's management of the group and the
        planning for ongoing activity was impressive. Mr Mason managed to
        provide leadership whilst at the same time acknowledging the need for
        other Directors to cwn the plans, to be very much a part of the plans
        and far the initiative to be Merseyside^wide rather than Liverpool City
        Council led.




 Inspector
