A / c r t 't 'c
EM402 _RET
        _ _ _ _133963152-000001
                _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ _ _RT
                                           _ _ID:_ _NT
E M -N E -0 1 - A - A Q - 0 0 13 - D - 0 1 - 0 2 0103466927
S K P :E H 800373617                       CUST:PHM /750
REF1 PHM/750                               NRM
Reference #1:P H W 750
Minor Desc: FABC498919      Srv: 24/05 5:30pm BST       For: RPRATT:
ROSEANNE PRATT DFfO                         ROSEANNE PRATT

R                                                            NEXT



              FABC498919
                                                                                      AM BULANCE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                      ELM HOUSE
                                                                                      B ELM ON T G R O V E
                                                                                      L IV E R P O O L L6 4EG
                                                                                      T E L: 051-260 5 2 20

                                                                                      Our Ref:     CD/JR
                                                                                      Your Ref:




       MERSEY METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE SERVICE
         MANAGED BY SOUTH SEFTON (MERSEYSIDE) HEALTH AUTHORITY




5th February, 1990                                                              jisiMcfrj
                                                                                1 0 7 FEB1990 ?


Merseyside Fire & Civil Defence Authority
Emergency Planning Unit
The Podium
Mulberry House
Canning Place
LIVERPOOL
LI 8JB.




Dear Sir/Madam


THE ROLE OF THE UNIFORMED VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS
IN A MAJOR DISASTER IN MERSEYSIDE

Thank you for your letter dated 26th January, 1990 in connection with this
matter. I am sanevdiat surprised to hear that there is a wish, particularly
on the part of two of the organisations, the St. John Ambulance and British
Red Cross Society to be more involved in planned arrangements. The major
emergency plans for the Ambulance Service has for many many years now
included both these organisations, and indeed only recently our plans have
been reviewed and arrangements for the Ambulance Service to call upon these
two organisations in the event of a major emergency, and how they would
work to the Ambulance Service have been confirmed once again.

As far as the WRVS and Salvation Army are concerned, these to my knowledge
have always been a matter for Local Authorities, therefore they would
normally be co-ordinated and responded through the Police channels.
Unfortunately because of the present dispute taking place within Ambulance
Services, lines of ccnmunication have been almost constantly open for the
last four months with the two voluntary first aid organisations. Therefore,
once again I am satisfied that we are aware of the extent of their response
and resources available.

Since the preliminary report was published of Lord Justice Taylor's
investigations into the Hillsborough Disaster, the Merseyside Ambulance
Paramedic Service is in attendance at all major sporting events in the
county, particularly those at the large football grounds on a Saturday, and


            C HI EF M E T R O P O L I T A N AMBU LAN CE O F F I C E R - MR O. DI SL EY, FASI
here again therefore very close liaisons have been strengthened with the
first aid organisations.      However, if it is felt by the various
organisations that a discussion on their response to major emergencies
would be helpful, I would certainly be prepared to ask a member of my
management team to take part in discussions and contribute appropriately.


Yours faithfully




0. DISLEY
CHIEF METROPOLITAN AMBULANCE OFFICER




 cc.                 Emergency Planning Officer, M.R.HwA., Hamilton House
       24, PalJ Mali, Liverpool, L3 6AL
VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES (VAS) ASSISTANCE TO ARMED SERVICES AND THE NATIONAL
HEALTH SERVICE IN NATIONAL EMERGENCY
Introduction
1     The definition of VAS is British Red Cross Society and St John
      Ambulance Brigade (St Andrew in Scotland).
2     It has been agreed and accepted that in national emergency the VAS have
       two roles, namely:
      2.1    Support of the Armed Services in time of war or peacetime
               crisis. Although this is still the primary role it has become
               the smaller commitment and, on present assumptions, is confined
               to service within the United Kingdom.
      2.2      Support of the Health Services in time of war or in a major
               peacetime catastrophe. This is by far the larger commitment and
                in these circumstances the VAS would come under the control of
                the NHS. All other volunteers in the community would come under
                the control of the Local Authority.
Aim
3     The aim of this paper is to identify defined and manageable tasks for
       VAS members to meet both military and NHS requirements, commensurate
       with their skills, experience, training and numbers available to meet a
       sustained involvement.
VAS Support required by the Armed Services
4     The following are the   main priorities:
      4.1      The staffing of Army Medical Reception Stations and Medical
                Centres at Royal Air Force and Royal Naval Stations.
      4.2      Welfare duties to military establishments (as provided in
                peacetime) expanded to take account of the needs of dependents
                of military personnel returning prematurely from overseas or
                otherwise displaced as a result of the crisis.
VAS Support required by the NHS
5     It is impossible to be prescriptive, bearing in mind the unpredictable
       nature of events, but the following are the most likely tasks the VAS
       would be asked to perform:
      5.1      Nursing duties in general wards (not acute care or post acute
               care) in order to relieve NHS nursing staff for re-deployment to
               acute and post acute care.
      5.2      Provision of staff and ambulance vehicles to support the NHS
               Ambulance Service which may include the reception of military
               casualties at Airfields, Railheads or Ports and transfer to NHS
               hospitals.
       5.3     Assistance to the Family Health Service Authorities (FHSA) and
                their General Medical Practitioner/Primary Health Care Teams in
                the staffing of Emergency Medical Centres.

                                        1
      5.4    Welfare duties both in hospital and in the community.
Staffing Requirements
6    The above tasks/roles have evolved during discussions between Military,
      VAS and DoH planners based upon a ‘Top Down' view of the VAS and their
      potential to provide the necessary resources of manpower. There is a
      view that we may be in danger of making too heavy demands upon the VAS
      and there is now a need to assess their potential taking a "Bottom Up'
      view of their resources.
7    To achieve this it is necessary to:
      7.1    Establish actual numbers of VAS members (excluding members who
             are NHS personnel) and their particular skills.
      7.2    Re-define (if necessary) the manageable tasks commensurate with
             their skills, and numbers available to sustain a full time
             commitment.
      7.3      Match this potential more realistically to the proposed
             tasks/roles at paras 4 and 5 above.
      7.4      Based on the foregoing identify the shortfall and encourage VAS
             recruitment, including a syllabus and schedule of training to
             achieve higher numbers with the desired standards in the
             required skills.
Conclusion
8    There is a need to establish the active (non NHS) membership of the
     VAS, it is suggested that this could be easily accomplished through the
      VAS County Joint Executive Emergency Committees (CJEEC) organisation in
      each county using the format at Annex 'A'.
9    It is vital that the Military and the NHS identify the locations and
      quantify the numbers of VAS they anticipate are required to perform the
      tasks identified at paras 4 and 5.
10 Any shortfall in VAS members will require the identification of
     possible ways to boost their numbers which may include agreed joint
     VAS/NHS 'crash training' programmes such as that described at Annex
      *B * or a possible re-appraisal of tasks/roles to establish if a
     reduction in VAS staffing requirements could be made.


JAC
Regional Health Emergency Planning Officer
Trent RHA
August 1990

REPORTS,NAT/EMER-VAS
C17/1/10, C17/14




                                      2
                                                                                                                     ANNEX 'A' TO VAS
SUHHARY OF VOLUNTARY AIO SOCIETIES RESOURCES                                                                                                                  m?)
                                                     BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY AND ST JOHN AMBULANCE


          1                2                    3                     4                   5                      6                7              8

 COUNTY             NO OF AOULT MEMBERS NO OF AOULT MEMBERS NO OF AOULT MEMBERS NO OF AMBULANCES OTHER NON NHS AOULT         TOTAL     NO OF INDUSTRIAL
                    WITH FIRST AIO ANO/ WITH WELFARE        TRAINEO AS          AVAILABLE FOR    MEMBERS                     MEMBERS   FIRST AIDERS
                    OR NURSING          TRAINING            AMBULANCE CREWS     EMERGENCY USE    (please specify)            EXCLUOING TRAINED IN LAST
                    CERTIFICATE         (see Note 2)        (see Note 3)                                                     NHS       THREE YEARS
                    (see Note 1)
                                                                                                                                        1987   1988    1989

 DERBYSHIRE
 1. BRCS             545                 78                   23                   4                    -                      646       497    517     567
 2. SJAB             807                 Included In Col 1   120                  30                   not relevant            807      1134   1227    1367

 LEICESTERSHIRE
 1. BRCS              96                  5                   18                   3                    240 (w'out quailf)     336      1380    723     651
 2. SJAB             275                 19                    9                   3                    252 (w'out quallf)     440      1380   2021    1818
 LINCOLNSHIRE
 1. BRCS             301                 IB                   22                   7                   389 (w'out quallf)      706       375    446     402
 2. SJAB             270                 12                  155                  13                   not relevant            282      1812   1573    1596
 NOTTINGHAMSHIRE                         39
 1. BRCS             166                 87*                  33                   3                   228                     466      1514   1480    2964 i
 2. SJAB             906                 15*                  31                   8                                           896       244    280     240 ;
 NORTHAMPTONSHIRE
 1. BRCS             180                 43                  none                none                       20                 210       451    543    775
 2. SJA8             496                 12                   84                 21                         -                  496       495    578    659
  TOTALS            4042                328                  495                  92                   1129                   5285      9282   9388   11039
* Included In Column 2

 NOTE 1: Oo not Include those members who work In the NHS
 NOTE 2: Oo not Include those members who work In the NHS or have been Included In Column 2 or 4
 NOTE 3: Oo not Include those members who work In the NHS or who have been Included in Column 2 or 3
AL July 1990
Trent Regional Health Authority
Emergency Planning
                                                             ANNEX ‘B ‘ VAS
EMERGENCY TRAINING PROGRAMMES
REGULAR NHS AMBULANCE SERVICE ANO VOLUNTARY AIO SOCIETIES
Introduction
1     This paper seeks to examine in more detail the manner in which the
      expertise of the NHS and the VAS could be utilised in developing a
      training syllabus for first-aiders to be employed in Emergency Medical
      Centres (EMCs), Medical Reception Centres etc. This type of training,
      if it could be realised, could contribute significantly to life-saving
      in a mass casualty situation.
2     The National Joint Emergency Executive Committee (NJEEC) of the VAS have
       issued a booklet on the Management of Mass Casualties to serve as a
       basis for training in the techniques of dealing with such situations and
       existing VAS members are already being trained in these techniques.
3     As a transition to war measure emergency training programmes would need
       to be given high priority. It would be for each Chief Ambulance Officer
       (CAO) to determine in collaboration with his hospital and VAS colleagues
       in the county how their joint training facilities should accomplish this
       locally. The main purpose of emergency training programmes would be to
       concentrate the expertise and training resources of both the NHS and the
       VAS in the most effective way in training volunteers for both Ambulance
       and basic nursing duties.
4     Many people in the community have some first aid training as a result of
       industrial and other works schemes, they would form a natural pool of
       volunteers who could be offered refresher training up to Instructor
       standard in suitable cases in order to achieve a cascade system of basic
       training.
Aim
5     To train volunteers to expand the existing peacetime Ambulance Service
      initially by pairing one volunteer with one experienced ambulanceman,
      although subsequently the need may be for ambulance drivers only.
6     To liaise with the VAS to enhance their crash training capability for
       First Aiders and basic nursing duties as a transition to war measure.
7     To identify potential instructors from amongst volunteers and give
       priority to developing their training to achieve a 'cascade' system of
       training.
Pol icy
8     In peacetime a cadre of instructors should be formed from both
       professionals and volunteers to form a nucleus which could be expanded
       if required. This may require the following action:
       8.1   The preparation of a suitable syllabus of training notes and
             modules on the wartime role.
       8.2 Suitable members of the VAS to be included on peacetime in-service
           courses.
       8.3   The compilation of a register of instructors.

                                        4
                    D E P A R T M E N T OF H E A L T H ^ ^ W S W X ^ I X X ^ M M X X
                    R IC H M O N D HOUSE                                .........   ....
                    79 W H I T E H A L L
                    L O N D O N SW1A 2NS                       I
                     T E L E P H O N E 01 2 1 0 3 0 0 0
                                                               ! 2 8 JU 1.1939 I
                                          210 5 7 7 1                          t
Y o u r reference
O u r reference                                                                r
To:     All HEPOs                               27 July t 9 f i 9 _                        J


Dear Colleague

I enclose a copy of a discussion paper issued by the
Civil Defence College together with a copy of
Alan Turney's covering letter, for information.

                                               Yours sincerely




                                               MLD MFO Division

                       I
                                             273   2798


Sir Peter Newsam
Secretary
Association of County Councils
Eaton House
66a Eaton Square
LONDON
SW1W 9BH
                                            5~   June 1989




                  ,

CIVIL DEFENCE COMMUNITY VOLUNTEERS - A DISCUSSION PAPER BY THE
CO-ORDINATOR OF VOLUNTEER EFFORT

Interim guidance on community volunteers which was distributed
under cover of           Is letter of 2 March 1989 foreshadowed
further studies by the Co-ordinator of Volunteer Effort. As the
first stage in a process of review, the Co-ordinator has now
prepared a discussion paper which assesses current arrangements
and examines possible future options for the functions and
organisation of community volunteer schemes. A copy of the paper
is attached.
                                             I
Although there is much to commend in a number of community
volunteer schemes in operation in Great Britain, the Co-ordinator
argues that underlying difficulties militate against coherent
national implementation of arrangements based on current
perceptions as to volunteer function and volunteer organisation.
In this light, he has made radical proposals as to the way
forward.

We have yet to decide how best to consult with the many
organisations and individuals having an interest in these
community volunteer arrangements, but in the first instance, it
will be helpful to have the initial views on the Co-ordinator's
proposals of your Association and of those organisations on the
attached list to which this letter is copied.

I should be grateful if you could reply to the Head of F6
Division by 6 October, at which point we should like to be in a
position to collate views and to consider what further stages, if
any, will be necessary in this consultation process.
The Scottish Home and Health Department will be writing in
similar terms to the appropriate Scottish bodies.

A copy of the paper is being sent for information to County Chief
Executives, Clerks to the Fire and Civil Defence Authorities and
County Emergency Planning Officers in England and Wales.




                    V -.- V - v v


                                                _L
Association of Metropolitan Authorities

Association of District Councils

Association of London Authorities

London Boroughs Association

SOLACE

County Emergency Planning Officers Society

Association of Civil Defence and Emergency Planning
Officers

Women's Royal Voluntary Service
St John Ambulance

British Red Cross
Civil Aid

Institute of Civil Defence
        Merseyside Fire & Civil Defence Authority
        Em ergency Planning Unit



                                                         3 0 JAN1990

     Mr D K Nichol
     Regional General Manager
     Mersey Regional Health
     Authority
     Hamilton House
     Pall Mall
     Liverpool
                                                                   26 January 1990
     For the attention of
     Mr B Morgan
      Dear Sir

      THE ROLE OF THE UNIFORMED VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS
      IN A MAJOR EMERGENCY, IN MERSEYSIDE

      In my contact with the various uniformed voluntary organisations,
      I have been made aware for sometime now of their wish to become
      more involved in planned arrangements that would be needed to
      respond to a major emergency in the County. This in the case of
      some organisations has resulted in the broadening of their roles
      to provide additional or expanded services.

      As I am sure you will agree, in order to be of maximum value in a
      major emergency, there is firstly a need for us to know in more
      detail, information on such aspects as the nature, scale and
      duration of any service that can be provided. Secondly, we also
      need to discuss with these organisations, their activation
      arrangements and look at whether coordination of their emergency
      response might be improved.

     You will therefore see from the attached copy letter sent to four
     principal uniformed voluntary organisations, that I am proposing
     a meeting be held to discuss these matters together with any
     related matters.   If such a meeting is held, and it is decided
     by those organisations that they should meet on a regular basis
     in future, I consider it would provide a useful link with the
     Emergency Services Joint Planning Committee.

     I am sending this letter and enclosure to all three Emergency
     Services and the Regional Health Authority, and would be pleased
     if you could indicate to me whether or not you would be prepared
     to attend this exploratory meeting.

     Yours faithfully




     CHIEF EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICER
                   The Podium # Mulberry House # Canning Place # Liverpool #                  LI 8JB
                                     Telephone 051-7 0 8 5 5 15 • 0 5 1 -7 0 8 8 54 8 (Fax)
r t w o l -o r g a n i s a t i o n s W R Holland # Chief Emergency Planning Officer
     Sent to:
     WRVS
     St John Ambulance
     British Red Cross Society            RT/IOM/189
     Salvation Army

                                          23 January 1990



     Dear
     COORDINATION OF UNIFORMED VOLUNTEERS IN A MAJOR EMERGENCY

     You will recall that during the last two years I have indicated
     my concern over the absence of a forum for the coordination of
     uniformed voluntary effort in the County, which would be of help
     in a major emergency. I have therefore, arranged several
     meetings of the Merseyside County Joint Emergency Executive
     Committee during this period in an attempt to make progress on
     this important issue.
     Whilst I think those organisations represented recognised the
     value of these meetings, I have come to the conclusion that a
     number of factors have made the objectives of CJEEC a somewhat
     inappropriate vehicle for taking on the wider role which the
     uniformed voluntary organisations are now able to fulfil both in
     peace and war.
     I have therefore spoken to the Acting Regional Health Emergency
     Planning Officer Mr Bernard Morgan on this matter and he and I
     share the view that until the National JEEC organisation becomes
     more positive in support of the County JEEC activity, there would
     appear to be limited value in trying to coordinate voluntary
     activity under the auspices of this body.   We consider that the
     meetings that are now being held of the Armed Forces Joint
     Medical Sub-Committee in Preston, may, in future be the most
     appropriate means by which the role of the uniformed voluntary
     organisations in support of the armed services in war can be kept
     under review.

     Mr Morgan and I are also agreed that the outstanding need for the
     coordination of the uniformed voluntary organisations might best
     be considered at an exploratory meeting involving yourselves and
     the other similar bodies, together with representation from the
     Police, Fire and Ambulance services and our own respective
     disciplines.   If you are agreeable, I would be prepared to take
     the Chair for such a meeting. I would add that if there is




WF\RT\VAS-LET
      sufficient support for my proposal, I would like to recommend
      that such a forum be set up to meet regularly after that
      exploratory meeting.

     I would be most grateful if you would be prepared to give this
     matter your consideration and let me know whether you are
     agreeable in principal to my proposal and, if so, who would
     attend from your organisation.

     Yours sincerely




      CHIEF EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICER




WP\RT\VAS-LET
EFFECTIVE PSE OP MEDICAL, NURSIMG AND OTHER TRAINED STAFF
• " M M a H M M H M I M M h M M M a M M M a M W N M M M M a H A H M M a a M I M H H M W I M H H M M lM M M M M I ia H H M M a M M a M H M M M



(See 3.22 - 3.24 and 3-27)

Guidelines

1.          Each Health District will have an establishment of
            staff in various roles.  The role is the key factor
            for planning purposes.

2.          Staff will be working in three broad locations:

            District General Hospitals
            Smaller general and specialised hospitals
            The Community (includes General Practice).

3.          There are thus three levels, or types, of health care
            operating.

4.          These can be broadly equated to DGHs, EMCs and CFAPs
            (6.4.8).

5.        CFAPs are not a Health Service responsibility with
           regard to staffing and equipping; they are planned by
           Local   Authorities  as   part  of   the  "Community"
           structure (Home Office guidance to LAs).        It is
           expected that part of the Community Volunteer force
           will include First Aiders.

            The VAS will also staff some CFAPs locally, by
            arrangement   with  the  Community   Executive  Team.
            Awareness of this level of care is essential since
            patients will be passed to the NHS where necessary,
            and Community NHS staff may well become involved on a
            request basis.

6.        Medical, Nursing and other trained                                                               staff            will          be
           primarily based at DGHs and EMCs.

7.        DHAs   should  proceed  as suggested in 6.6.7 i.e
           determine the number of EMCs needed in the District,
           assign the location and designated role, and allocate
           appropriate staff accordingly (6.4.8).

8.        The EMC is essentially a smaller acute hospital aimed
           at responding to injuries of all types, and will
          require corresponding staff.   (6.4.8).

           This nucleus can be supplemented by a proportion of
           General Practitioners, VAS members and other local
           volunteers (6.6.3 and 6.6.5). Professionals in other
           groups may also be recruited (3.24); and retired
           persons with appropriate skills may come forward.
           (3.27).
9.    Some   General    Practitioners   will have    special
      qualifications     or   interests   which   make   them
      particularly suitable for EMC work.         The larger
      proportion will necessarily and best be employed in
      Community Care, as now (3.22).          This care will
      stepwise increase in volume as preparations for
      hostilities, and the actual effects of hostilities
      "escalate".    The latter compounded by environmental
      problems.   (See also TTWMs.)

10.   Effective  use  of   staff will  be based on       the
      application of the "dispersal" plan decided for    each
      DHA (6.4.7, 6.4.8) i.e location and role in the    war­
      time situation.    Private establishments will     form
      part of the plan (6.4.4).

      If essential staff are re-deployed to pre-planned
      locations they can be supplemented as suggested
      above.   At the same time flexibility can be obtained,
      under-active units can support busy ones either by
      movement    of   staff   or  patients   according   to
      circumstances.




                     - 43 -
6.4.13   LIAISON WITH FAMILY PRACTITIOHER COMMITTEES, VOLUNTARY AID
         SOCIETIES AMD LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND OTHER ORGANISATIONS
         CONCERNED WITH CIVIL DEFENCE

         (See paras. 3.22, 3.25 and 3.2-8)

         Guidelines

         1.    The discharge of patients to the community will
                considerably increase the workload of GPs and a
                liaison should be maintained with FPCs to ensure the
                most effective supervision (see 6.6.3).      Primary
                health  care  teams will be closely involved in
                treatment and clinical supervision.

         2.    The Voluntary Aid Societies (BRCS, StJA and WRVS)
                will provide a considerable reservoir of trained
                personnel.   Close liaison should be maintained with
                the County Joint Emergency Executive Committee in all
                plans for the establishment of EMCs in order to
                deploy volunteers most effectively.    Joint training
                of NHS personnel and the VAS will enhance the skills
                and abilities of all personnel.

         3.    The VAS will also have a particular responsibility in
                the setting up and manning of CFAPs, in liaison with
                the Local Authority.

         4.    CAOs should consult with the CJEEC to achieve the
                most effective arrangements for the use of VAS
                ambulances and crews.     Special attention will be
                needed to ensure that any fitted communications
                equipment is compatible with ambulance frequencies.

         5.    LA Chief Executives as Controllers (designate) should
                be advised through the County Emergency Planning
                Officer at all stages of plans for the organisation
                of the health service.

         6.    LAs   will  also  be aware of other organisations
                prepared to assist in a crisis.   These should be
              . noted in District plans.




                               -44-
TRAINING

(See also 3.31)

Guidelines

1.   DHAs  should  encourage   staff  with  key planning
     responsibilities and/or key wartime roles to attend
     the wide variety of short courses and seminars held
     at the Civil Defence College, Easingwold.

2.   When plans are formulated, seminars and briefings
     should be arranged for appropriate members of staff.
      (Regional HEPOs are available to advise on content of
     programme).

3.   It would also be helpful for other staff to be kept
      informed of civil defence plans for the department.

     Consideration   should  be   given  to  the   regular
     exercising of plans for staff of EMCs including
     volunteers, in association with local authorities and
     VAS.




                    - 46 -
6.6.5   CONSULTATION WITH VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES (ON THE GENERAL
        An d s p e c i f i c d e p l o y m e n t o f v o l p h t e e r s )

        (See paras    3.25 - 3.27 and 6.14.12 these guidelines)

        Guidelines

        1.   The   Voluntary  Aid   Societies  (British  Red  Cross
              Society, St John Ambulance and Women's Royal Voluntary
              Service) would provide a considerable reservoir of
              trained personnel and particular attention should be
              paid to arrangements for their deployment.

        2.   Close    liaison    (co-ordinated   by  RHA)  should   be
              maintained with the County Emergency Planning Officer
              and County Joint Emergency Executive Committee on the
              establishment of Emergency Medical Centres and VAS
              members    should,   where   possible,  be  allocated   a
              specific EMC, preferably near their homes. This would
              enable a degree of familiarity with other personnel
              and buildings to be achieved together with joint
              training with other services.

        3. VAS ambulances    and  attendant  personnel would be
            controlled and deployed to best advantage by Chief
            Ambulance Officers, who should be closely involved in
            consultations with CEPO and CJEEC.

             District   plans should   also take account of the
             probability of many volunteers, not members of any
             organisation, offering to help and be prepared to
             advise and direct them.        In particular,  retired
             medical and nursing personnel are likely to be advised
             to offer their service.    (See TTWM pp, 29.30, 37 and
             60).




                               - 50 -
              NOTES ON THE FIRST CJEEC CO-ORDINATORS SEMINAR
          HELD AT THE EMERGENCY PLANNING COLLEGE 19-21 JULY 1989


GENERAL

1.   Attendance.   The seminar was attended by 41 CJEEC Co-ordinators or
their representatives, the Chairman and members of the NJEEC, and
invited speakers.

2.   Programme.   The principal subject areas addressed in presentations
were the VAS support in war to the military (Lt Col Roger Thayne) and to
the NHS (John Barnes), the war role of Commanders Medical (Col John
Tinsley), and the roles in civil emergencies of the Emergency Services
(College Police and Fire Directing Staff and Mr Barry Johns Chief
Ambulance Officer West Midlands), local authorities (Martin Sibson CEPO
Essex) and the WRVS (Mrs Carole Mayers Vice Chairman and Emergency
Services Co-ordinator WRVS).   Within the presentation programme there
were sessions summarising total staffing requirements and commitments
led by Lt Col Derek Champman and Sir Cameron Moffat.   A late copy of
the training video on First Aid Posts was shown, with comment that the
final version with professional voice-over would be available for
distribution (2 copies to each CJEEC) by the end of September 1989.

3.   Discussion.   Discussion periods became more prolonged and
interesting towards the end of the seminar.   Principal subject areas
covered were: the scope for the CJEECs to act in peacetime emergencies,
the need for assessment of resources, administration and organisational
matters with the need for NJEEC guidance Circulars, NJEEC/CJEEC
interaction, and future training and exercises.  Comment on the more
important matters raised appears below.

NHS PRESENTATION

4.   Outline of Content.   By request the NHS presentation concentrated
on the concepts of the Emergency Medical Centre and the Post Acute Care
Centre.   A copy of the script has been provided to Lt Col Chapman who
intends to distribute a full report on the seminar to CJEECs.

5.   EMC.   The principles incorporated in HC(88)31 were presented with
emphasis placed on the fact that, apart from the common role, all
aspects of planning were a matter for local determination and decision.
It was suggested that there would be no set pattern nationwide.    In the
context of the all hazards approach it was suggested that there could be
advantage, particularly in respect of joint training, in the acceptance
of the EMC as the single, all hazards NHS/VAS interface.      The
arguments presented were that the NHS has standing arrangements to
enable a professional nucleus (mobile medical teams or BASICS) to be
deployed to the scene of a major emergency within a short response time.
Thus if the VAS are called upon to provide additional support it will be
to work with the professional nucleus (i.e. the EMC concept) rather than
independently by establishing a FAP.     It was suggested that by modest




                                                                   SETRHA
                                    1                              AUG 89
extension of the investment in EMC planning there could be direct
association of VAS Centres or Divisions with each designated EMC.    Thus
in response to a civil emergency it would be possible to alert the
apppropriate VAS Centre or Division to assemble personnel, to rendez
vous at their designated EMC location for onward deployment to the scene
to work in conjunction with already deployed mobile medical teams.
Attention was drawn to the fact that the designated EMC locations,
although most pertinent in respect of civil defence planning, conferred
the benefit of off-site assembly thus reducing initial chaos and
confusion at the disaster scene and, of course, they provide the basis
for response throughout any geographical area.

6.   CJEEC Role.    In a general development of the theme of EMC response
to civil emergencies it was suggested that the CJEEC, currently confined
by its terms of reference to civil defence planning matters, should be
viewed as the all hazards focal point for emergency contact and co­
ordination.   This may be accommodated in NHS and local authority
emergency plans by the inclusion of detail of office and home telephone
numbers of the CJEEC Co-ordinator with two additional officers nominated
by each society to serve as alternative contacts.    (It was cited that
this is the case in respect of the SETRHA and SWTRHA Emergency Plans.)
The nomination of the CJEEC as a focal point for all hazards emergency
contact does not supersede the individual organisations' call-out
arrangements but establishes for the benefit of other authorities and,
it was suggested for the VAS Centres and Divisions, a clear alerting and
co-ordinating chain.

7.   PACC.   The reasoning leading to the PACC concept was explained
with broad coverage of the NHS, VAS and local authority collaboration
which would be required to establish such facilities in close proximity
to clutches of designated casualty hospitals.    It was emphasised that
the concept is in embryo form and subject to refinement as a result of
further detailed work by the JCMMPG.   To provoke thought, it was
suggested that the PACC concept could confer dual benefit and thus, in
the long term, the investment in planning may be viewed as most
worthwhile.    There is long standing recognition that in the event of
nuclear hostilities NHS resources could not cope with radiation
casualties thus there would be a need for community nursing.    The PACC
requirement for nursing care of military casualties would be time
limited thus such centres could be viewed as having a two stage life
subsequently forming the community nursing facility.

8.   Post Presentation Discussion.    Lt Col Chapman opened the
discussion by a brief presentation of possible demands in respect of VAS
personnel.   His assessment was that the PACC role would involve a total
of 30,000 VAS personnel (4 x 200 bed PACC per county @ 150 VAS staff per
PACC) and the total commitment in respect of EMCs could be in the order
of 100,000.   Although it was accepted that it was unlikely that there
should be simultaneous, total activation of both types of Centre, he
acknowledged that there is a significant shortfall in resources.
Total current membership strength, including reservists, was given as
104,000 and the consensus view was that 20 to 30% of total strength




SETRHA
AUG 89                              2
could be assumed to be available to respond, leaving a shortfall in the
worst case of 70-75,000.    This matter of resource shortfall was
subsequently addressed by Sir Cameron Moffat with a suggestion of
possible short training courses for other volunteers, details of which
are to be developed and distributed to CJEECs.    It is worthy of
mention that Sir Cameron saw VAS commitments to the Armed Services as
embracing:

        PACC staffing - facilities run by the NHS but supporting the
        military
        MRS staffing - as quantified by the military
        Airfield reception teams
        Port Reception Squadrons if formed
        Deployment of ambulance fleets "under the direction of the
        national ambulance service"
        A "fairly large" commitment to MAO(CH) in welfare tasks
        Possibly ambulance train staffing - "a concept which is
        continually on/off"
        Possibly assistance in aircraft
        Services to military families evacuated from the Continent
        Community assistance as a result of NHS hospital discharges

The concept of EMCs playing an all hazards role and being the single
NHS/VAS interface in the response to emergencies involving casualties
raised much interest in the audience.    It was also worthy of note that
in various counties there has been acceptance of the CJEEC as the all
hazards point of contact for alerting and subsequent VAS co-ordination
of response.    Whereas Lady Limerick was not able to accept that there
should be any form of limitation to spontaneous response by the
societies, the CJEEC Co-ordinators more readily acknowledged that
specific call-out was the means to achieve a more integrated response
with Emergency Services and local authorities emergency plans.     In
addition there was support from the floor in respect of development of
the CJEEC terms of reference to promote broader, formal liaison with
other voluntary organisations, e.g. Salvation Army, Age Concern etc.,
with an invitation extended periodically to such groups to send a
representative to CJEEC meetings.     The benefit derived by co-opted
membership of the WRVS was cited as a major argument for such an
extended CJEEC role.

TRAINING VIDEO FAP

9.    Introduction.   Prior to the viewing of the training video it was
explained that it had been produced by Image Television and sponsored
and financed by the Civil Defence College as part of the Civil
Protection film series.

10.   Comment.   When asked to comment at the end of the viewing I
expressed the view that I could not perceive a situation where an FAP as
depicted in the film would be established.   In terms of principles and
procedures for immediate care the film has value but without inclusion
of a professional nucleus (i.e. mobile medical teams in the civil




                                                                  SETRHA
                                   3                              AUG 89
emergencies context or GPs in the EMC civil defence concept) many false
lessons may be put across.   (Footage of casualties arriving by
ambulance vehicle, as opposed to stretcher or improvised stretcher
carry, may also create false impressions of a half-way house facility
rather than more on-site.   In the civil emergencies context, why unload
from ambulances rather than evacuate direct to hospital(s)?)    The
documentation process shown in the film was also an impediment to
immediate care and it was unique in terms of forms and method and
adhered to the T1 to T4 categories.     If it must be accepted that the
film has passed the stage of any refinement, it should be recognised
that there should be no stand-alone viewing.    As a personal view I
consider that it is essential that there should be a teach-in and
possibly some highlighting of areas of false lessons prior to any
showing.

11.   Discussion.   It was clear from comment from the floor that a film
is required in support of local training and an "anything is better than
nothing" attitude prevailed.    The Dorset CJEEC has produced its own
video, which is apparently shorter with the intention that there is a
teach in prior to viewing, and it appeared open to question whether the
centrally produced version would be used in lieu.    Sir Cameron
Moffat’s remark that "the FAP is a team rather than a place" may
indicate that a facility based approach is in decline.

OTHER MATTERS OF NOTE

12.   Definition of Role.   In her opening address Lady Limerick stated
that the role of the societies is to support the Armed Services, Health
Authorities or local authorities in the event of a "national emergency
being declared in peace or war".    In subsequent conversation with Lady
Limerick I suggested that it is most unlikely that a "national
emergency" will ever be declared in the UK in peace but support by the
VAS may be required over the complete spectrum of localised civil
emergencies.   In consequence I suggested that there should be review of
the definition of role and this was accepted by Lady Limerick.    In the
final discussion, which returned to the CJEEC focal point role, there
was some strength of feeling that this should be pursued with acceptance
of a co-ordinated VAS response to major emergencies rather than reaction
as separate organisations.    It was suggested that a united approach
would not only eliminate the risk of quibbling but overall present a
better image.

13.    Spontaneous Response v Call-Out.    I believe a very valid point
was made in the presentation by Carole Mayers on the WRVS role in major
emergencies.     She stated that because the WRVS greatly value the
loyalty of their members and do not wish to put this to the test by
false alarms, it is a guiding principle that the WRVS reacts to call­
out, establishing that there is a true need prior to any movement.
The organisation does not respond spontaneously.    (cf Lady Limerick's
view at para 8. above)     Is this the underlying reason why the WRVS
tend to feature more prominently in exercises and major emergencies
(reported in the WRVS presentation as "five involvements per week"),




SETRHA
AUG 89                             4
because call-out confers a means for a more controlled and integrated
response?   (It was also of interest to note that the membership
strength of the WRVS is rising.   14,000 additional members were
recruited in 1988 bringing the total strength to 170,000 including
16,000 men)

14.    Ambulance Service Viewpoint.   Barry Johns included in the seven
principal roles of the ambulance service in response to a major
emergency "The Control and Co-ordination of Voluntary Organisations" (cf
Recommendation (4) to RAO April 1988 Seminar Report).    I suggest that
there is no argument in respect of control and co-ordination at the
scene.   If anything this approach reinforces the concept of the VAS
working with a professional nucleus rather than independently setting up
FAPs.

15.   NJEEC/CJEEC Links.    In a broad discussion of relationships it
was agreed that:

        a. The NJEEC should assume the role of information dissemination
        by extracting lessons and principles of good practice reported
        in the CJEEC minutes.

        b. In the interests of continuity it is not essential for CJEEC
        Co-ordinators to be members of the societies.

        c. There is a need for updating of the 'Notes for CJEEC
        Members'.

        d. There is no requirement for NJEEC direction in respect of
        exercises e.g. revision of 'Spearpoint' series, this should be a
        county matter.

        e. NJEEC guidance on a two day training package for volunteers
        will be pursued.

        f. On request by CJEECs the NJEEC would provide a copy of
        generic 'Standing Operating Procedures' covering arrangements
        for emergency call-out and resource registration.

        g. There is a need to think through the development of FAPs to
        become EMCs.

       h. The NJEEC will address how a single representative may be
       provided to be the liaison link between Commanders Medical and
       CJEECs with Home Defence Regions.

       i. Articles in 'Civil Protection' should be the means used to
       draw attention to VAS capabilities and activities.

       j. The remuneration of VAS personnel in support of the military
       should be retained regardless of the fact that PACC may be
       managed by the NHS.   (Personal comment: How will local




                                                                  SETRHA
                                   5                              AUG 89
          authorities recruit/retain other volunteers to perform PACC
          'hotel services' without similar payment arrangements?   An 'all
          or nothing' situation; the all is unlikely to be favoured by the
          military!)

          k. CJEECs should inform neighbouring counties of their
          activities and invite observers to exercises.

FUTURE SEMINARS

16.      At the close of the seminar there was unanimous agreement that:

          a. There should be a 1990 seminar for CJEEC Chairmen with the
          same programme as that produced for the CJEEC Co-ordinators.

          b. There should be a further CJEEC Co-ordinators Seminar in 1991
          thus establishing a two year cycle for Co-ordinators and
          Chairmen.




J E BARNES
Regional Emergency Planning Officer SETRHA




SETRHA
AUG 89                                6
       BJM/CJ
                                                              Mr B.J, Morgan
                                                              Bxt. 2161


13th Maroh 1989


E,A, Trew Esq.,
County Director,
The British Red Cross,
Bed Cross Bouse,
20 Saxton House,
Knutsford,
Cheshire,
WA16 CDS.


Dear Hr Trew,

I writ® to acknowledge and to thank you for your letter of Tth Marsh 1989 end
for kindly enclosing a oopy of 8JSSC 1/89.

Thank you for letting »e know that a meeting of the CJEBC will take place in
the fairly near future.


Tours sinoerely




B.J. Morgan
Acting Health Baergenoy Planning Officer
                                   VAS STUDY PERIOD - PROGRAMME



Serial      Time                Subject                      Speaker                 Remarks

 (a)        (b)                    (c)                        (d)                     (e)

  1      1000-1030   Arrive Fulwood Bks, Preston                             Coffee
                                                                             See attached map

  2      1030-1035   Introduction                       Col P V Panton 0BE
                                                        - Chief of Staff

  2      1035-1055   The Casualty in Europe             Comd Med -
                     A description of how the           Lt Col P E Deck
                     casualty gets from point
                     of wounding to UK.

  4      1055-1115   Military Casualties in UK          G3 Mob - Lt Col
                                                        (Retd) K Scragg
                     a.   From point of arrival.
                     b.   Locally wounded.

  5      1115-1135   The NHS Role. The facilities       Health Emergency     Mr Morgan ) To liaise
                     and treatment offered by the       Planning Officer               ) over this
                     NHS.                                                              ) present­
                                                                                         ation

  6      1135-1140   Break

  7      1140-1150   The VAS Role. How and where        Comd Med
                     the VAS assist the Army
                     Medical Services (AMS).

  8      1150-1205   Support for the                    Maj Mieville - G1
                     serviceman and his family
                     in war.

  9      1200-1220   The role of a Gen Hosp (V)         CO of 208 (M)
                     in war                             Gen Hosp -
                                                        Col L Hipkin

10       1220-1240   AMS Training. AMS trg              Camp Comdt AMS
                     facilities and a view of           Field Trg Centre
                     future VAS trg possibilities.      Brig (Retd)
                                                        B L Francis

11       1240-1255   Discussion.    Question and        Comd Med
                     answer.

12       1300-1400   Lunch                                                   Officers Mess
                                                                             Fulwood Bks




SJI
        BJM/CJ
                                                         Mr. B. J. Morgan
                                                         Ext. 2161


2nd February 1989


Mrs R.H.C. Downhaa, J.P., R.G.N.,
Branch Director,
The British Bed Cross Society,
Red Cross House,
4 Tuebrook Terrace,
346 Vest Derby Road,
Liverpool,
Merseyside,
L13 7HG.


Dear Mrs Downham,

Toliatary Aid Socletiea
Study Period - 18th April 1989

Thank you for your letter of the 13th January 1989.

I have let Lieutenant. Colonel Deck know that Colonel Mary Creagh will
accompanying you on 18th April 1989.

With kind regards.


lours sincerely




B.J. Morgan
Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer
       BJM/CJ
                                                           Mr. B.J. Morgan
                                                           Ext. 2161


1st February 1989


K.H. Bennlson, Esq,
St. John Ambulance,
142 Foregate Street,
Cheater,
CHI 1HS.


Dear Mr Bennison,

Voluntary Aid Societies
Study Period - 18th April 1989

Thank you for your letter of 24th January 1989.

I note that for the tlae being correspondence should be sent to you at your
County Office.

I shall let Lieutenants Colonel Deok know that you will be attending to
represent the St.John Ambulance (Cheshire) at the study period on 18th April
1989.

With kind regards.


lours sincerely




B.J. Morgan
Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer
         BJM/CJ
                                                           Mr. B.J. Morgan
                                                           Ext. 2161


2nd February 1989


Lt. Col P.E. Deck,
Commander Medical,
Horth West Distriot Headquarters,
Fulwood Barracks,
Fulwood,
Preston,
Lancashire,
PR2 4AA.


Dear Colonel Deck

Voluntary Aid Societies
Study Period 18th April 1989

I refer to ay letter of 10th January 1989 and now have some amendments to make
to your Guest List.

2. (b)    (i)     (Red Cross)

An additional guest Colonel Mary Creagh, The British Red Cross Society, Red
Cross House, 4 Tuebrook Terrace, 346 West Derby Road, Liverpool, Merseyside
L13 7HG.

2. (e)   (ii)     (W.R.V.S.)

An additional guest Mrs P. Edmondson, Women's Royal Voluntary Service,
Cheshire & Merseyside Area Office, 7 Grosvenor Street, Chester, CH1 2DD.

2. (d) (ill) (St.John Ambulance)    Delete Dr L. Kader add Mr K.H. Bennison,
St.John Ambulance, 142 Foregate Street, Chester, CH1 1HS.

The other guests under the Mersey Regional, Health    Authority   heading have
indicated their wish to attend the Study Day,

With kind regards.

Tours sincerely




B.J. Morgan
Acting Health Eaergsnoy Planning Officer
        BJM/CJ
                                                          Mr. B.J. Morgan
                                                          Ext. 2161


2nd February 1989


Mrs. B. Barrett,
Area Emergency Services Organiser,
Women*8 Royal Voluntary Service,
Cheshire 4 Merseyside Area Office,
7 Orosvenor Street,
Chester,
CH1 2DD.


Dear Mrs Barrett,

Voluntary Aid Societies
Study Period - 18th April 1989

Thank you for your letter 20th January 1989.

I have arranged for Mrs Edmondson’s name to be added to the guest list for the
study period on 18th April 1989.

The letter of invitation will be sent to her in due course at 7 Orosvenor
Street, Chester.

With kind regards.


Tours sincerely




B.J. Morgan
Acting Health Baergency Planning Officer
                   Women’s Royal Voluntary Service

                                Cheshire,& Merseyside




                                             1989 .
                                20th January 1989
         I
B.J.Morgan,
Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer,
Mersey Regional Health Ai-thority,
Hamilton H0use,
2U Pall Mall,
Liverpool L3 6AL.


Bear Mr. Morgan,

Voluntary Aid Societies.

Thank you for your letter dated 11th January 1989 re the
Study Period 18th April.   Please can I add another name
to the list, as Mrs. P. Edmondson, the Area Organiser,
would like to attend on that day.

Yours sincerely,




Mrs. E. Barrett,
Area Emergency Services Organiser.
    THE BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY
                             CHESHIRE COUNTY BRANCH

President:                                                       RED CROSS HOUSE,
Mrs. J. Bromley Davenport          INTERNATIONAL
                                      RED CROSS                      20 BEXTON ROAD,
County Director:
                                  1863             1988
E. A. Trew, Esq.                                                f.         KNUTSFORD,              |
County Adm inistrator:
Mrs. K. D. Ferguson                                             C h e s h ir e   w ai   6   ods.   *
Hon. County Treasurer:
J. H. Leslie, Esq.


         EAT/LMC                     12S TEARS
                                         AT WORK


         Yr. Ref: BJM/MJL

        Mr. B. J. Morgan
        Acting Health & Emergency Planning
        Mersey Regional Health Authority,
        Hamilton House,
        24 Pall Mall,
        LIVERPOOL L3 6AL.                                        13th January 1989

         Dear Mr. Morgan,

                              Voluntary Aid Societies
                            Study Period - 18 April 1989


        Thank you for your letter of                      the 11th January, and I
        confirm that I would be able                      to attend the proposed
        meeting.  I shall be glad if                      you will let me have
        details of the precise venue                      in due course.


        Yours sincerely,




        E. A. Trew
        County Director
+   THE BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY
    (FOUNDED 1870 INCORPORATED BY ROYAL CHARTER 1908)
    Patron and President: Her Majesty the Queen
    Merseyside County Branch

    County Director:
    Mrs. R. H. C. Downham, J.P., S.R.N.
                                                       ^

                                                       ;;
                                                       i\
                                                                  M R H A - M Lull

                                                                   16 JAN1989
                                                                                            Red Cross House
                                                                                            4 Tbebrook Terrace
                                                                                            346 West Derby Road
                                                                                            Liverpool
                                                                                            Merseyside L13 7HG
                                                                                            Telephone: 051-220 1971
                                                                   If        I -

    Our Ref:           BHCD/SK                                                       13 January 19^9

    Mr B J Morgan
                                                                 l a —   !
    Acting Health Emergency Plannii
    Mersey Regional Health Authority
    Hamilton House
    2k Pall Mall
    Liverpool
    L3 6al

    Dear Mr Morgan

    Voluntary Aid Societies

    Thank you for your letter of 11th January.

    I have booked the date in my diary.                            Would I be able to bring another
    Officer with me?

    Best Wishes.


                                          L
    Yours sincerely




    Mrs R H C Downham, J.P., R.6.N.
    Branch Director


                                              Charity Registration No. 502856
        BJM/MJL
                                                                B.J. Morgan
                                                                Ext. 2161




                                                             //'i^ nn


                            VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES

                         STUDY PERIOD - 18 APRIL 1989

You will recall that some months ago I mentioned      to    youover the telephone
that the Commander Medical at N.W Army District (Fulwood Barracks Preston)
intended to hold a study period for District VAS representatives in 1989.

It is the intention to introduce representatives to tha concepts of military
casualty evacuation and the VAS role in the treatment and rehabilitation of
service personnel.

The date for the study period has now been       given -   Tuesday   April   1989
beginning at 10.30 and dispersing after lunch.

A provisional list of guests is attached.

Yours sincerely,




B.J. Morgan
Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer.
        BJM/KC

        106/1A MLD
                                                              Mr. B. J. Morgan
                                                              Ext. 2161

1Oth January 1989


Lt. Col P.E. Deck,
Commander Medical Headquarters,
North West District,
Fulwood Barracks,
Fulwood,
Preston,
Lancashire.
PR2 4AA


Dear Colonel Deck,

Voluntary Aid Societies (VAS)
Study Period Advance Hotlce

Thank you for your letter of 21st December 1988 and the draft programme for
the Study Period to be held on Tuesday, 18th April 1989.

Your proposals look good and I see no reason to suggest any alteration.

With kind regards.

Yours sinoerely,




B. J. Morgan,
Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer.
                                          RESTRICTED


                                                                                               « lH A -« e > tC A L
            Headquarters
                                                                                               0 6 JAN1989
            North W est District
            Fulwood Barracks Fulwood Preston Lancs PR2 4AA                                                  ■




                     Telephone Army Network Preston Military \   .
                               GPO Preston (0772) 716543     J          2482


                                                                     Your reference


See Distribution                                                     Our reference    106/1A Med

                                                                     Date    % .(     Dec 88



VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES (VAS) STUDY PERIOD ADVANCED NOTICE

1.   It is proposed to hold the above study period at Fulwood Bks on 18 Apr 89.

2. Please find attached the programme and administrative details for your
consideration.
3. Health Emergency Planning Officers (HEPOs) are requested to warn the VAS
through their respective County Joint Emergency Executive Committees. Official
invitations will be issued nearer the date.

4.   Any comments to Comd Med by 27 Jan 88.




                                                             P E DECK
                                                             Lt Col
                                              ^1,            Comd Med

Distribution

External:

HEPOs:  Mr E Bailey
        Mr B Morgan
        Mr P Young
AMS Fd Trg Centre - Camp Comdt
208 (Merseyside) Gen Hosp

Internal:

COS
DCOS
G3 Mob
Mess Manager




                                          RESTRICTED
                             VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES
                                (VAS) STUDY PERIOD
INTRODUCTION

1. In war the VAS (Red Cross, St Johns Ambulance and WRVS) have agreed to assist the
Army Medical Services and the National Health Service in treating and the rehabilitation
of Service casualties.

2. Contact with the VAS in NW District has so far been through the Health
Emergency Planning Officers (HEPOs) who attend the County Joint Emergency Executive
Committee (CJEEC) meetings.

AIM

3. The aim is to hold a study period at which District VAS representatives are
introduced to the concepts of military casualty evacuation and their role in the
treatment and rehabilitation of service personnel.

FORMAT

4.    a. The study period to be held at Fulwood Bks on 18 Apr beginning    at 1030
      and dispersing after lunch.

      b.   A provisional list of guests is at Annex A.

      c.   The proposed programme is at Annex B.
                                                           ANNEX A TO
                                                           106/1A MED
                                                           DATED XI DEC 88




                             VAS STUDY PERIOD - GUESTS


NW REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

1.   a.   HEPO    Mr E Bailey

     b.   Greater Manchester County:

          (1)    Red Cross   Mr J Rushton

          (2)    St Johns Ambulance    Dr T K J Leese

          (3)    WRVS   Mrs E Holmes
                        Miss E Evans

     c. Lancashire County:

          (1)    Red Cross   Mrs C V Elletson
                             Mr W Real

          (2)    St Johns Ambulance    Mr R Holt JP
                                       Mr J Watkinson
          (3)    WRVS Mrs M Tanikker

MERSEY REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

2. a.     HEPO    Mr B Morgan

     b.   Merseyside:

          (1)    Red Cross   Mrs R C H Downham

          (2)    St Johns Ambulance      Dr G P Sechiari

     c.   Merseyside/Cheshire

          WRVA    Mrs E Barrett

     d.   Cheshire

          (1)    Red Cross   Mr E A Trew

          (2)    St Johns Ambulance    Dr L Kadar

NORTHERN REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY

3. a.     HEPO    Mr P J Young

     b.   Cumbria

          (1)    Red Cross   Mr M J Donnelly

          (2)    St Johns Ambulance    Dr G W Stitt

          (3)    WRVS   Mrs M E Pantry
                                                                                ANNEX B TO
                                                                                106/1A MED
                                                                                DATED ■) i DEC 88

                                   VAS STUDY PERIOD - PROGRAMME


Serial     Time                    Subject                   Speaker               Remarks
 (a)       (b)                       (c)                          (d)                 (e)
  1      1000-1030   Arrive Fulwood Bks, Preston                             Coffee
                                                                             See attached map
  2      1030-1035   Introduction                      Col P V Panton OBE
                                                       -■ Chief of Staff

  3      1035-1055   The Casualty in Europe            Comd Med -
                     A description of how the          Lt Col P E Deck
                     casualty gets from point of
                     wounding to UK.

  4      1055-1115   Military Casualties in UK         G3 Mob - Lt Col
                     a. From point of arrival.         (Retd) K Scragg
                     b. Locally wounded.
  5      1115-1135   The NHS Role. The facilities      Health Emergency      Mr Morgan |To liaise
                     and treatment offered by the      Planning Officer      r>         over this
                     NHS.                                                   **          presentatioi

  6      1135-1140   Break

  7      1140-1200   The VAS Role. How and where       Comd Med
                     the VAS assist the Army
                     Medical Services (AMS).

  8      1200-1220   The role of a Gen Hosp (V)        CO of 208 (M)
                     in war                            Gen Hosp -
                                                       Col L Hipkin

  9      1220-1240   AMS Training. AMS trg             Camp Comdt AMS
                     facilities and a view of          Field Trg Centre
                     future VAS trg possibilities.     Brig (Retd)
                                                       B L Francis

 10      1240-1255   Discussion.    Question and       Comd Med
                     answer.

 11      1300-1400   Lunch                                                   Officers Mess
                                                                             Fulwood Bks




SJI
    THE BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY
                            CHESHIRE COUNTY BRANCH

President:                                                       RED CROSS HOUSE,
Mrs. J. Bromley Davenport
County Director:
                                   in t e r n a t io n a l
                                      r e d CROSS                  20 BEXTON ROAD,
E. A. Trew, Esq.                  1863               1988
                                                                            KNUTSFORD,
County Adm inistrator:
Mrs. K. D. Ferguson                                             CHESHIRE WA16 0DS.
Hon. County Treasurer:
J. H. Leslie, Esq.                                           % Tel. Knutsford (0565) 50201


     EAT/PT                           ■M TEAKS

                                                                     y RHA- MEDICAL
     Mr.B.J.Morgan,                                                      10 MAR 1989
     Mersey Regional Health Authority,                                                 ...


     Hamilton House,                                                 W T
     24 Pall Mall,
     Liverpool L3 6AL                                                .




     Dear Mr.Morgan,


     I enclose copy of NJEEC circular 1/89 for your
     information.

     You may wish to know that with the agreement of
     Ron Dobson St.Johns, I have been in touch with
     the County Emergency Planning Officer and we hope
     to have a meeting in the fairly near future to
     consider the emergency planning issues relevant
     to voluntary aid societies.




     E.A.Trew
     Co-ordinator
                                     l   M   M   .
            NATIONAL JOINT EMERGENCY
                 EXECUTIVE COMMITTEEL




Chairm an’s Office
9 Grosvenor Crescent            Telephone 01-235 5454
                   C JEEC    CO-ORDINATORS    S E M IN AR       1 9-21 J U L Y   1989



         SUBJECT                             PRESENTED           BY                     APPENDIX

Welcome                                   L ad y L i m e r i c k                          1

C iv il P r o t e c t i o n -
A National Viewpoint                      Mr.    J.    Bettridge                          2

The C a s u a l t y E v a c u a t i o n
C ha in                                   Lt.Col.          R.C.       Thayne              3

The NHS in W ar                           Mr.    J.    Ba rn es                           4-

Manning Requirements                      Lt.Col.          D.    Chapman                  5

The P ub l ic R ol e                      Supt.       J.    Rodway                        6

The A m b u l a n c e   Service           Mr.    B. J oh ns                               7

The    CEPO R o l e      •                Mr.    M .A . S i b s o n                       8

The S cope for CJEEC
in P e a c e t i m e                      D r .N .H .B .E llis                            9


E m e r g e n c y P l an s                Brig.       R.C.       Middleton               10

NJEEC/CJEEC          Interaction
& Summary                                 Lady Limerick                                  11



Discussion Periods                                                                      12

Delegates        Attending                                                              13


List of V i s i t i n g      Speakers                                                   14-
                                                                             122/43

                            EMERGENCY PLANNING COLLEGE

                          THE AMBULANCE SERVICE IN WAR


          (A Paper by A Hopkins, Assistant Chief Metropolitan Ambulance
          Officer, South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service)


INTRODUCTION

1.   The purpose of this paper is to state briefly the organisation and role of
the Ambulance Service in war or in a state of emergency which might lead to war.

DOTIES

2.   Curing any period of conventional war affecting the UK, the basic planning
assumption is that the country wculd function as normally as possible and that no
large scale re-organisation of the NHS would occur. However the NHS has a
commitment to receive and treat military casualties evacuated from Europe and
this task will create a need for early implementation of civil defence plans.
These envisage that, during a period of tension which might lead to 'war, Health
Authorities wculd invoke the "Emergency Clinical Policy" which wculd, as far as
possible, provide space for the care of casualties. This wculd primarily mean
the suspension of certain cold surgery and day care facilities and hospitals
accepting emergency cases only.

3.   The peacetime Ambulance Service will form the basis of the wartime service
under the control of the Chief Ambulance Officer who will aim to provide the best
possible service to the District Health Authorities. To meet this central aim,
it is recognised that it will be necessary to plan to utilise all central and
local ambulance training facilities to increase the numbers of trained volunteers
in the community.

4.   Plans will be kept simple, uncomplicated and make maximum use of existing
contingency arrangements, existing facilities, resources and staff. The basic
strategy will be:-

     a.   the rapid expansion of the service by pairing one experienced
     ambulanceman with one volunteer who had received some training;

     b.   to identify the sources for the provision of additional vehicles
     together with the necessary resources of fuel, oil etc;

     c.   where possible to redesignate all part-time ambulance staff to
     full-time duties;

     d.   to maintain close liaison with the Voluntary Aid Societies
     (British Red Cross, St John Ambulance or St Andrew's Ambulance
     Association in Scotland) in order to establish their potential to
     assist the Ambulance Service and to establish procedures for
     implementation of agreed plans, communications and control.

     e.   to expand the existing Ambulance Service ccnmunicatians system to
     supplement health service ccnnunicatians in war;

     f.   to ensure that planning takes account of the need to deploy
     Ambulance vehicles, staff and equipment in order to provide the best
     possible protection and to ensure an equitable spread of Ambulance
     resources throughout the County;



                                      1 of 3
                                                                                  «


     In addition, in the event of war:

     g.   trained ambulance staff may not always be best enployed on
     transport duties. Their skills may well be vital in providing
     leadership by practising ambulance aid and exercising their advanced
     training skills;

     h.   Ambulance fuel installations should ideally have capability to
     operate on a manual system;

     i.    in the event of nuclear attack the role of the ambulance service
     will be to support the casualty plan and if possible provide a
     coiraunication service.

5.   In order to reflect the change to an "Emergency Clinical Policy" the
Ambulance Service wculd need to adapt to changes, some of which are as follows:

    a.   non-emergency services such as out-patient clinics, day hospitals,
    elective admissions etc wculd be curtailed or cancelled in order to
    provide more immediate beds;

    b.   hospitals wculd concentrate on the provision of an emergency
    service only, to include where possible diagnostic and X-ray
    facilities;

    c.   the Ambulance Service would provide an "emergency only" service
    with surplus vehicles and staff diverted to other duties, such as the
    transfer of patients from primary to seoondary hospitals.

    d.   Emergency Medical Centres (EMC) wculd be prepared in the
    community, though not yet opened;

    e.   priority would be given to the discharge of patients whose
    retention was not medically or socially essential.

    f.   retained patients and staff might be re-located to provide better
    protection and to achieve a rationalisation of services;

    g.   in the light of prevailing circumstances NHS General Managers
    would decide which medical facilities, Casualty Hospitals and Emergency
    Medical Centres would respond to a given situation.



6. As a transition to war measure, emergency training programmes wculd be given
high priority. It would be for the Chief Ambulance officer to determine in
consultation with his colleagues in the County hew this would be achieved
locally. The main purpose of emergency training programmes wculd be to:-

     a.   brief all regular NHS Ambulance Service personnel on the wartime
     requirements;

     b.   assist the Ambulance Service to expand to meet its wartime role;

     c.   concentrate the expertise and training resources of the Ambulance
     Service in liaison with the VAS in the most effective way to train
     volunteers, particularly instructors, who would teach others.




                                         2 of 3
      iCATTONS

7. Accurate information is the vital pre-requisite to most decisions and
actions which would be taken in an emergency situation. It would be of the
utmost importance that General Managers and their liaison officers should be in a
position to offer sound and credible advice based on the best possible
information available. Canmmications therefore assume a top priority in the
Emergency Control Centres and to all operational locations.
8. As a result of the high dependence which the peacetime Ambulance Service
places upon reliable communications sytems, considerable experience and knowledge
has been built up in the use of many types of equipment. In an emergency the
Ambulance Service will play an important role in helping to preserve existing
communication channels and in adapting than to changing needs.
9.   In essence the systems of communications will fall mainly into the following
categories

    a. messenger services which may vary from pedestrian to bicycle or
    vehicle depending upon local conditions;
     b. telephone, making use of the Government Telephone Preference
     Scheme (GTPS);
    c. radio telephone, utilising redundant ambulance equipment
    to expand the existing system;
     d. miscellaneous eg local intercommunication or other available
     systems.




                                                             May 1988
                                                                APPX 1


County JEEC Co-ordinators Seminar, 19th July 1989 .




Welcome by Lady Limerick,   Chairman of National JEEC.



I would like to thank all of you who have made a special effort to come
at a busy time of the year to attend this the first national meeting of
County JEEC Co-ordinators, at which we will be updating everyone on the
Governments' approach to Civil Protection, medical planning in the event
of war and arrangements for national emergencies and major disasters in
peacetime.  Among the issues we wish to address are whether there is a
role for CJEEC in planning and training for peacetime emergencies and
whether there is a need for co-ordination of operational response from
Red Cross and St. John which County JEEC could perform but which would
require revision of the Terms of reference of both National and County
JEECs.

It may help the debate if with the help of view foils I give the
historical background to the designation Voluntary Aid Society and to
the formation in 1980 of the National and County Joint Emergency
Executive Committees.

The term "Voluntary Aid Society" derives from the Geneva Conventions
these are international treaties (to which states are party ie., signed
by governments) setting out the rules for the humane treatment of the
victims of war.   The idea stems from two main proposals put forward by
Henri Dunant, the founder of the Red Cross, in his book "A memory of
Solferino" in 1862.    The first of these was the creation in time of
peace, in every country, of private relief societies to help the wounded
in time of war.      The second was for an international agreement
recognising the inviolability of medical services and of the wounded.
Following the first Geneva Conference in 1863 , which gave birth to what
was later called the International Red Cross and Red Crescent movement,
the second proposal was implemented by the adoption of the first Geneva
Convention of 1864 .

Relief or National Red Cross Societies were formed in several countries,
the first in Belgium in 1865 . In Britain a National Aid Society was
formed in I87 O and subsequently in 1898 a central Red Cross Committee,
which included representatives of the St. John Ambulance Association
and Brigade formed in 1873 and 1877*     In 1905 the British Red Cross
Society was founded incorporating some of these earlier relief
societies, with a Royal charted being granted in 1908.

It was only when the first Geneva Convention was revised in 1906 that
the treaty expressly recognised Henri Dunant's first proposal and
formally extended to such Volunteer Aid Societies "if duly recognised
and authorised by then own Governments" the privileges and immunities
granted to medical personnel, buildings and material of the medical
services of the Armed Forces.

In 1929, the 1906 Geneva Convention for the Sick and Wounded was again
revised using for the first time the phrase Voluntary Aid Society, "with
a specific role in support of the medical services of the Armed Forces.
                                  -2-


A Second Geneva Convention of 1929 relative to the treatment of
Prisoners of War refers to Societies for the relief of prisoners of war,
a different function.  One organization, of course, may perform both of
these separate relief roles.

During the 1914-18 and 1939-45 world wars the British Red Cross Society
and the Order of St. John as two of the three Voluntary Aid Societies
recognised by the British government combined in the Joint War
Organisation. In peacetime the title of the Order of St. John comes
first, but in wartime the Red Cross Society has precedence because its
emblem is the only one recognised under the Geneva Conventions.
Britain's third VAS is St. Andrew's Ambulance Association in Scotland.

After the 2nd world war, three important events occurred.    In 1949, the
Geneva Conventions relating to the Sick and Wounded in the Field, at Sea
and Prisoners of War were revised and a fourth new Convention was added
giving protection to Civilians in enemy hands, such as in Occupied
Territories.   These were given effect where necessary in     British law
by the Geneva Conventions Act of 1957.    Several articles of the first
Geneva Convention of 1949 pertain to Voluntary Aid Societies, granting
their personnel the same legal status as permanent military medical
personnel provided the VAS is duly recognised by its government and
authorised to act as an auxiliary to the military medical service in
time of war, and that each State has notified to other States who are
parties to the First Geneva Convention         the names of recognised
Voluntary Aid Societies.   Only those VAS personnel who are employed on
the same duties as the personnel of the military medical service and who
are subject to military law are entitled to protection and to wear a
large Red Cross emblem. This Convention also permits National Red Cross
Societies, but not other VAS, to use a smaller size Red Cross emblem in
peacetime.   Voluntary Aid Societies are however private organisations
devoted to the care of all sick and wounded in time of war or armed
conflict, and are able to maintain their independent status.

A year previously, the 1948 International Red Cross Conference which is
attended by delegations from governments signatory to the Geneva
Conventions as well as by delegations from National Red Cross/Red
Crescent Societies and their federation called The League of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, adopted a resolution to safeguard the status of the Red Cross
emblem as defined in the Geneva Conventions and the identity and
impartiality of National Red Cross Societies. This resolution made it
impossible for a National Red Cross Society to delegate executive
authority over future Red Cross war work to a joint war organisation.

In the light of these changes which emphasised the paramount importance
in time of war of the impartiality and international status of the Red
Cross, the British Red Cross Society and The Order of St. John in 1951
reached a new agreement regarding co-operation in the event of a future
war.   This agreement states that the joint war time activities of the
Order and the Society shall be organised within the framework of the
British Red Cross Society and that legal authority shall be vested in
the Society. The active collaboration of the Order and participation of
St. John personnel was recognised as essential.    An appeal for funds
shall be made in the name of the Chairman of the Council of the British
■i                                     -3-


     Red Cross Society and the Grand Prior of the Order of St. John;      for
     this purpose,the emblem and name of the Order shall be used alongside
     the Red Cross emblem. In other words in future the combined work of the
     two bodies in wartime will be directed by a British Red Cross Society
     National War Executive consisting of representatives from b o t h
     organisations, the Chairman being a Red Cross Officer and the Vice-
     Chairman a St. John Officer. In the counties in England and Wales
     t h e r e will be British Red Cross Society County War Executives
     constituted in a similar way to the National War Executive.   Apart from
     the combined war work, there will be the normal work of the two bodies
     which they will continue to conduct independently, as in the last war.

     All Red Cross and St. John war work and continuing peacetime work in the
     Counties, whether carried on independently by the Society, the Order or
     the Association or the Brigade, or combined under the County War
     Executives will in wartime be financed by the National War Executive
     from the National Fund to which all money collected by the two Bodies
     from the National Appeal will be credited.

     In August 1980 the British government revitalised Civil Defence Planning
     which had been somewhat in abeyance since 1968.    Following a statement
     in the House of Commons by the Home Secretary in August 1980,
     emphasising the need for greater involvement of volunteers, discussions
     took place between St. John Ambulance, the British Red Cross Society,
     the Home Office, the Ministry of Defence and the Department of Health
     and Social Security from which it became clear there was a requirement
     for the two VAS to provide support to the medical services of the Armed
     Forces in the time of war and to the National Health Service in the
     event of a national emergency in peace or war.

     British Red Cross and St. John decided these commitments could best be
     handled through the establishment of Joint Emergency E x e c u t i ve
     Committees at National and County level.     This was in effect partial
     implementation of the still binding 1951 agreement as seen from the
     Terms of Reference of NJEEC "In pursuance of the 1951 Agreement between
     the British Red Cross and The Order of St. John regarding co-operation
     in the event of a war or in a period of tension likely to lead to war
     the Society and the Order have agreed to the establishment of a
     National Joint Emergency Executive Committee."

     Under its terms of Reference the scope of the NJEEC embraces (a) the
     establishment and development of Joint Emergency Executive Committees at
     County level in England and Wales; (b) planning against the possibility
     of a national emergency being declared in      either peace or war; (c)
     liaison with Government Departments; (d) planning a full War Executive
     if necessary     and (e) planning and establishing suitable parallel
     organisations in Scotland and Northern Ireland when appropriate.
     Arising from the last, I am glad to say, that in 1988 in Scotland the
     Scottish Central Council Branch of the British Red Cross Society
     together with St. Andrew's Ambulance Association have formed a Scottish
     Emergency Planning Group on which there is also a representation from
     the Medical Services of the Armed Forces and the Scottish Home and
     Health Department.

     The next three view foils set out the composition of the National JEEC
     with the Chairman, Chairman of the Council of the British Red Cross
     Society, Vice-Chairman, Chief Commander of St. John Ambulance, and three
                                  -4-


Senior members from each National Headquarters. Co-opted Members include
the WRVS and the Scottish Emergency Planning Group. The Secretariat is
composed of two Joint Secretaries: one for Logistics, currently Brig.
Middleton and one Medical, currently Sir Cameron Moffat and there is an
Assistant General Secretary, Col. Derek Chapman.     The next view foil
set out briefly the responsibilities of the National JEEC: Liaison with
Government Departments; Planning support to the Medical Services of The
Armed Forces, the National Health Service, the Emergency Services and
Local Authorities; Training planning and guidance; and Monitoring County
activities.

The next view foil gives the terms of reference for County JEEC. Thus
its Functions and Powers include (a) to carry out work delegated by the
National JEEC (b) to liaise with the Health Authority and Local
Authority on the planning of, and training for, the provision of
paramedical support in time of National Emergency, whether in peace or
war, (c) to foster the maximum degree of co-operation between BRCS and
St. John Ambulance Headquarters, units and members in planning and
training for the emergency role, (d) to submit regular reports to NJEEC
and keep the BRCS County Branch Committee and St. John Council informed
about all the work which it is carrying out.

The next view foil gives the composition of the County JEEC. This is
intended to be small in size comprising three members from each Society
at a County level to include Branch President or Deputy President of the
British Red Cross County Branch and the Commander or Commissioner from
St. John Ambulance.    It is accepted that the Chairman of County JEEC
will alternate between the British Red Cross and St. John Ambulance at
two year intervals. The membership includes the Co-ordinator, and Co­
opted Members suggested are the WRVS County Organiser, the Local
Authority Chief Emergency Planning Officer (CEPO)      and the Regional
Health Emergency Planning Officer (HEPO). It was also suggested that the
Emergency Services and Representatives of Military Medical Services
should be in attendance. The County JEEC Co-ordinators functions are set
out in the Notes for the Guidance of Members of County JEECs.
Responsibilities of County JEECs are to liaise with the Military
District Headquarters, Health Authorities, Local Authorities and other
Voluntary Organisations within the County, and arrange Training
appropriate to the role and locality.

The final development I would like to mention in this background history
is the Civil Protection Act 1986 which allows Civil Defence resources to
be used in the response to civil emergencies.   This is in line with the
all hazards approach to Emergency Planning which we shall be hearing
about from Mr. John Bettridge,       who is currently Principal of the
Emergency Planning College and also Home Office Co-ordinator of
Voluntary Effort; he is a co-opted member of National JEEC.

The all hazards approach poses several problems for the Voluntary Aid
Societies.   First there is a political disinclination on the part of
some Local Authorities to engage in any planning or funding of exercises
thought to be associated with preparations for war.     Thus some CJEEC
find it very difficult to obtain funding for exercises which have to be
described as Civil Defence in order to qualify for Home Office funds.
                                  -5-



The second difficulty is that the all hazards approach assumes that
there are common features in the planning required for wartime and
peacetime emergencies.    Although this is true, there are important
differences. In the case of the Voluntary Aid Societies for example our
first commitment in wartime is to support Medical Services of the Armed
Forces and the Health Authorities.      As this is stated in the 1985
Emergency Planning Guidelines to Local Authorities, other Emergency
Services have tended to ignore our services in peacetime emergencies. As
already mentioned, in wartime, the Red Cross and St. John have an
agreement to operate our war work jointly but such joint operation was
not envisaged to cover non-war work or peacetime activities.

Hence our need at this seminar to consider both the requirements being
made on the VAS by the Medical Services of the Armed Forces and the NHS
for war time planning and the implications for Red Cross and St. John
and St. Andrew's Ambulance Association both as VAS and as separate
organisations of the all hazards approach to Emergency Planning being
endorsed by the Government.
                                                        APPX 2


   CIVIL PROTECTION - AN UPDATE FROM A NATIONAL POINT OF VIEW
           (Address given by Mr J B Bettridge CBE, Principal
             Emergency Planning College, Easingwold, York)


    Mr Bettridge welcomed members to the College and said that
the College was delighted to host the Seminar.     He explained that
his talk was intended to update members on current developments
in peacetime and wartime emergency planning.     Speaking first

about planning for civil emergencies, Mr Bettridge reminded the
audience that, following recent tragedies such as the sinking of
the Herald of Free Enterprise at Zeebrugge, the Home Secretary
had ordered a wide ranging review of the arrangements for dealing
with civil emergencies.     The review had included the circulation
of consultation papers to all interested organisations and a
seminar to which representatives of organisations and bodies with
an operational role in connection with the response to disasters,
had been invited.     The chairmen of the VAS had attended this
seminar.



     The Home Secretary announced the findings of this review in
June of this year; his announcement included the following
decisions:


     a.      that the responsibility for responding to disasters is
     to remain at the local level - the idea of forming a
     national disaster squad had been ruled out.


     b.      it was acknowledged that better arrangements were
     needed to give national oversight to the development of co-

                                   1
                                                                      9
                                                                      »

    ordinated emergency planning and that more needs to be done
    to develop co-ordination of the various services at the
    local level.


    c.    to meet the needs described in 'b' above a Civil
    Emergencies Adviser is to be appointed who has oversight of
    the whole subject and who reports directly to the Home

    Secretary.     The Adviser is to have no operational role.   He
     (or she) will be expected to produce an annual report.


    d.    to support the work of the Adviser, the Civil Defence
    College is to be given a wider remit and will be expected to
    address questions of peacetime emergency planning
    irrespective of any wartime connection (the College's name
    was changed in June this year to "Emergency Planning
    College" in order to reflect this decision).


    e.    the Adviser's task will be "to consider matters of
    current concern in the field of civil emergency planning in

    peacetime with a view to helping those with operational

     responsibilities achieve the highest standards of co­

     ordination and compatibility between their contingency
     arrangements".



    Mr Bettridge pointed out that developing the wider role for
the College was an exciting challenge but it would take time for
the College's contribution in this area to be identified and also
for the College to develop appropriate expertise in this area.

                                  2
     Turning to wartime planning he spoke of recent changes which
had a bearing on civil defence.    He referred to a significant
change in the public perception of the risk of war following the
recent dramatic developments on the international scene.       He

quoted from recent opinion polls which indicate that most people
now believe that the world is a safer place than it was a few
years ago.    Although these developments may affect public support
for programmes which have a wartime planning element, Mr
Bettridge explained that the Home Secretary had recently made it
clear that civil defence programmes would continue for as long as
the risk of war remained and irrespective of whether or not this
risk was considered to be high or low.     He pointed to the
increased interest in many local authorities in the need to
improve planning for civil emergencies and said that many were
now successfully adopting the all hazards approach to emergency
planning.



     Turning to other developments in wartime emergency planning,

Mr Bettridge described the many reviews which were in hand on a
wide variety of subjects.     He went on to explain how the annual

budget of approximately £110M, for the country as a whole, was
spent.    He described the main elements in the programme and, in

particular, the work now in progressin local authorities - he
pointed out that the costs of the planning and training at local
authority level amounted to nearly one quarter of the total

budget.     He explained the encouraging progress which has been

made in preparing plans at local authority level under the

                                   3
                                                                    i

Planned Programme for Implementation of the 1983 Civil Defence
Regulations.   He said that, in future, this programme is to
concentrate on local exercises and on the validation of plans.


     In closing, Mr Bettridge acknowledged the extremely valuable

contribution which volunteers from many organisations - including
the VAS - made towards emergency planning as a whole.   He
stressed the importance of this contribution and said how much it
was appreciated.




                                 4
                                                        APPX3




           CJEEC CO-ORDINATORS CONFERENCE - 19 JUL 89




                  THE CASUALTY EVACUATION CHAIN




                       LT COL R C THAYNE RAMC
                         SO 1 MED - HQ UKLF




EASINGWOLD 20 JUL 89
INTRODUCTION



1. LADY LIMERICK, GENERAL SIR CAMERON MOFFAT,
LADIES AND GENTLEMAN GOOD MORNING. THANKYOU FOR
INVITING ME TO YOUR CONFERENCE AND ALLOWING ME THE

OPPORTUNITY TO DELIVER A SHORT PRESENTATION ON THE
PLANNED MEDICAL EVACUATION CHAIN, IN WAR, FOR

BOTH OUR HOME DEFENCE AND NATO ASSIGNED FORCES.


2. THE VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES HAVE TRADITIONALLY
PLAYED A MAJOR ROLE IN THE PROVISION OF MEDICAL

CARE AND WELFARE SUPPORT TO THE ARMED FORCES IN
TIMES OF CONFLICT. DURING THE LAST WAR THEY
PROVIDED THE VOLUNTARY AID DETACHMENTS,
PRINCIPALLY TO REINFORCE THE TERRITORIAL ARMY

MEDICAL UNITS AND THE MILITARY HOSPITAL RESERVE
WHO AGREED TO ENLIST IN THE ARMY MEDICAL SERVICES

ON MOBILISATION AND SERVE BOTH AT HOME AND
OVERSEAS. THESE 2 ORGANISATIONS ALONE PROVIDED

SOME 10,000 TRAINED MEDICAL, NURSING AND

ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF TO REINFORCE THE ARMY MEDICAL
SERVICE.


3. THE UNITED KINGDOM MAINTAINS A SMALL, ALL
REGULAR DEFENCE FORCE REINFORCED IN WAR BY

RESERVISTS AND THE TERRITORIAL ARMY. THERE ARE
,AND ALWAYS HAVE BEEN ,INSUFFICIENT FUNDS TO
PROVIDE A SEPARATE FULL MEDICAL SERVICE FOR THE
ARMED FORCES SUFFICIENT TO MEET THE DEMANDS OF
WAR. WE THEREFORE RELY ON THE NATIONAL HEALTH

SERVICE AND PARTICULARLY ON THE VAS TO PROVIDE

THE ADDITIONAL SUPPORT REQUIRED.




AIM



4. THE AIM OF MY PRESENTATION, THIS MORNING, IS
TO OUTLINE THE CURRENT PLANS FOR THE
EVACUATION,DISPERSAL AND TREATMENT OF SERVICE
CASUALTIES IN UK IN WAR.




SCOPE



5. MY PRESENTATION WILL BE IN 5 PARTS *


        A. PART ONE - MOBILISATION OF UK SERVICE
        HOSPITALS.


      B. PART 2 - EVACUATION OF CASUALTIES FROM
        SERVICE HOSPITALS IN BRITISH FORCES GERMANY

      ON TRANSITION TO WAR.


      C. PART 3 - THE RECEPTION AND DISPERSAL OF
      CASUALTIES EVACUATED FROM NATO THEATRES TO UK
      IN WAR.


      D. PART 4 - MEDICAL SUPPORT FOR MILITARY
      HOME DEFENCE FORCES.
     E.      PART 5 - HOSPITAL AND POST ACUTE CARE.
MOBILISATION OF THE UK SERVICE HOSPITALS

6. THE DEFENCE MEDICAL SERVICES CURRENTLY
MAINTAIN 8 HOSPITALS IN UK LOCATED AT

PORTSMOUTH,PLYMOUTH,   ALDERSHOT, WOOLWICH,

CATTERICK, WROUGHTON, HALTON AND ELY. ON
MOBILISATION OF THE REGULAR FORCES ALL THESE

HOSPITALS CLOSE, THEIR PATIENTS ARE TRANSFERRED
TO LOCAL NHS HOSPITALS AND THEIR MILITARY STAFF
MOVE TO HOSPITALS WITH NATO FORCES OVERSEAS.


7. WE WOULD EXPECT THAT ASSISTANCE WOULD BE

FORTHCOMING FROM THE RELEVANT VAS COUNTY BRANCHES
TO ASSIST IN MOVING SUCH PATIENTS AND IN THE

PROVISION OF WELFARE SUPPORT TO PATIENTS AND
THEIR FAMILIES.




THE EVACUATION OF PATIENTS FROM SERVICE HOSPITALS

IN BRITISH FORCES GERMANY


8. A SIMILAR EVACUATION OF SERVICE PATIENTS IS

ALSO NECESSARY IN GERMANY ON MOBILISATION AND IS

PLANNED TO COINCIDE WITH THE RETURN TO UK OF

SERVICE FAMILIES AND CIVILIANS. THE PLAN FOR SUCH
EVACUATION CARRIES THE ACRONYM " NEO" STANDING FOR
THE NON - COMBATANT EVACUATION ORGANISATION.


9. THE VAS HAVE ALREADY BEEN ASKED TO ASSIST WITH
THE WELFARE OF SERVICE FAMILIES EVACUATED TO UK.

WE WOULD ALSO FORESEE A NEED FOR ADDITIONAL

ASSISTANCE TO MOVE PATIENTS FROM UK ARRIVAL
AIRFIELDS TO RECEIVING NHS HOSPITALS AND FOR THE
WELFARE NEEDS OF SUCH PATIENTS AND THEIR
DEPENDANTS.
THE RECEPTION AND DISPERSAL OF CASUALTIES

EVACUATED FROM NATO THEATRES TO UK IN WAR


10. THERE ARE INSUFFICIENT MEDICAL FACILITIES TO

PROVIDE FOR THE COMPLETE TREATMENT OF EITHER UK OR
US CASUALTIES ASSIGNED TO NATO IF THE CURRENT
CASUALTY ESTIMATES FOR A FUTURE CONFLICT ARE

REALISED. PLANS HAVE BEEN PREPARED TO RETURN

CASUALTIES TO UK AFTER THEY HAVE RECEIVED INITIAL
TREATMENT OR SURGERY AND ONCE THEY ARE STABLE AND

FIT TO UNDERTAKE THE JOURNEY. ON ARRIVAL INTO UK
CASUALTIES ARE DISPERSED TO NHS OR US HOSPITALS
FOR FURTHER DEFINITIVE TREATMENT. A SIMILAR
PROCEDURE WAS ADOPTED DURING THE PREVIOUS TWO

WORLD WARS.


11. THE BASIC CONCEPTS OF THE PLAN ARE SIMPLE.

CASUALTIES WILL EITHER BE EVACUATED BY AIR, THE

PREFERRED OPTION,OR BY SEA. CONTINUOUS AIR
EVACUATION CANNOT BE GUARANTEED AND THEREFORE WE
RETAIN AN ABILITY TO EVACUATE BY SEA.
12.AIR EVACUATION. AT THE ARRIVAL AIRFIELDS

CASUALTIES WILL BE MET BY RAF AIRFIELD MEDICAL
RECEPTION TEAMS(AMRT) AND A SMALL NHS TEAM
INCLUDING AN AMBULANCE OFFICER. CASUALTIES WILL BE

TRANSFERRED INTO SERVICE AMBULANCE COACHES BY
MILITARY OR CIVILIAN STRETCHER BEARERS AND

DESPATCHED TO NHS HOSPITALS AS DIRECTED BY THE

AMBULANCE OFFICER. AIRCRAFT USED FOR THIS TASK

WILL BE PROVIDED FROM BOTH THE CIVIL AIR FLEET AND
THE RAF. WE ARE CURRENTLY UNABLE TO PROVIDE IN

FLIGHT MEDICAL ATTENDANTS FOR THESE AIRCRAFT AND
WOULD BE GRATEFUL FOR ADVICE ON WHETHER THE VAS
COULD TAKE ON THE TASK.(SLIDES)


13. SEA EVACUATION. SEA EVACUATION RELIES ON THE

USE OF RO-RO FERRIES THE BULK OF WHICH WILL

OPERATE BETWEEN CHANNEL PORTS. IT HAS RECENTLY

BEEN DECIDED THAT WHEN IT IS NECESSARY TO EVACUATE
BY SEA RECEPTION UNITS WILL MOVE TO PORTS FROM
AIREFIELDS. ON THE ARRIVAL OF FERRIES ANY

CASUALTIES REQUIRING IMMEDIATE CARE WILL BE
TRANSFERRED TO LOCAL HOSPITALS THE REMAINDER BEING

DISPERSED THROUGHOUT UK BY USE OF SERVICE

AMBULANCE TRAINS. THE NHS ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
RECEPTION OF CASUALTIES AT ARRIVAL RAILHEADS AND

THEIR TRANSFER TO NHS HOSPITALS.(SLIDES)


14. COMMAND AND CONTROL. THEY KEY AIM OF THE
COMMAND AND CONTROL OF THIS EVACUATION IS TO
ENSURE THAT THE CASUALTY LOAD IS DISPERSED AS
EVENLY AS POSSIBLE THROUGHOUT THE COUNTRY AND TO

AVOID LOCAL OVERCROWDING. CONTROL IS EXERCISED BY

THE MEDICAL EVACUATION CELL AT HQ UKLF AT
SALISBURY WHICH HAS REPRESENTATIVES FROM ALL 3
SERVICES, TOGETHER WITH DEPT OF HEALTH AND US
MEDICAL LIAISON OFFICERS. THE NHS REGIONS INFORM

ARMY DISTRICT HEADQUARTERS OF THE NUMBERS OF BEDS

AVAILABLE IN EACH NHS DISTRICT, THIS INFORMATION

TOGETHER WITH DETAILS OF RECEPTION

AIRFIELDS/RAILHEADS IS PASSED ON BY DISTRICT HQs
TO THE MEC. THE MEC DECIDE ON THE LOADING FOR EACH
DISTRICT FOR THE NEXT 24 HRS AND INFORM THE
DEFENCE OPERATIONAL MOVEMENT STAFF(DOMS) WHO
PROVIDE THE NECESSARY AIRCRAFT, SHIPS OR TRAINS
REQUIRED.


MEDICAL SUPPORT FOR MILITARY HOME DEFENCE FORCES


15.EXCEPT FOR THE FRONT LINE RAF STATIONS AND SOME

SHOREBASED RN ESTABLISHMENTS THE MAJORITY OF THE
DEFENCE MEDICAL SERVICES ASSETS ARE COMMITTED, IN
WAR TO THE SUPPORT OF OUR NATO FORCES OVERSEAS.

OUR MEDICAL PLAN FOR THE HOME BASE THEREFORE

RELIES HEAVILY, FOR INITIAL TREATMENT ON THE VAS,
AND, FOR HOSPITAL CARE, TOTALLY ON THE NHS.


16. SOME ARMY UNITS, MAINLY THE REGULAR AND

TERRITORIAL INFANTRY UNITS ,WILL HAVE THEIR OWN
INTEGRAL MEDICAL SUPPORT. THE REMAINDER WILL HAVE
NO IMMEDIATE SUPPORT AND WILL HAVE TO RELY FOR
SUCH, ON THE LOCAL NHS MEDICAL CENTRE AND WHERE

ESTABLISHED, LOCAL FIRST AID POSTS.


17. THE SERVICES WILL NOT OPERATE A SEPARATE
AMBULANCE SERVICE AND WILL RELY, TO A LARGE
EXTENT, ON THE NHS AMBULANCE SERVICE WHICH WILL,

OF COURSE, BE SUPPLEMENTED BY THE VAS.



18. ALL SERVICE CASUALTIES REQUIRING HOSPITAL
TREATMENT WILL EVACUATED TO NHS HOSPITALS. MINOR
SICK AND INJURED WILL BE CARED FOR IN SERVICE
MEDICAL RECEPTION STATIONS(MRS). THESE MRS WILL
BE MANNED BY CIVILIAN DOCTORS AND NURSES

CURRENTLY EMPLOYED BY THE SERVICES, REINFORCED ON

TTW BY VAS PERSONNEL. THE MRS WILL BE EQUIPPED TO

PROVIDE BASIC MEDICAL CARE FOR BETWEEN 25 AND 50
PATIENTS AND WILL BE LOCATED WITHIN CURRENT

SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.


HOSPITAL TREATMENT AND POST ACUTE CARE


19. THE NHS HOSPITALS WILL AIM, IN WAR, TO

PROVIDE THE NECESSARY ACUTE CARE ONLY AND TO
DISCHARGE PATIENTS TO THEIR HOMES FOR REST AND

RECUPERATIVE TREATMENT FROM THE COMMUNITY MEDICAL
SERVICE. THE AVERAGE LENGTH OF STAY IN HOSPITAL IS

EXPECTED TO BE 7 DAYS. ALTHOUGH SUCH A PROCEDURE

IS PRACTICAL FOR THE MAJORITY OF CIVILIAN CASES
IT CANNOT BE FOLLOWED FOR SERVICE CASUALTIES.
 20. IN ORDER TO PROVIDE FOR THE CARE OF SERVICE

 CASUALTIES, FOLLOWING ACUTE TREATMENT, A NUMBER OF
 POST ACUTE CARE CENTRES WILL BE ESTABLISHED IN

 EACH NHS DISTRICT. THESE PACCs CAN BE LIKENED TO
 THE AUXILIARY HOSPITALS SET UP BY THE VAS IN WORLD
 WAR 2. THEY WILL BE FORMED ON EXISTING NHS NON

 ACUTE FACILITIES, SCHOOLS, HOTELS OR EVEN STATELY
 HOMES AND PROVIDE BASIC NURSING CARE FOR

 CONVALESCING CASUALTIES. MEDICAL SUPERVISION WILL
 BE MAINTAINED BY THE NHS BY VISITS FROM

 CONSULTANTS AND LOCAL GPs. NURSING AND AUXILIARY
 STAFF WILL, WE HOPE, BE PROVIDED FROM BOTH THE NHS
 AND VAS.


£l#. THE REQUIREMENT, IN PREVIOUS PLANS, TO
 ESTABLISH 3,000 REHABILITATION BEDS IN EACH ARMY
 DISTRICT HAS BEEN SUPERSEDED BY THE PACC. IT IS
 NOW ENVISAGED THAT AMBULANT PATIENTS DISCHARGED

 FROM THE PACCS AND REQUIRING REHABILITATION WILL

 BE SENT TO TRAINING DEPOTS. EACH DEPOT WILL HAVE A
 SMALL REHABILITATION STAFF OF PHYSIOTHERAPISTS AND
 PHYSICAL TRAINING INSTRUCTORS UNDER THE DIRECTION
 OF A SPECIALIST MEDICAL OFFICER. SERVICEMEN
REQUIRING LENGTHY AND SPECIALIST REHABILITATIVE
TREATMENT WILL BE REFERRED TO THE NHS.
SUMMARY


22
m .   THAT THEN LADIES AND GENTLEMEN IS A RATHER     1

CONDENSED ACCOUNT OF CURRENT JOINT SERVICE MEDICAL   8
PLANS FOR THE UK BASE IN WAR. PLEASE APPRECIATED     |
THAT SUCH PLANS ARE FAR FROM COMPLETE AND WILL       |
REQUIRE MUCH MORE DISCUSSION AND VALIDATION BEFORE   |

THEY CAN BE CONFIRMED NATIONALLY. I DO HOPE THAT     1

MY PRESENTATION HAS REINFORCED IN YOUR MINDS THE     |
KEY ROLE OF THE VAS IN OUR PLANS AND THEREFORE       1

THE IMPORTANCE OF THE WORK OF THE COUNTY JOINT       \

EXECUTIVE EMERGENCY COMMITTEES IN THIS AREA AND      |
THE NEED FOR GOOD LIAISON, IN PEACETIME BETWEEN      |
THE CJEEC AND THE ARMY DISTRICT MEDICAL STAFF.LT     1
COL DEREK CHAPMAN NOW FOLLOWS TO DISCUSS THE         8

DETAILED MANNING REQUIREMENT FOR THE VAS WITHIN      1
OUR PLAN, YOU WILL HEAR MORE DETAILS ON THE NHS      |

AND THE ROLE OF THE ARMY DISTRICT MEDICAL STAFF      H
LATER THIS MORNING. IF THERE ARE ANY PRESSING        |

QUESTIONS I COULD TAKE THEM NOW, HOWEVER THERE       |
WILL BE A CHANCE FOR ME TO ANSWER ANY DETAILED       |
POINTS AT THE DISCUSSION PERIOD BEFORE LUNCH.




                                                     R C THAYNE

                                                     LT COL
                                                     SOI MED
                                                     OPS/PLANS
                                                               APPX   k



NHS PRESENTATION TO CJEEC CO-ORDINATORS SEMINAR 20 JULY 1989

By John Barnes, Regional Emergency Planning Officer
                SE and SW Thames RHAs


I have been requested to address two specific concepts in NHS Civil
Defence Planning; the Emergency Medical Centre (EMC) and the Post Acute
Care Centre (PACC).  I appreciate that this limitation in my
presentation may leave many questions unanswered.   However, I shall be
available until then end of the seminar and I hope that the opportunity
will arise, within the lecture theatre or outside, to respond to any
individual or corporate questions on NHS civil defence planning as a
whole.

In August 1988 the long awaited Department of Health revision of
guidance on NHS civil defence planning was published as Circular
HC(88)31.   In effect much of the content of the new Circular is the
same as the superseded Circular HDC(77)1, particularly in terms of the
action to be taken in transition to war to 'clear the decks' for the
reception of casualties.   The most significant change has been the
introduction of the Emergency Medical Centre concept with a single tier
for immediate care, in lieu of the 2 tier approach of First Aid Posts
and Casualty Collecting Centres.   There has been some disquiet at this
change in concept, with accusations that it deprives communities of
immediate care facilities.

I do not accept this accusation.    I suggest that the previous 2 tier
system was unrealistic and a fiction because there was no capability to
provide both first aid post (FAP) and casualty collecting centre (CCC)
facilities.   Thus there can be no accusations of deprivation if there
was no original means to implement the two tier concept.    I base these
comments on experience gained in the period 1982 to 1984 in detailed
planning, conducted in conjuction with District Health Authorities
(DHAs), local authorities and CJEECs, in 6.1 Home Defence Zone which
forms my area of responsibility.    This detailed work led to the
production of lists of designated FAPs and CCCs with in excess of 1200
identified FAPs and 505 CCCs within the four counties of 6.1 Zone.
Although it may be argued that there was never an intention that all
immediate care facilities should be established simultaneously, from
contact with communities it was evident that there was a perception and
expectation that FAPs would be established at the outset of transition
to war measures.     It will be readily apparent that any such demands
for widespread activation of FAPs would greatly exceed total staff and
equipment resources.

Leaving aside the numbers game, the two tier concept also introduced
concerns at both the FAP and CCC level.   The primary concern expressed
at the FAP level was in respect of role, in particular the triage
requirement.   However fundamental this process may be perceived to be
at FAP level, it is an unfamiliar role to the voluntary aid societies
(VAS); triage is difficult enough for the medical profession.     To a
lesser degree there was also some concern in what may be termed




                                      1
'leadership' roles and I emphasise that I mention this without any
aspect of criticism of VAS officers' capabilities.   With the large
numbers of FAPs required to achieve the appropriate coverage to each
local authority identified community, a huge co-ordination and staff
allocation problem would have arisen.   At the CCC level there was equal
concern expressed by General Practitioners.  In essence they presented
the fact that the CCC concept was no more than a renaming of group
practices with no additional resources provided to meet the role
required.   The single tier EMC concept overcomes the concerns expressed
at both levels by providing a professional nucleus, supported by VAS
trained personnel, to meet the staff intensive process of immediate
care.

The Circular HC(88)31 has established the EMC role as covering
resuscitation, triage, the simple surgical procedures of wound toilet
and splintage, and dressings, prior to casualty evacuation to hospital
or return to the community.   There is no prescription in all other
matters, such as the deployment pattern of EMCs, their size and
population catchments.   It is recognised that there are many factors,
not least geographical considerations, which will influence local
planning of designated EMCs.   I suggest that there can be no set
pattern nationwide or within home defence boundaries.        Within 6.1
Zone the population catchments of EMC range from in excess of 10,000 in
the more urban areas to 2,000 in rural areas.    If there is a mean it
is in the range of 6,000 population.   In geographical dispersion, the
map plot of the 602 designated EMCs within 6.1 Zone indicates that
realistic cover is provided to all communities.       A detailed
examination of map plots reveals that at worst a community will be 2.5
km (1.5 miles) from an EMC.   (Viewfoils of 6.1 Zone EMC map plot
shown.)

The general view is that the EMC concept for immediate care is only
applicable in the worst case nuclear scenario.   As a personal opinion I
consider that this is a squandering of the investment in emergency
planning.    I suggest that EMCs represent a valuable asset in any major
emergency situation.   In the process of detailed planning there can be
identification of EMC teams by the association of a GP group practice
and a VAS centre or division with each designated EMC.   In this way I
suggest that we achieve the means to activate an EMC team to respond to
any emergency situation with very broad geographical coverage.     The
designated EMC location, which is most pertinent to civil defence plans,
can serve as the team assembly point and I would highlight the fact that
a rendez vous away from the actual scene of a disaster is important to
minimise initial on-site chaos and confusion.   In essence the detailed
planning process, involving the listing of EMCs by location and team
composition, can provide a shorthand to simplify the activation of an
EMC and thus achieve a realistic response time.     I suggest that the
most significant advantage gained in viewing the EMC concept as
applicable throughout the spectrum of emergency situations is that it
establishes a single, all hazards interface between the NHS and VAS.
This unchanging interface opens the path to simplified and thus more
effective joint training.   The question may be asked 'Where can the EMC
concept feature in civil emergency planning?'.     As but one example,




                                      2
current planning associated with the Channel Tunnel incorporates
contingency arrangements to establish an EMC at the terminal location.
Such a facility would feature in the process of casualty evacuation,
which could be of a prolonged nature, given any accident in the tunnel
during the operational phase post-1993.    With pressures exerted on
NHS hospitals in the event of such an accident, the VAS could play a
vital role at the terminal EMC supporting the nucleus of professional
staff deployed as mobile medical teams.     If joint NHS - VAS plans can
achieve the necessary framework, associating centres and divisions with
specific EMCs, I suggest that we can achieve the response time required.

To complete   the response picture, I offer another personal view.    I
believe that it should be widely accepted that the CJEEC should form the
focal point   for contact and co-ordination to activate EMCs or other VAS
response in the 'all hazards' context.      The need for such a focal
point, which would be complementary to VAS in-house call-out
arrangements, is of particular significance in respect of the Emergency
Services initial contact and co-ordination activity throughout the
duration of an emergency.      I would suggest from the VAS viewpoint it
would also add a degree of simplification to contingency arrangements if
centres and divisions knew that the CJEEC would act as the focal point
for co-ordination within and between the societies.       The South East
and South West Thames Regional Health Authorities' Emergency Plans
published in 1987 have established that the CJEEC will be the focal
point for NHS emergency contact with the VAS.     Thus there has been
incorporation, in the data Part 2 of the plans, of the office and home
telephone numbers of the CJEEC Co-ordinator, with two British Red Cross
Society and two St John Ambulance nominated officers as the alternative
emergency contacts.

The second concept I have beeA asked to address is that of the Post
Acute Care Centre (PACC).     The requirement for such centres has been
identified in the joint NHS - military planning for the reception and
treatment of military casualties evacuated from the Contingent in the
event of conventional hostilities.    In brief, the NHS conducted a
detailed evaluation of bed availability, to meet forecast military
demands whilst maintaining emergency services for the civil community.
In essence it has been assessed that the NHS can meet commitments
provided that it can maintain short stay times in hospital.    You will
be aware that it is current NHS practice to adopt short stay times in
hospitals but this approach is based on capabilities to discharge
patients to home nursing.   In respect of military casualties their
homes may be at some distance from the hospital to which they are
admitted, thus the need arises for some form of post-acute nursing care
with appropriate facilities provided in close proximity to clutches of
NHS hospitals.

It must be stressed that the PACC concept is in embryo form.    At this
stage it is evident that we need to earmark accommodation, where beds
already exist, and address in some detail the total area of logistic
support.    It is envisaged that the NHS could provide visiting medical
cover for PACC but there would be dependence on the VAS for support in
the nursing role and for local authorities to meet 'hotel services' in




                                      3
accordance with their extended statutory responsibilities in war.    For
an indication of the numbers of PACC required it is necessary to picture
the pattern and grouping of acute type hospitals, NHS and private
sector, within any geographical area.   (Viewfoil of 6.1 Zone designated
casualty hospitals used as an example.)    In essence the PACC locations
are liable to be within established centres of population, where it is
to be hoped there will be adequate VAS membership strength to meet
staffing requirements.

The PACC concept has yet to be fully developed in joint NHS - military
planning and at this stage the requirement is to raise awareness of the
probable commitments.       Again as a personal view, I would draw
attention to the fact that the investment in PACC planning may have dual
benefit, in that PACC could be considered to have a two stage life.
Initially the PACC could serve to provide nursing care for military
casualties discharged from NHS hospitals.    In the event of any
escalation of hostilities, it has been recognised for a long time that
there would be a requirement for community nursing for radiation
casualties which could be in numbers far in excess of NHS resources.
I suggest that PACC could be viewed as meeting the requirement for
designated community nursing facilities in a second stage of existence
when the military post acute nursing role will have ceased.

The time allocated to this presentation has now expired but, as
mentioned at the beginning, I shall be willing to answer any questions
as and when opportunities arise throughout the remainder of the seminar.




                               000 OOO 000




                                       4
                                                                                            APPX    5


DETAILED MAHHIHG REQUIREMENTS

W i t h t h e c h a n g e s in p l a n n i n g a s s u m p t i o n s e . g . e v a c u a t i o n of
c a s u a l t i e s f r o m m a i n l a n d E u r o p e to be m a i n l y b y a i r i n s t e a d of
sea, a n d th e p r o p o s e d a l t e r a t i o n s to t h e c a s u a l t y t r e a t m e n t
p r o c e s s e.g. t h e i n t r o d u c t i o n of t h e P o s t A c u t e C a r e C e n t r e
( P A C C ) to p a r t i a l l y r e p l a c e t h e S e r v i c e s R e h a b i l i t a t i o n Unit
(SRU),           it    is    extremely          difficult      to      forecast         manpower
r e q u i r e m e n t s f o r t h e V A S r o l e s in war.

It is l i k e l y t h a t the A r m e d F o r c e s n e e d s w i l l be c o m p a r a t i v e l y
l o w b u t t h e N H S w i l l s w a l l o w u p a l l o f o u r m a n p o w e r t h a t is
a v a i l a b l e a n d r e q u i r e a n y t h i n g up to 3 0 , 0 0 0 mor e.

U n f o r t u n a t e l y u n t i l w e k n o w m o r e a b o u t t h e e s t a b l i s h m e n t of
va ri o us m i l i t a r y and NHS Units and i n d e e d h o w m a n y s u c h u n i t s
w i l l be r e q u i r e d w e c a n n o t a t t e m p t t o e s t i m a t e t h e n u m b e r s
requ i r e d n a t i o n a l l y mu c h less b r e a k these n u m b e r s down into
regions and counties.

It      is p o s s i b l e       that   the     Commanders          Medical   at D i s t r i c t
H e a d q u a r t e r s w i l l be a b l e to a d v i s e y o u on l o c a l c i r c u m s t a n c e s
a n d if y o u a r e no t a l r e a d y in c o n t a c t w i t h t h e s e C o m m a n d e r s y o u
s h o u l d o p e n c o n t a c t s as s o o n as p o s s i b l e .

As      s o o n as t h e F o r c e s a n d t h e N H S c a n g i v e t h e N J E E C s o m e
a s s u m p t i o n s u p o n w h i c h t o p l a n a n d e s t i m a t e t h e n u m b e r s of
m e m b e r s r e q u i r e d a c i r c u l a r w i l l be i s s u e d to a l l C JE E C s .
                                                                                                                                                                               APPX 6




i




       i "   '



       i
       i
                 v .tif c V f ;




                                      POINT®
                                               fS S ®  P“                                      O' "'-••*-‘X'.
                                                                                               .-r- • -^; *- ;
                                                    •M'f                                       ji**- -


                          *> --•-:%   ^   i   ?i V - ^ - ' > 4   s~su.tr *




                                              "■%V''V                        *T       -   '■    .,* X . - > - ^ \ t * '"   *^H' ■

                                                                                                                                                                                   ;3,;
                                                                                                                                                                                      5|4k^’.i
                                                                                                                                    a rt vtj*
                                                                                                                                                                   kooie.cgt           ^£it

                                                                                                                                                                       ^«b»*   —
rrw.

                                                                                                                                                                    P E ua^
                                                                                                                                                                                   V   ;
                                                                                  I       a 5 .----4 U * K                                      ■g g w q a v -■*




                                                                                                                                                                                           -—   — — ------------------— —
             POLICE RESPONSIBILITIES

 1. Initial mobilisation of the Police and other
     Emergency Services

 2. liaison with, and co-ordinating the efforts of,
     all responding services
 3. Provision of communications
 4. Establishing routes and traffic diversions.
 5. Custody and security of property
 6. Press liaison
 7. Establishing a casualty bureau
 8. Make provisions for Mortuary facilities
 9. Issue public warning and organising evacuation
10. Sealing off the area and controlling sightseers
11. Reports for Coroner and Enquiry Boards
                APPX 7




   MAJOR
 INCIDENTS




       THE
AMBULANCE SERVICE
      ROLE
BRADFORD FIRE

  CLAPHAM

HUNGERFORD

 KEGWORTH

KING'S CROSS

HILLSBOROUGH

 PIPER ALPHA

 ZEEBRUGGE
   MAJOR INCIDENT

NHS DEFINITION:


"A MAJOR INCIDENT IS ONE WHICH
BECAUSE OF THE NUMBER AND
SEVERITY OF LIVE CASUALTIES
REQUIRES SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS
BY THE HEALTH SERVICE".
        THE
AMBULANCE SERVICE
 IS THE FRONT LINE
NHS RESPONSE WITH
  SEVEN KEY ROLES
1
           SAVING LIFE

           TREATMENT
                               ]
           TRANSPORT
                               ]
     ALERTING & MOBILISATION
        OF NHS RESOURCES


      PROVISION OF ON-SITE
    MEDICAL COMMUNICATIONS

         ESTABLISHMENT OF
     INCIDENT CONTROL POINT,
    TRIAGE AREA & AMBULANCE
          LOADING POINTS

    CONTROL & CO-ORDINATION
       OF VOLUNTARY AID
        ORGANISATIONS
ORGANISATION OF AMBULANCE OPERATION A T MAJOR DISASTER

                         -DISASTER S IT E


                             FORWARD CONTROL
                                 POINTS     (   2.

                              CASUALTY
                             COLLECTING-
                               CENTRE

                                                                     FIRST
                                              INCIDENT               AIDE/RS
                                                 H.Q.

                               AM8ULANCE
                              LOADlNgPoiMT   yr^
                      0— Q-I-- —   ---------- L-G— 0




                                                            AMBULANCE
                                                          PACKING P O IN T
    AMBULANCES
       WITH
     CASUALTIES
                                                            AMBULANCES
                                                              |     AND    i
                                                            F I R S T AIDERS


                                                             f t


  EMERGENCY                                                  OUTER.
                                                           RENDEZVOUS
   Ho s p i t a l                                            P O IN T




 De s i g n a t e d
    HOSPITAL
                                                              o
                                                         L O C A L DlVlSlOMAL.
                                                         ASSEMBLY PO INTS
                                                         UP TO 3 0 MILES A W A Y
                                                                                      APPX 8


Presentation       to   County   JEEC Co-ordinators    Seminar at   the        Emergency

Planning College. Easinewold on 20 July 1989



Role and responsibilities of a County Emergency Planning Officer



A    Principal     Emergency Planning Officer is usually     responsible         to    his

Chief    Executive       for the preparation of plans for Civil Defence          in    the

event     of    hostilities and for Civil Emergencies in peacetime          under      the

umbrella title of Civil Protection.



This     is      epitomised by the All Hazards Approach in which          it    is    now

acknowledged       that many of the skills and resources needed for a            planned

response are common to both requirements.



The     nature of the risk and the consequences of the event can be              similar

whether        the chemical or biological hazard is caused by a deliberate             act

of war or terrorism or accidentally.         Only the reasons and, perhaps,            the

scale would be different.



Local Authorities - Powers and Duties

It is essential to distinguish between the two tiers of local               government

in     England    and Wales,     those of County and   District     (inc.      Boroughs)

Councils and the division of functions between them.



The County Council is responsible for the provision of education,                 social

services,         libraries andmaintaining highways (unless there is a District

Agency).         It is also theprincipal Civil Defence authority.           Equivalent

bodies    have succeeded the former Metropolitan Authorities (e.g.               London,

West    Midlands,       Greater Manchester and Merseyside) and      their      emergency

planning is carried out by Fire and Civil Defence Authorities.
District     Councils        are    responsible     for    housing     (and    the     homeless)

household     waste disposal,             environmental health and local          planning      and

development       controls         (a most important function        when     considering        the

location of premises handling hazardous substances).




So    far as the principal emergency services are concerned most                       policemen

and     fireman   belong to forces or brigades which are part                  of     their     own

local     authority     at    County       or equivalent     level     although      the    unique

constitutional        position       of    the police is     recognised.       The    Ambulance

Services is, of course, a Department of Health responsibility.




Elected    Members make policy decisions and it is advisable to                      keep       them

informed about the plans we commend to them.                 They represent a vital link

with the community and their support is to be preferred to disinterest or

opposition based upon lack of knowledge of the facts.



Local Authorities have a general responsibility to maintain the provision

of all the services usually available to the public at large under normal

conditions.

In emergency planning terms this requires us to:

1.    Prevent or reduce the probability of accidents.

2.    Mitigate the effects should a major incident take place.

3.    Restore to normal and rehabilitate as soon as possible.

These     principles         are    constant    whether     we   are    responding         to    the

consequences of civil emergency of the effects of hostile attack.




The Civil Defence Dimension

Our responsibilities here are quite specific and clearly defined.
      Legislation

      Civil Defence Act 1948

      Definition of Civil Defence

      Civil Defence (General Local Authority         Functions) Regs. 1983

      Civil Protection in Peacetime Act 1986

      Emphasis the principal role of County or equivalent body.

      Reg 4 - County

      Schedule 2 - Plans

      Reg 5 - District



      Guidance

      EPGLA

      Working Party Reports

      Home Office - Consultation and Circulars



      Action

      PPI - Progress

      PPI2 - 1989/91



Civil Emergencies - Powers and Duties

The    Local Government Act 1972,         S138 provides powers (not duties)            -   to

County      and     District    Councils so that where an      emergency     or     disaster

involving         destruction   of or danger to life and property          occurs    or    is

imminent or there is reasonable ground for expecting such an event                    which

may affect their area or inhabitants, the Council mav -




      (a)   incur     expenditure     ......   calculated to    avert,     alleviate       or

eradicate the effects or potential effects of the event: and

      (b)   make grants or loans in certain circumstances
Where     such action has been taken and expenditure incurred the                               Secretary

of State for the Environment must be notified.




In this brief selection of legislation touching arrangements in the event

of emergencies I must include the Health & Safety at Works etc. Act 1974,

the full purpose of which is to promote the health, safety and welfare of

people     in the workplace and control of dangerous substances and                               certain

emissions        in     to        the   atmosphere     (CIMAH Regs      1984)     and     the     Food   &

Environment Protection Act 1985. (quote post Chernobyl)




However,       there         is    very little help if we         are    looking        for     statutory

guidance       on the question of defining roles and relationships                            when    more

than one service or organisation is involved.



The     Home     Office           Consolidated     Circular     entitled    Emergency            Planning

Guidance       to     Local        Authorities       (EPGLA)    1985    SS22-24    recognises          and

describes well the respective roles of the principal emergency                                  services,

local health or other authorities, other essential services and voluntary

associations as well as how to obtain military assistance.



"Local authorities have a primary role to maintain their own services and

help people in distress;                     secondly, a general duty to co-ordinate what is

being done by the various organisations which are giving help.




The appropriate emergency services would direct operational activities at

the     scene.         In     general officers of the local             authority        would       obtain

additional            manpower          or     specialised     equipment;       provide         temporary

accommodation; meals and other forms of relief ....
The police would have an operational role in such matters as                     evacuation,

crowd and traffic control, public safety and advice and facilitating the

activities    of other services.         Consultation with the police will be               an

important aspect of planning by local authorities."



Phases in a Planned Response




The obligations to prevent mitigate and restore coincide with the                      phases

of any major disaster as follows:-




1.   Before - Prevention

       (i) Planning and developmental controls

      (ii) Consultation and liaison with site and transport operators

     (iii) Preparing, maintaining and exercising emergency plans




2.   Response - Mitigation of the effects at the time

       (i) early       alerting    to assist mobilisation             and   co-ordination    of

             support     by other essential services,               military assistance     and

             contribution from voluntary associations.

      (ii) close support for the emergency services at the scene as

             required     eg.     Resources     to    assist        direction/diversion      of

             traffic.

     (iii) provision       of care and welfare for those affected               eg.    through

             Reception     and    Rest   Centres,         liaison    with   Police    Casualty

             Bureau.




3.   After - Restore and Rehabilitate

       (i) Short       and long-term measures including rehousing - drying                  out

             premises/stock,        clearance        of   roads,       repair/demolition     of

             property.
        (ii) Counselling and other social support.



The Planned Response towards achieving these objectives.



Before embarking upon the task of planning a response to major                  accidents

we need to ask questions such as:-



What is the purpose of the plan?

Who is it for?

When will it be activated?

How will it be implemented?

The answers will help us to determine whether it is to be an 'on-site; or

an     'off-site'      plan or both andwhether it will be in          generic   form      or

specific to the site or event.            Whatever the answers -there are factors

common to each.



Many    different       interests   may be reflected        in   the need     for   making

contingency      plans and will,      quite properly,      be primarily concerned         to

meet their own responsibilities and requirements.



However,       there    is the very real danger that such        planning     could      take

place     in    isolation with      the   result thatthe    overall    plan         is   not

integrated but merely a collection of individual interpretations of their

respective roles.          Under those circumstances effective co-ordination               at

the time of need is virtually impossible.



One Plan?

The combined approach offers the preferred course to achieve the                    concept

of     "one    plan", that plan having component parts which can              respond      in

accordance with a developing or changing situation.                It is a plan where
the roles and relationships have been discussed and where interfaces have

been identified.




Only through consultation and liaison between all participants can       there

be   better understanding of the whole picture - rather like   putting     the

last piece in a jigsaw puzzle.    Co-ordination at the scene of the      major

disaster   can only be achieved through writing it into the plan from      the

outset.
                                                                                                       APPX 9

T h e VAS h a v e no d e f i n i t i v e r o l e in p e a c e time.            The Home Office
v i e w is t h a t t h e S t a t u t o r y S e r v i c e s c an cope.         We k n o w t h a t we
h a v e c o n s i d e r a b l e e x p e r t i s e to o f f e r a n d we w i s h to discuss
w h e t h e r we s h o u l d p r e s e n t a c o m m o n f r o n t in t h i s are a.

L a t e l a s t y e a r a S e m i n a r t o o k p l a c e here, o r g a n i s e d b y t he H o m e
Office,           to r e v i e w t he a r r a n g e m e n t s f o r d e a l i n g w i t h C i v i l
E m e r g e n c i e s in t he U K in p e a c e time.            Both Societies were asked
fo r t h e i r v i e w s in w r i t i n g , a n d b o t h L a d y L i m e r i c k a n d G e n e r a l
L e u c h a r s , th e t h e n C h i e f C o m m a n d e r SJA, a t t e n d e d t h e S e m i n a r .

I do n o t i n t e n d to go i n t o d e t a i l of ou r v i e w s t h a t we g a v e to
the Home              Office.            S u f f i c e it t o s a y, w e s a i d t h a t w e h a d
c o n s i d e r a b l e e x p e r t i s e r e a d i l y a v a i l a b l e a n d a s k e d t h a t w e be
i n v o l v e d in a l l p l a n n i n g at C o u n t y L e v e l f o r s u c h e m e r g e n c i e s .
We s u g g e s t e d t h a t it s h o u l d be s t a t u t o r y to i n v o l v e t he V A S a n d
t h a t a r e p r e s e n t a t i v e o f t h e V A S s h o u l d b e i n c l u d e d in a l l
C o m m i t t e e s a b o v e C o u n t y l e v e l i n v o l v e d in th e p l a n n i n g f o r
emergencies.                M o n e y w o u l d of c o u r s e be r e q u i r e d f or t r a i n i n g ,
travel e t c .

As a r e s u l t of t hi s S e m i n a r , I w o u l d l i k e to r e a d to y o u               certain
p a r a g r a p h s f r o m the R e v i e w of t he S e m i n a r a s p u b l i s h e d          by the
Home Office.              I quote:-

1.      CONCLUSIONS        AT T H E S E M I N A R

        a)      T h e o p e r a t i o n a l r e s p o n s e to a d i s a s t e r s h o u l d r e m a i n at
                the       local         level;         there        was        no    support    for      an
                i n t e r v e n t i o n i s t " n a t i o n a l d i s a s t e r s q ua d" ;

        b)      more        c o u l d be d o n e      to     encourage            and develop co­
                o r d i n a t i o n at l o c a l l e v e l   b e t w e e n th e v a r i o u s s e r v i c e s
                and a u t h o r i t i e s involved,          e s p e c i a l l y in t e r m s of j o i n t
                planning;

        c)      a l t h o u g h t h e c a s e f o r l e g i s l a t i o n i m p o s i n g a d u t y on
                l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s to p l a n f o r p e a c e t i m e d i s a s t e r s w a s
                s t r o n g l y a r g u e d by a n u m b e r of the l o c a l au t ho r i t y
                r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s p r e s e n t , th e p r e v a i l i n g v i e w w a s t h a t
                on b a l a n c e          there was           no i m m e d i a t e need for such
                l e g i s l a t i o n a n d t he g e n e r a l v i e w w a s t h a t t h e r e w a s
                r o o m f o r i m p r o v e m e n t s in c o - o r d i n a t e d l o c a l p l a n n i n g
                w h i c h s h o u l d be e x p l o r e d f u l l y b e f o r e r e a c h i n g a v i e w
                o n t he n e e d f o r l e g i s l a t i o n ;

        d)     in t e r m s o f c e n t r a l g o v e r n m e n t c o - o r d i n a t i o n t h e " l e a d
               D e p a r t m e n t " c o n c e p t r e m a i n e d v a l i d a l t h o u g h it was not
               w e l l u n d e r s t o o d o u t s i d e G o v e r n m e n t a n d s h o u l d be m o r e
               clea r l y explained;

       e)      t h e r e w a s c o n s i d e r a b l e s u p p o r t f o r ( a n d no d i s s e n t
               f ro m) p r o p o s i t i o n s t h a t a r r a n g e m e n t s to g i v e a n a t i o n a l
               o v e r s i g h t of t h e p r o g r e s s of c o - o r d i n a t e d p l a n n i n g
               could          lead     to     improvements                in o u r    response          to
               emergencies.
2.   CONCLUSIONS OF THE REVIEW

     As a r e s u l t of th e v i e w s e x p r e s s e d at t h e S e m i n a r ,           the    Home
     S e c r e t a r y r e a c h e d th e f o l l o w i n g c o n c l u s i o n s :-

     a)     T h e b a s i s o f t h e r e s p o n s e to p a r t i c u l a r d i s a s t e r s
            s h o u l d r e m a i n at the l o c a l l evel:                   it is h e r e t h a t
            expertise                and    knowledge           exists,          that     the  best
            i n f o r m a t i o n is a v a i l a b l e , a n d it is at t hi s l e v e l t h a t
            co-ordination                   between          the va r i o u s       agencies     or
            individuals inv o l v e d can p r o v i d e the m ost e f f e c t i v e
            response.                 There      has      been      no      support       from  the
            p r a c t i t i o n e r s f o r a " n a t i o n a l d i s a s t e r sq uad ".

     b)     Although              some local author i t y representatives had
            a r g u e d f o r a s t a t u t o r y d u t y to p l a n f o r p e a c e t i m e
            e m e r g e n c i e s , t h e H o m e S e c r e t a r y is n o t c o n v i n c e d of the
            n e e d f o r it at p r e s e n t .

     c)     A c l e a r n e e d has b e e n i d e n t i f i e d f o r n e w a r r a n g e m e n t s
            to g i v e n a t i o n a l o v e r s i g h t to t h e d e v e l o p m e n t o f C o ­
            o r d i n a t e d e m e r g e n c y p l a n n i n g , a n d to a d d r e s s s p e c i f i c
            practical              issues          raised        by    recent        disasters.
            A d d i t i o n a l l y m o r e n e e d s t o b e d o n e to e n c o u r a g e a n d
            d e v e l o p c o - o r d i n a t i o n b e t w e e n t he v a r i o u s s e r v i c e s a t
            th e l o c a l le vel .

     d)     C o - o r d i n a t i o n of t he c e n t r a l G o v e r n m e n t r e s p o n s e s can
            most e f f e c t i v e l y be c a r r i e d          out by the the le a d
            D e p a r t m e n t , s u p po rte d where n e c e s s a r y by a r r a n ge men ts
            for c o l l e c t i v e d i s c u s s i o n o r g a n i s e d u n d e r        Cabinet
            O f f i c e a u s p i c e s in th e n o r m a l way.            Bu t th e l i n k a g e s
            b e t w e e n t h is m a c h i n e r y , t he v a r i o u s i n s p e c t o r a t e s a n d
            the o p e r a t i o n a l        emergency        services          are not well
            u n d e r s t o o d a n d n e e d to be m o r e c l e a r l y e x p l a i n e d .

     e)     To m e e t t h e s e n e e d s the H o m e S e c r e t a r y ha s d e c i d e d to
            app oin t a Civil E me rge n c i e s Ad viser, to w o r k c l o s e l y
            w i t h s e n i o r r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s o f a l l th e g r o u p s w h i c h
            h a v e o p e r a t i o n a l or a d m i n i s t r a t i v e r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s in
            t h i s f ie l d .      In a d d i t i o n t h e r e w i l l be a n e n h a n c e d r o le
            for the Civil De f e n c e College                          (to be r e n a m e d t h e
            Emergency Planning College).

3•   CIVIL EMERGENCIES            ADVISER

     a)     T h e C i v i l E m e r g e n c i e s A d v i s e r w i l l be c h a r g e d w i t h the
            o v e r s i g h t of t h e w h o l e a r e a a n d w i l l be r e p o r t i n g
            d i r e c t l y to th e H o m e S e c r e t a r y .       He w i l l d r a w t o g e t h e r
            the w i d e r a n g e of a d m i n i s t r a t i v e ,         operational and
            i n s p e c t o r a t e interests involved with major disasters,
            and encourage and promote c o - o r d i n a t e d p l a n n i n g b o t h
            locally and centrally.

     b)     T h e A d v i s e r w i l l n o t be e m p o w e r e d to o v e r r i d e e x i s t i n g
            s t a t u t o r y or o t h e r f o r m a l r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s , but will
            e x p l o r e r e l e v a n t i s s u e s w i t h a l l t h o s e c o n c e r n e d , to
            e s t a b l i s h the m o s t e f f e c t i v e w a y of r e s o l v i n g p r o b l e m s .
            His p a r t i c u l a r c o n c e r n s w i l l be wi th:
     (1)     th e d e v e l o p m e n t a n d d i s s e m i n a t i o n of g o o d p r a c t i c e
             and i n f o r mation,          in p a r t i c u l a r a b o u t l o c a l c o ­
             ordination .

     (2)     ensuring   that the l e s s o n s of r e c e n t                       and     past
             experience are learnt and applied.

     (3)     assistance         with     exercises        and    training;

     (4)     liaison with all                  inspectorates             concerned          with
             p u b l i c s af ety ;

     (5)     liaison across central Government Departments,
             local government,  the e m e r g e n c y services, the
             voluntary   bodies  and   others        with  a direct
             interest;

     (6)      development    of  technical    arrangements                                      in
              conjunction with users and suppliers.

OVERALL    STRUCTURE

a)   U n d e r the p r o p o s e d new a r r a n g e m e n t s this country's
     r e s p o n s e to m a j o r e m e r g e n c i e s w i l l c o n t i n u e to h a v e two
     main elements,              each with distinct responsibilities.
     T h e s e are:

              The emergency services,                       local authorities and
              o t h e r s w i t h o p e r a t i o n a l r e s p o n s i b i l i t i e s at l o c a l
              le ve l.

             The  "lead"  Government   department,    supported
             through Cabinet Office machinery where necessary.

b)   T h e e m e r g e n c y s e r v i c e s a n d o t h e r s at th e s c e ne of a
     d i s a s t e r a r e r e s p o n s i b l e f o r d e a l i n g w i t h th e i m m e d i a t e
     e f f e c t s , d e c i d i n g on t h e n e e d fo r a d d i t i o n a l r e s o u r c e s
     a n d a s k i n g f o r them, a n d k e e p i n g r e l e v a n t G o v e r n m e n t
     d e p a r t m e n t s a n d t h e p u b l i c in t h e s u r r o u n d i n g a r e a
     i n f o r m e d a b o u t p r o g r e s s in d e a l i n g w i t h th e e f f e c t s of
     the e m e r g e n c y and any m e a s u r e n e c e s s a r y for public
     safety.

c)   T h e " l e a d " G o v e r n m e n t D e p a r t m e n t is, w h e n e v e r p o s s i b l e ,
     i d e n t i f i e d in a d v a n c e a n d is r e s p o n s i b l e             for c o ­
     o r d i n a t i n g both the n e c e s s a r y central c o n t i n g e n c y
     p l a n n i n g a n d t h e i m p l e m e n t a t i o n of t h e p l a n s h o u l d a
     d i s a s t e r oc cu r .

d)   T h e C a b i n e t O f f i c e is r e s p o n s i b l e f o r s u p p o r t i n g the
     Cabinet and Cabinet C o mmi tt ee s                     in t h e    conduct         of
     Government business.
ST JOHN AMBULANCE and BRITISH RED CROSS


                     BLANKSHIRE


                 EMERGENCY PLAN
                                                  \




DISTRIBUTION LIST
  ISSUED TO           NUMBER OF PLANS ISSUED   SERIAL NUMBERS


ST JOHN DIVISIONS


 RED CROSS CENTRES


 NATIONAL JEEC
          RECORD OF AMENDMENTS




num ber       DATE ISSUED        AMENDED BY
                                     \
                                          SECTION t


                    INTRODUCTION



ONE DEFINITION OF A MAJOR   ACCIDENT   OR EMERGENCY IS ;
                                        SECTION 2

                    *




               TYPES OF DISASTERS


                                               \



EVERY DISASTER IS BY DEFINITION DIFFERENT


       AND NO EMERGENCY PLAN SHOULD EXPECT TO



                TOTALLY COMPREHENSIVE __
                                           SECTION 3



The British Red Cross and St John Ambulance (Blankshire)
offer the following services in an emergency situation :


 SERVICES UNDFRTAKFM :

                               First Aid

                               Nursing

                              Welfare
        STAGES OF AN EMERGENCY


Stage 1 An Alert


Stage 2 Limited Commitment



Stage 3 Major Emergency
                                       SECTION 5


         COUNTY CALL OUT PROCEDURE


 Call out for Blankshlre Red Cross/St John Ambulance
                                              \


is normally made b y .....

Contact telephone numbers are :


RAYNET
Contact telephone numbers are :

Additional Telecommunications Facilities :
               CALL OUT ACTION LIST

SECTION 6

             General Advice
                                        \




                RESPONSIBILITIES :
SECTION 7

            COUNTY HEADQUARTERS
SECTION 8

            LIAISON OFFICER
SECTION 9

            CENTRE LEADER/DIVISIONAL OFFICER
                                      SECTION 10



              OPERATIONS LOG


  DATE        KEEPERS NAME   —            SHEET NUMBER
                                               \




T ME   FROM    EVENT             ACTION            INITIALS
                                SECTION 11


EQUIPMENT REQUIRED BY INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS


 Identification Card
 Call out card
  Hand torch
  Paper and pen
 Scissors
 Small first aid kit
SECTION 12
SECTION 13
                     APPENDIX




SETTING UP and STAFFING


  A FIRST AID POST
                     APPENDIX B




DISASTER EQUIPMENT
a p p e n d ix c
                     APPENDIX D




USEFUL TELEPHONE NUMBERS
                          APPENDIX E




AVAILABLE TRANSPORT BY LOCATION
                                                                         APPX   11



NJEEC/CJEEC INTER-ACTION by The Chairman of National JEEC
Lady Limerick.




One of the valuable outcomes of the establishment of the National and
County JEEC structure has been the improved relationship between Red
Cross and St. John through co-operation in planning and joint exercise.
An excellent raport exists now at National and most County levels.

In my welcoming remarks I reviewed the historical background to the
establishment of National JEEC and its current Terms of Reference which
covers co-operation between Red Cross and St. John in the event of war
or the declaration of National Emergency.   These Terms of Reference and
the 1951 Agreement recognise however that in all other activities the
two organisations should continue to operate independently.

Mr. John Bettridge in his talk on Civil Protection, an up-date from a
National viewpoint, made three very important points. First, that Civil
Defence remains a basic duty. Second, that the all hazards approach to
planning for peacetime and wartime emergencies is being endorsed by the
Government, and adopted — by --the ■Military -Medical Atrtkerities and many
Local Authorities. It is relevant too that the newly named Emergency
Planning College now has a wider role in connection with civil
emergencies.   This all hazards approach has been strengthened by two
trends: Local Authorities increased interest in planning for Civil
Emergencies and the changed public perception of the risk of war which
is considered to be much reduced in the U.K. Third, that responsibility
for planning, exercising and response to peacetime emergency remains
primarily at County and District levels.


In our first session the Seminar focused on plans which involve
Voluntary Aid Societies in the event of war.    Col. Thayne outlined the
stages of The Casualty Evacuation Plan and reminded us that the manpower
requirement of the Voluntary Aid Societies may be much greater than
hitherto anticipated.    He indicated that the plans are currently
undergoing major revision but showed that there was a role for the
Voluntary Aid Societies in virtually every stage of the new plan.    The
National JEEC will, of course, inform County JEECs when the details of
the new plans and requirements are defined.

Mr. Barnes, Health Emergency Planning Officer, outlined the role of the
National Health Service in war time plans.   He described in some detail
the concept of the Emergency Medical Centre.      A First Aid Post may
either precede the establishment of such a Centre or be incorporated
within it. He talked about the Post Acute Care Centres which will rely
largely upon Voluntary Aid Societies for the nursing support, although
they will be managed by the National Health Service.    In this case VAS
personnel will be accountable to National Health Service managers when
caring for servicemen patients.       This is a new arrangement the
implications of which require further consideration by the National JEEC
with the Department of Health and the Medical Services of the Armed
Forces.   We have, however, been assured that the remuneration for VAS
personnel in war time when serving in any capacity of caring for the
wounded has been agreed with the Ministry of Defence.
Col. John Tinsley spoke next outlining the War Role of the Commanders
Medical and emphasised that exercises should involve the Medical
Services of the Military, the National Health Service Hospital staff,
members of Voluntary Aid Societies and the Ambulance Service.    He also
indicated that the Medical Services of the Armed Forces are planning
readiness for greater involvement in major peacetime emergencies in line
with the all hazards approach.

Sir Cameron Moffat as Joint Secretary Medical of National JEEC presented
the arguments for having JEEC representation at a regional level, to
coincide with Commander Medical Districts. He indicated that the
Commander Medical when establishing a formal Medical Committee in each
Military Medical District would like to deal with one Representative of
County JEECs within that District. This suggestion that there should be
one representative of County JEECs in each District on the District
Medical Committee met with this seminars' approval.                       Such regional
representation was always envisaged and is mentioned in the Notes for
Guidance of members of County JEECs. "At the request of the Home Office
a County JEEC Co-ordinator in each Civil Defence Region may be nominated
by the National JEEC to act as Regional Representative Co-ordinator". It
has been suggested at this seminar that the Representative should be the
County Co-ordinator located nearest to the Headquarters of the Military
District, although it has been pointed out that this co-ordinator may
not always be the most suitable person. There are therefore two options
for us to consider: first whether you would like National JEEC to
nominate the Regional Representative after consulting by post all County
JEECs in the Military District. The second option is whether you would
rather   C o u n t y J E E C C o - o r d i n a t o r s me t to e l e ct the R e g i o n a l
representative.          I think that the consensus was that National JEEC
should consult by post in the first instance.

The First Aid Video has been welcomed and was considered very useful for
training Red Cross and St. John members and possibly also for showing
to wider audiences such as Community nurses and    General Practitioners
at Post Graduate Medical Centre meetings.    The need to have a training
package for new recruits who would apply to the VAS      in the event or
threat of war, is recognised and it will be prepared.

Our second session focussed on major peacetime emergencies. We had
very good accounts of the planned response to major incidents of the
Police,    F i r e Service,  A m b u l a n c e S e r v i c e , W R V S a n d of the
responsibilities of the County Emergency Planning Officer. Two important
points were recognised in this session.           The first the urgent need to
agree a single casualty label system throughout the U.K.; there is some
argument for adopting a system which is used throughout NATO countries
as well. The second was recognition that in major peacetime emergencies
there is often a need for a local first aid post to treat casualties
with minor injuries who may include the rescuers injured in the course
of their rescue work.

Discussion on the potential role of County JEECs in planning and
exercising for peacetime emergencies was opened by Dr. Ellis, Vice-
Chairman of the National JEEC.    He referred to the points made by Mr.
Bettridge about the Government's response to the Home Office review of
Civil Emergency Planning, reminding us that planning and exercising
would remain primarily at the local level but the system of the lead
Department at Central Government remains.    Two new developments are the
decision to appoint a Civil Emergencies Adviser to the Home Office and
the widening of the role of the College to include Emergency Planning
for peacetime as well as for wartime.     Dr. Ellis also referred to the
Red Cross and St. John response to the Home Office 1988 Consultative
Document about Civil Emergencies.   Perhaps I should make it clear that
the British Red Cross and St. John Ambulance responded to this
Consultative Document as separate organisations because the Document was
concerned with Civil Emergencies which was outside the Terms of
Reference at National JEEC and furthermore there was no time for Red
Cross and St. John to meet as the National JEEC since the replies had to
reach the Home Office within five weeks in July/August.      I would like
to reassure Members however that there is extraordinary consistency in
the views of Red Cross and St. John within National JEEC on all issues
we have dealt with so far.        Excellent relationships have been
established between the two organisations at a national level and I have
every confidence that this will continue.

Mrs. Elaine Cook, as County JEEC Co-ordinator for Berkshire, made an
eloquent case for County JEECs     planning and exercising for major
peacetime emergencies as well as for war.   She indicated that the Local
Authorities, Emergency Services and particularly the Health Authority
had in Berkshire proved much more receptive to -an approach made in the
name of both St. John and Red Cross rather than by either organisation
separately.  There appeared to be general agreement that in most County
JEECs this is what is happening in practice and that it is sensible to
plan and exercise together for peacetime emergencies in view of the all
hazards approach being endorsed by the Government and all other
authorities, while retaining operational independence.       However, we
should remind ourselves of the terms of the 1951 Agreement between Red
Cross and St. John which declared    that outside their war work the two
organisations should retain autonomy of action.

This seminar has been a most valuable opportunity to exchange views and
experiences;    useful suggestions and recommendations have been put
forward.   If in the light of these any change in the Terms of Reference
of National and County JEEC is needed, both Red Cross and St. John would
have to consult their own governing councils and Home Office approval
would have to be sought.

I believe a consensus    has emerged that the National and County JEECs
may include planning and exercising for Civil Emergencies without
neglecting their primary function of planning and training for war.
Within each County JEEC, however, St. John & Red Cross will wish to
discuss and make appropriate arrangements with the Emergency Services
and CEPO for response and call out by the Emergency Services. While the
two organisations will have their own member call out system, the CEPO
or Emergency Services may wish to be able to initiate this in some
counties via the County JEEC Co-ordinator as well as through each St.
John and Red Cross county organisation headquarters.

C o - o p e r a t i o n does not preclude either organisation from making
arrangements with other services.          Delivery of service will be in
single uniform teams for peacetime emergencies whereas in exercises and
wartime joint Red Cross/ St. John teams should operate. Brig. Middleton
presented an excellent County JEEC call out plan and guide to St. John
and Red Cross services. This was compiled by Berkshire County JEEC and
was an extremely good example of how a County JEEC can make 'the
Statutory Services better aware of the quality and nature of the
was an extremely good example of how a County JEEC can make the
Statutory Services better aware of the quality and nature of the
services of both the Red Cross and St. John.

Finally the Seminar approved the suggestion that there should be a
meeting of County JEEC Chairmen next year with a similar Agenda to this
Seminar.

In conclusion I would like to read a relevant extract from the
Task of the Civil Emergencies Adviser:   "helping those with operational
responsibility achieve the highest standard of coordination and
compatibility between their contingency arrangements".     National and
County JEEC can lead to similar high standards of co-operation between
St. John and Red Cross.

I would like to thank all the speakers and all County JEEC Co­
ordinators for making this Seminar such a useful and constructive
occasion for exchange of information, debate and recommendation.
                                                                                                    APPX 12




SUBJECTSI QUESTIONS RAISED DURING DISCUSSION SESSIONS


 1.   W h a t w i l l h a p p e n to th e           military        hospitals       once     th e   Service
      staff have mobilised?

      T h e h o s p i t a l s a r e o f f e r e d to t he NHS.           In on e i n s t a n c e the
      U.S. F o r c e s h a v e i n d i c a t e d t h a t t h e y w o u l d l i k e to u s e the
      h o s p i t a l f a c i l i t i e s fo r U.S. c a s u a l t i e s c o m i n g f r o m m a i n l a n d
      Europe.

2.    Are G e n eral             Practitioners             aware           of    proposed        sites      of
      E m e r g e n c y M e d i c a l C e n t r e s (E MC) ?

      H e a l t h A u t h o r i t i e s a r e at d i f f e r e n t s t a g e s of p l a n n i n g a n d
      it is d i f f i c u l t to g i v e a s i n g l e a n s w e r f o r UK. S u g g e s t
      c o n t a c t is m a d e w i t h t h e R e g i o n a l H E P O c o n c e r n e d .

 3.   Who    is    in c o n t r o l / c h a r g e   at   th e     EMC ?

      O n c e t he E M C has b e e n e s t a b l i s h e d it w i l l c o m e u n d e r t h e
      c o n t r o l of t h e H e a l t h S e r v i c e w i t h a l o c a l d o c t o r in c h a r g e
      at th e EMC.         U n t i l t h a t t i m e t h e s a me l o c a t i o n m a y w e l l be a
      F i r s t A i d P o s t (FAP) w h i c h w i l l be m a n n e d e n t i r e l y b y VA S
      m e m b e r s a n d be a d m i n i s t e r e d b y t h e VAS.

 4.   Who   ca n      authorise         th e s e t t i n g   up    of a n EMC ?

      In      w a r t h e e x e c u t i v e o r d e r w i l l be i s s u e d b y           the Dept        of
      H e a l t h w h e t h e r s t i l l c e n t r a l or d i v e r s i f i e d .

 5.   When will         the FAP       training video               be     issued    to   CJEECs?

      It is e x p e c t e d      that     general        issue      w i l l be     towards    the     en d of
      November.

6.    Ist h e r e a n y c h a n c e of               a   nationally             agreed     format         for
       casualty documentation?

      At      the        moment       most C o u n t y Ambulance Services and                              NHS
      h o s p i t a l s h a v e d o c u m e n t a t i o n s y s t e m s p e c u l i a r to t h e m s e l v e s .
      T h e a r m e d f o r c e s h a v e their own system.                            A single system
      throughout              UK w o u l d        be     the     ideal        but      although         many
      d i s c u s s i o n s h a v e t a k e n p l a c e it is n ot c o n s i d e r e d l i k e l y in
      th e f o r e s e e a b l e f u t u r e .      In t h e F A P v i d e o we s t r e s s th e n e e d
      f o r d o c u m e n t a t i o n a n d do n ot t r y to i m p o s e a n y o n e sy ste m.
                                                 -2-

 7.   We h a v e h e a r d a b o u t th e s h o r t f a l l of t r a i n e d m e m b e r s in the
      e v e n t of war.         Is t h e r e a c o u r s e f o r u s e a t a t i m e of
      ten sio n for tra ini ng         v olu nt eer s who w ou ld come forward?

      W o r k is b e i n g d o n e at th e m o m e n t to d e s i g n a c o u r s e fo r t hi s
      p u r p o s e b a s e d o n F i r s t A i d t r a i n i n g in           St J o h n a n d R e d
      Cr oss .      F u r t h e r , a c o u r s e is b e i n g d e s i g n e d w i t h th e h e l p of
      the RA MC, to fit o u r m e m b e r s f o r w o r k w i t h th e m i l i t a r y e.g.
      military documentation terms used and perhaps minor nursing
      procedures.

 8.   What    is t h e    staffing       of a n EMC ?

      It is i m p o s s i b l e to          give m e m b e r s but thep r o f e s s i o n a l l y
      q u a l i f i e d m e d i c a l p e r s o n n e l w i l l be f o u n d f r o m Hospital
      Mobile M e d i c a l Teams or General Practice p e r s o n n e l p e r h a p s
      a s s i s t e d by local dentists if necessary.                     Suppo r t i n g staff
      would be VAS trained members and p o s s i b l y some v o l u n t e e r s
      trained as per Q u e s t i o n 7.

 9.   When  will  new plans    be                    known       for     military          casualty
      evacuation and treatment?

      P l a n s a r e b e i n g p r o c e s s e d in H Q U n i t e d K i n g d o m L a n d F o r c e s
      (UKLF) at t h e m o m e n t .          This plan will only give the outlines
      or s k e l e t o n of t he p r o c e d u r e s a n d w i l l r e q u i r e e a c h m i l i t a r y
      d i s t r i c t to c o m p l e t e t h e d e t a i l .     Liaison with District
      C o m m a n d e r s M e d i c a l is e s s e n t i a l .

10.   Should     Commanders         Medical attend           CJEEC meetings?

      M o s t C o m m a n d e r s M e d i c a l do t r y to a t t e n d b u t w i t h t h e n u m b e r
      of c o u n t i e s in e a c h m i l i t a r y d i s t r i c t it is o f t e n too t i m e
      consuming.            It has b e e n s u g g e s t e d t h a t t h e C o m m a n d e r M e d i c a l
      s h o u l d set up a D i s t r i c t P l a n n i n g T e a m w h i c h includes a
      m e m b e r , m a y b e two, of t h e VAS.            It w o u l d be up to t h e N J E E C
      or CJE EC , to d e t e r m i n e t h i s r e p r e s e n t a t i o n .

      ( A f t e r d i s c u s s i o n it was a g r e e d in p r i n c i p l e t h a t th e N J E E C
      c o u l d a p p o i n t r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s u n d e r a u t h o r i t y of p a r a 6 of
      th e b o o k l e t G u i d a n c e to CJ EE C.
                                                            APPX 13




NAME                      NOMINATING AUTHORITY

VISITING SPEAKERS

J BARNES                  Regional Emergency Planning
                          Officer, South East Thames
                          Regional Health Authority

Chief Ambulance Officer
B JOHNS                   West Midlands Metropolitan
                          Ambulance Service

Mrs C MAYERS              Vice-Chairman and Emergency
                          Services Co-ordinator,
                          Women's Royal Voluntary
                          Service, London
MA SIBSON                 County Emergency Planning
                          Officer, Essex County
                          Council and President,
                          County Emergency Planning
                          Officers Society
Lieutenant Colonel
RC THAYNE RAMC            Medical Branch, Headquarters
                          United Kingdom Land Forces,
                          Salisbury, Wiltshire

Colonel
J TINSLEY                 Commander Medical, Headquarters
                          North East District, York
                                                       APPX 14
                     EMERGENCY PLANNING (PT ,TIFCT!


                     CJEEC CO-ORDINATORS SEMINAR

                          19 - 21 JULY 1989


                        FIRST LIST OF MEMBERS
NAME                            NOMINATING AUTHORITY

L BARKER                        Humberside
BDT BARTON                      Surrey
D BRADLEY                       Cambridgeshire
E BROUGHTON                     North Yorkshire

MC BURMAN                       West Midlands

SA BUZZARD                       Bedfordshire

J CARRIE                         Kent

Mrs E COOK                       Berkshire

Miss L COVEY                     Sussex

D CREMER                        Hertfordshire

AE CUMMINS                       Wiltshire

E DAVIDSON                       Greater Manchester

RL DAVIES                       West Glamorgan

Colonel (Retd)
MA DEMETRIADI                   Suffolk



Dr JG ELDER-SMTTH               Nottinghamshire

Major (Retd)
JGD ELVIN                       Powys

Dr A GEE                        Dorset

R GILES                         South Glamorgan

E GRANGE                        Essex

KK HAWKINS                      London

E HILL                          Somerset

JR HOLT                         Lancashire

AR HCWFT.T.S                    Mid-Glamorgan




JJP/CM 8 9 0 6 2 8              - 1 -
 NAME                       NOMINATING AUTHORITY
 S KELLY                    London
Lieutenant Colonel (Retd)
WW KERR                     Scotland
m    LONG                   Lincolnshire
Colonel (Retd)
MDC McBAIN                  Durham
FT MALCCM                   Scotland
Major (Retd)
RH MEDLEY                   Gwent
D O'LEARY                   Gwynedd
Lieutenant Colonel (Retd)
RA PAYNE                    Buckinghamshire
C PICKIN                    Staffordshire
CJ PIPER                    Devon
GR POND                     Shropshire
LKW RICHARDS                Norfolk
Mrs J RICKLETON             Northumbria
Wing Commander
JA RYAN RAF (Retd)          Warwickshire
Miss EA SWAN                Oxfordshire
G TOLLEFSON                 West Yorkshire and
                            South Yorkshire
E TREW                      Cheshire
JVL WALTERS                 Dyfed
Lieutenant Colonel (Retd)
J WIISON                    Leicestershire
NJEEC

Lieutenant General
SIR CAMERON MOFFAT          Joint Secretary (Medical)
Lieutenant Colonel (Retd)
D CHAPMAN                   Assistant General Secretary
Dr WHB ELLES                Vice-Chairman

LADY LIMERICK               Chairman

Brigadier (Retd)
RC MIDDLETON                Joint Secretary (Logistics)



JJP/CM 89 0 6 2 8           - 2 -
 NAME                       NOMINATING AUTHORITY

 V IS IT IN G SPEAKERS


 J BARNES                   Regional Emergency Planning
                            Officer, South East Thames
                            Regional Health Authority
 Chief Ambulance Officer
 B JOHNS                    West Midlands Metropolitan
                            Ambulance Service
 Mrs C MAYERS               Vice-Chairman and Emergency
                            Services Co-ordinator,
                            Women's Royal Voluntary
                            Service, London
 MA SIBSON                  County Emergency Planning
                            Officer, Essex County
                            Council and President,
                            County Emergency Planning
                            Officers Society
 Lieutenant colonel
 RC THAYNE RAMC            Medical Branch, Headquarters
                           United Kingdom Land Forces,
                           Salisbury, Wiltshire
 Colonel
 J TINSLEY                 Commander Medical, Headquarters
                           North East District, York




JJP/CM 890 6 2 8           - 3 -
Merseyside Fire & Civil Defence Authority
Emergency Planning Gnit          f^RHA-MEDICAL

                                  0 5 M A V 1989

                                  6rt-



Mr B Morgan
Acting Health Emergency
 Planning Officer                Our ref    rt/IOM
Merseyside Regional HA
Hamilton House                   Your ref
66 Pall Mall
Liverpool 1                      Date       3 May 1989



Dear Mr Morgan
MERSEYSIDE COUNTY JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

I write to confirm that the next meeting of the above Committee
will be held at 5.15 on Thursday, 11 May at the Headquarters of
the British Red Cross Society, 4 Tuebrook Terrace, 346 West
Derby Road, Liverpool 13.
Mrs Downham has invited to the meeting Lt Col D Chapman, who is
Emergency Services Organiser at the British Red Cross Society's
Headquarters in London, so I will look forward to seeing you at
the meeting on 11 May.

Yours sincerely




CHIEF EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICER




 The Podium # Mulberry House # Canning Place # Liverpool #   LI 8JB
           Telephone 051-7 08 5515 • 051-708 85 48 (Fax)
           W R Holland • Chief Emergency Planning Officer
      MERSEYSIDE COUNTY JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
A meeting of this Committee will be held on Thursday 11th May at
5.15pm at BRCS Headquarters, Tuebrook Terrace, West Derby Road.

                               AGENDA

1.   To welcome Col Chapman.

2.   To receive Apologies.
3.    To receive the Minutes of the Last Meeting held on 30th
     January 1989.

4.   To receive reports following the Sheffield Football Stadium
     Disaster.

5.   To further discuss the future role of the Voluntary Aid
     Societies.
6.   To receive a report of the meeting held with North West
     Military District on 18th April.

7.   To receive Any Other Business.
8.   To decide on date of next meeting.
Minutes of a Meeting held on Monday 30th January 1989 at British Red
Cross Headquarters, 346 West Derby Road to discuss the way forward
for the Merseyside County Joint Emergency Executive Committee.
Present:-

Mrs R H C Downham        BRCS (Merseyside Branch)
                     _    tl        tt         tt
Mr J Crosby
Dr G P Sechieri          St John Ambulance (Merseyside Branch)
Mr B Morgan              Mersey Regional Health Authority
Mr B Holland             Merseyside Emergency Planning Unit
Mr R Tann                      ft         tt        tt     tt




The main riisenssion contrcd upon the broadening roles of both St
John and BRCS and how those changing roles were reflected in where
they would each relate to in any major Emergency. A key question
arose as to whether in the light of these changes, that the basis
of the JEEC orgasnisation would also need to change ie., An
increased welfare counselling role may make their volunteers of
greater value to the local authorities than to the health
authorities, to whom they were principally in support of at the
present time.

This was borne out by Mrs Downham, who said that in the past,
BRCS's main role was to ferry non-urgent cases from hospitals.
Recently however, the last 3 major incidents it was involved in,
drew mainly upon their welfare/counselling role.

Mr Holland thought that with a broadened role, BRCS and St John
could play a useful part in support of local authorities by
helping in First Aid Rooms and counselling evacuees/survivors at
Reception Centres.

i>r Sschicri ssi(3 he thought the VAS could reasonably looli tiftsir
the less seriously injured particularly where shock was much in
evidence.

Mr Downham said she felt it was important for the VASs to know
where they would 'fit in' in the event of a major incident such as
Lockerbie. She also said she would like her members to be
familiar with the locations of designated Reception Centres and
temporary mortuaries. Mr Holland said his unit was currently
undertaking surveys to identify buildings throughout Merseyside
for this use, and their drawing up individual plans for use in an
emergency. He would ensure this information would be made known
once available.

Mr Holland suggested both organisations should examine their
existing structures to see how they could be of maximum benefit in
a major 'eiuergeucy'
                   •and the best means of activation. He would also
make enquiries to ascertain what was required.

Mr Tann said he presumed the problem they were considering was a
fundamental one for the whole JEEC organisation and not just
related to Merseyside. He suggested Mrs Downham and Dr Sechieri
should jointly write to the National JEEC organisation for its
views. He also asked whether, as part of that enquiry, the
Note of a meeting held on Monday 31 October at the Merseyside
Emergency Planning Unit to discuss the way forward for the
Merseyside County Joint Emergency Executive Committee
Present

Mrs R H C Downham                  BRCS (Merseyside Branch)
Mr B Morgan                        Acting HEPO Mersey RHA
Mr W Holland                       CEPO Merseyside
Mr R Tann                          Asst CEPO Merseyside
It had been hoped that Dr Sechiari from the St John's Ambulance
would have been present. In the event general matters were
discussed including the involvement of BRCS in an emergency.

Mrs Downham said she was keen that the BRCS might take part in
exercises and undertake more training for emergencies.   Mr Tann
asked whether there was any impetus from the National JEEC
organisation for the Spear/Crash/Flashpoint exercises.
Mrs Downham said there was very little on JEEC matters being
received. Mr Morgan said this was the case regionally - and he
thought nationally as well. He would arrange for the matter to be
discused at Northern HEPOs meeting on 1 December.

The matter of the widening BRCS role was discussed. Mrs Downham
said BRCS would be able to give assistance with transporting of
certain casualties, nursing procedures and registration. Also the
role in welfare matters - especially counselling needed to be
recognised. Mrs Downham agreed with Mr Tann suggested that this
changed emphasis ought to be reflected in forums other than the
JEEC, which was centred on a medical response. Mr Holland also
noted that with the BRCs broadening role, its value extended
beyond that of the medical services to that of the welfare role of
the local authority.

Mr Downham asked Mr Morgan if it would be possible for the VASs to
be told of any changes occurring in emergency reception facilities
at hospitals.

Mr Holland outlined the current situation regarding the Unit's
requirement to recruit community volunteers. He said it was still
his wish if possible to use St John and BRCS instructors in
providing the training in First Aid, which would be paid for.
Mrs Downham said BRCS would be prepared to assist.

Mrs Downham suggested that within organisations she was familiar
with ie The Soroptomists, there were people already with relevant
'specialist' skills who might be recruited as volunteers. On
resources, Mr Holland asked Mr Morgan if he was able to give
details of beds (ie mattresses) held by the NHS that could be made
available in an emergency and, if so how they could be activated.
Mr Morgan said he would look into the matter and let him know.

In answer to certain questions, Mr Tann said he would make a copy
of the Sussex BRCS report on the October 1988 hurricane, and also
the note on DHSS emergency stockpile of emergency equipment.
In regard to the next meeting, Mr R Tann offered to make the
arrangements. It was agreed it be fixed for January 1989, the
preferred days being 16 and 23. Mr Tann to contact Dr Sechiari.

There was a discussion on whether other representations should be
invited to attend eg the Military, Ambulance Service, Police etc.

This was however agreed that it would be preferable to contain the
meeting to BRCS/St John/RHA/MEPU at this stage and broaden it out
later if appropriate.




RT/I0M/1/11 /88
+    Telephone
    01-235 5454
                   NATIONAL JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE


                                     Chairm an: The Countess of Limerick
                              Vice-Chairman: Major-General P. R. Leuchars, C.B.E.
                                                                                     Chairman’s Office
                                                                                         9 Grosvenor Crescent
      Telex                                                                                  London, S W IX 7EJ
      918657

(Y\ r .    PO o /"<



                                                                      23rd February, 1989



 TO:              Co-ordinators of County JEECs
                          England and Wales

                  Commander of the Order of St. John
                          Priory for Wales

                  BRCS Regional Officers                                                    ivu ’M A l j
                                                                                     1 6 MA<\            |

                              NJEEC CIRCULAR l/89                                   !e>T^ I                I
                            COUNTY JEEC CO-ORDINATORS



 1.       An up-to-date list of County JEEC Co-ordinators is
          attached as an annexure to this Circular in replacement
          of the list forwarded with NJEEC Circular l/89.
          dated 12th February 1987.

 2.       Amendments to the list should be notified promptly to
          the NJEEC Secretariat at the above address in order to
          maintain correct channels of communication.

 3.       The functions and responsibilities of Co-ordinators
          are described in the NJEEC booklet "Notes for the
          Guidance of Members of County JEECs", copies of which
          were forwarded under NJEEC Circular 4/84 dated
          14th December 1984. Further copies are available on
          request.




                                                                      Sir Cameron Moffat



                                                                     R C Middleton

                                                                     Joint Secretaries
                                                                     for Chairman
               COUNTY JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE


                             CO-ORDINATORS


AVON                   Dr. J. Clifford                  BRCS
                       Red Cross House
                       Alma Road Avenue
                       Bristol BS8 2DX

BEDFORDSHIRE           Mr. S. Buzzard                   BRCS
                       Red Cross County Officers
                       99 Ashburnham Road
                       Bedford MK40 1EA

BERKSHIRE              Mrs. E. Cook                     St. J
                       St. John House
                       101 London Road
                       Reading
                       Berks RG1 5BY
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE         Col. Payne                          St. J
                        St. John Ambulance HQ & TC
                        Croft Road
                        Aylesbury HP21 7RD

CAMBRIDGESHIRE          Dr. W.D.W. Burton OBE               St. J
                        Fitzpatrick House
                        3 Barton Road
                        Cambridge CB3 9JZ

CHESHIRE               Mr. E.A. Trevr                   BRCS
                       Red Cross House
                       20 Bexton Road
                       Knutsford
                       Cheshire WA16 ODS

CLEVELAND              Col. D. Clarke                   BRCS
                       BRCS
                       30 Park Road North
                       Mi ddlesborough
                       Cleveland TS1 3LF

CORNWALL               Maj. Gen. R.M. Jerram CB MBE    St. John
                       St. John Ambulance
                       Princess Chula House
                       City Road
                       Truro TR1 2JL




                             -   1   -
/CUMBRIA          Lt. Col. M.C. Sweeney FBIM    BRCS
                  BRCS
                  Woolpack Yard
                  Kendal
                  Cumbria LA9 4NG
DERBYSHIRE        Mr. T.N. Watkins OBE          St. J

                  Derby

DEVON             Mr. J.E. Bury                 BRCS
                  BRCS
                  Ermen House
                  143 Pennsylvania Road
                  Exeter EX4 6DZ

DORSET            Dr. A. Gee MB ChB             BRCS
                  BRCS
                  Red Cross County Office
                  Wareham
                  Dorset BH20 4SW

DURHAM            Col. M.D.C. McBain DL         St. J
                  Co-ordinator Durham County NJEEC
                  St. John Ambulance County Office
                  53 Old Elvet
                  Durham B01 3HN

ESSEX             Brig. J. Whitehead            BRCS
                  BRCS
                  200 London Road
                  Chelmsford
                  Essex CM2 9AD

GLOUCESTERSHIRE   Col. D. Swiney                BRCS
                  Red Cross House
                  Cainscross
                  Stroud
                  Gloucester GL5 4JQ
HAMPSHIRE         Miss E. Balfour OBE           BRCS
                  Red Cross House
                  Weeke
                  Winchester
                  Hampshire S022 5JD

HEREFORD AND      Mr. G.C. Hayman BEM           BRCS
WORCESTER         Red Cross House
                  Greenhill
                  London Road
                  Worcester WR5 2AE




                          -   2   -
HERTFORDSHIRE        Mr.   D. Cremer            St. J
                     St.   John Ambulance
                     102   Ashley Road
                     St.   Albans AL1 5DF
HUMBERSIDE           Mr. J.S. Young             St. J

                     Burton Pidsea
                     Hull          1
ISLE OF WIGHT        Mrs. E.M. Giles MBE        BRCS
                     Red Cross House
                     1 Hunnyhlll
                     Newport
                     Isle of Wight P030 5HJ
KENT                 Mr. J.R. Carrie            BRCS
                     Red Cross House
                     25 College Road
                     Maidstone ME15 6EX
LANCASHIRE           Mr. J.R. Holt              St. J
                     HQ«     John Ambulance
                     15 Mount Street
                     Preston PR1 SAD

LEICESTERSHIRE       Lt. Col. J. Wilson         St. J
                     St. John Ambulance
                     112 Regent Road
                     Leicester
LINCOLNSHIRE         Mrs. W.A. Stirk            BRCS
                     BRCS
                     Elm House
                     Elmer Street
                     Grantham NG31 6RE
LONDON               Mr. L. Hawkins             BRCS

                     Bexley
                     Kent f   '
                     Mr. Seamus Kenny           St. J
                     St. John Ambulance
                     (Greater London) HQ
                     Edwina Mountbatten House
                     63 York Street
                     London W1H IPS
GREATER MANCHESTER   Mr. N. Higham              St. J
                     St. John House
                     Egerton Road
                     Fallowfield
                     Manchester M14 6XX



                                  3   -
MERSEYSIDE         Mrs. R.H.C. Downham            BRCS
                   BROS
                   Red Cross House
                   3^6 West Derby Road
                   (k Tuebrook Terrace)
                   Liverpool L13 7HG

WEST MIDLANDS      Mr. M.C. Burman TD             BRCS
                   BROS
                   34 Blossomfield Road
                   Solihull
                   West Midlands B9i INS
NORFOLK            Mr. L.K.W. Richards            BRCS
                   Farriers
                   Fressing-Field-
                   Eye
                   Suffolk IP215PE
NORTHAMPTONSHIRE   Mrs. W. Lovell                 BRCS
                   Red Cross House
                   51 Billing Road
                   Northampton NNi 5DB
NORTHOMBRIA        Mrs. J. Rickleton              St. J
                   St. John House
                   Grainer Park Road
                   Newcastle on Tyne NE4 8RY
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE    Dr. J. Elder-Smith             St. J
                   St. John County Headquarters
                   56i Valley Road
                   Basford
                   Nottingham NG7 2PA
OXFORDSHIRE        Miss E.A. Swan                 BRCS
                   BROS
                   101 Banbury Road
                   Oxford 0X2 6JY

SHROPSHIRE         Mr. G.R. Pond                  BRCS
                   Red Cross House
                   Betton Street
                   Belle Vue
                   Shrewsbury SY3 7NY
SOMERSET           Col. A. Woodford               BRCS


                   Nr. Crediton
                   Devon          I

STAFFORDSHIRE      Mr. D*; Griffiths'
                   BRCS
                   2k St. Leonards Avenue
                   Stafford ST17 4LU
SUFFOLK                Mr. J. Tannock           BRCS
                       BRCS
                       Linden House
                       146 Kings Road
                       Suffolk IP33 3DJ
SURREY                 Mr. B.D.J. Barton        BRCS
                       BRCS
                       Red Cross House
                       5 Jeliner Road
                       Guildford GUI 3PJ

SUSSEX                 Mr. G. Slade              BRCS

                       Brighton          ~

WARWICKSHIRE           Wg— Cdr J.A. Ryan
                                      —         BRCS

                       Leamington Spa
                       Warwicks
WILTSHIRE              Comdr. Ashley Cummings    BRCS
                       Red Cross House
                       Semington
                       Trowbridge
                       Wiltshire BA14 6JW

NORTH YORKSHIRE        Mr. T. Broughton          St. J

                       Sowerby
                       Thir.sk [


WEST/SOUTH YORKSHIRE

                       Mr. Gordon Tollefson      St. J

                       Adel
                       Leeds

WALES

Clwyd                  Miss M. Ellwodd          BRCS
                       BRCS HQ
                       Rhiw Road
                       Colwyn Bay
                       Clwyd

Dyfed                  Mr. Jack Walters

                       Pontyates
South Glamorgan     Mr R Giles                        BRCS



                    Cardiff

M id Glamorgan      Mr A R Howells                    BRCS
                    Red Cross House
                    18 Pentrebach Road
                    Pontypridd
                    Mid Glamorgan CF37        4BW

West Glamorgan                                       BRCS
                    BRCS
                    42 Sketty Road
                    Swansea SA2 OLJ

Gwent               Maj R Medley                     St.J


                    nr Abergavenny
                    Gwent

Gwynedd             Mr H Gott                        BRCS
                    BRCS
                    Red Cross House
                    Oxford Road
                    Llandudno LL30      1DH

Powys               Maj J G D Elvin                  St.J
                    Co-ordinator Powys CJEEC


                    Llandrindod Wells
                    Powys

Isle    of   Han    Co-ordinator CJEEC
                    c/o BRCS
                    Derby Road
                    Douglas, Isle of Man

(BRCS) Regional Officer for Wales          Order of St John

                                           Lt Col R L Spurrell OBE


                                           Cardiff
                                           South Glamorgan
    Merseyside Fire & Civinrn&mm'a*Authority
    Emergency Planning Unit                      |28N 0Vi® 8
/

                                                  6f>
    With Compliments                                                     £



                                                                         /
    d f & d c ts .   /                     (oo


    duSTl            (l& po/b kfu l^ ti,
     The Podium # Mulberry House • /Canning Place # Liverpool   LI 8JB
               Telephone 051-708 5515 • 051-708 8548 (Fax)
               W R Holland # Chief Emergency Planning Officer
                    BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIES
                       9 Grosvenor Crescent _
                         London, SW1X 7EJ
                                                            91   /8 8
                                                 JZ   j   HP/sd/ kp
                                                    1 July 1988



Sussex Branch Report on its action to assist victims of the
              hurricane emergency October 1^§7


This circular notes some of the key points from the Sussex
Branch experience in responding to the storms of October
1987. These points have been put together to help Branches
in their own thinking and planning for emergencies. The
attachments extracted from the Branch's own report give
greater detail.

1. There was no formally declared emergency and no formal
    call out from the authorities. A few people at Branch
    headquarters recognised that a positive Red Cross
    response was necessary, contacted Centres and initiated
    a process of local surveys and response.

2.   Centre members were required by Branch headquarters to
     assess the situation and contact the police locally.
     (Some Centres in areas not too badly affected needed
     convincing of the need to assist in surrounding areas
     but Centres responded well once given a clear lead by
     Branch headquarters.)

3. The Needs of the victims were for comfort and
    reassurance, for a spur/framework for their own efforts
    and for material assistance (tarpaulins, cooking,
    lighting and heating equipment).

4.   The Branch Response focussed on the immediate personal
     needs oi victims whilst statutory services restored
     services in their areas of functional responsibility
     (clearing roads, restoring power, water).

     In particular it involved provision of

        -   24 hour cover
        -   visiting all those who requested help
        -   use of an identified and publicised phone number
        -   co-operation with local radio in informing people
            of the availability of Red Cross services.

5.   Branch headquarters demonstrated considerable ingenuity
     and flexibility in responding to th6 actual needs of the
     victims. The Branch made effective use of its own
     resources.

        - Centre personnel working from their own buildings
        - and in operational teams working directly from
          Branch
        - ambulances (as multipurpose vehicles)
        - Centre buildings.
                              2

6.   Branch used its own emergency supplies, purchased what
     it did not have and then called for (and received) back
     up from other parts of the Red Cross.

        - Surrey for members to assist in the operation
        - Northants for gas supplies
        - National Headquarters for tarpaulins, blankets and
          support/advice on the operation and dealing with
          the media.

7.   Red Cross members worked with great enthusiasm and
     dedication and employers when asked were often willing
     to give leave of absence. Members from all
     "disciplines" were used in the operation and coped well
     in providing sympathy, support and practical assistance
     to victims. Members of the public volunteered
     assistance.

8.   Although there was no formal declaration of emergency or
     call out, co-operation with the authorities (police,
     fire county emergency planning officer, social services,
     SEEBOARD) and voluntary agencies (WRVS, Age Concern,
     Association for the Disabled) was close and effective.
     All welcomed the initiative taken by Red Cross.

9.   Co-operation with Raynet was particularly close and
     their assistance was vital in making the operation
     effective as telephones were often not working.

10. Some of the other lessons learned concern the importance
    of

        - having details of Branch headquarters personnel and
          ambulance crews specifically detailed in the
          operational plan
        - assigning someone to liaise with the media and
          support from National Headquarters in this area
        - providing for the needs for rest for volunteers.

11. The Sussex Branch efforts cost the Branch some £30,000.
    Its subsequent appeal raised £22,000 and additional
    financial support from the EEC may still be forthcoming.




                        J.C. Burke-Gaffney
                         Director General



     To: Branch Directors'
                   B R I T I S H      R F D   C R O S S   S O C I E T Y
                                   SUSSEX COUNTIES BRANCH
          SUMMARY OF ACTION IN THE RECENT HURRICANE DISASTER OF OCTOBER   1987
Following the hurricane which struck Southern England on the night of 15th October, the
Sussex Counties Branch of the British Red Cross Society initiated a full-scale alert.
An Operations Room was immediately set up at the Branch Headquarters in Hove and its
39 Centres in the two counties of East and West Sussex were contacted to assess the scale
of the damage and to determine how best it could assist those in difficulty.   From this
eiroe for the next eleven days 24-hour cover was provided at Branch Headquarters.
Despite transport and communication difficulties due to the widespread devastation, many
Red Cross Centres were in action from early Friday morning and remained in close contact
with BHQ by one means or other throughout the whole emergency.
It soon became apparent that the prime need in many cases was for tarpaulins and cooking,
lighting and heating equipment,as most Sussex villages and the coastal towns were totally
without power.    As this equipment, especially tarpaulins, was quickly found to be in
very short supply or non-existent locally, arrangements were made with the Society's
National Headquarters in London to supply the Branch with an initial 250 tarpaulins and
500 blankets.   Following arrival at BHQ late Saturday evening, these were distributed
by the Branch ambulances called in from Centres for dispatch to all affected parts of
the two Counties.    These ambulances remained at the disposal of BHQ for the remainder
of the emergency to ferry all kinds of equipment.    A further supply of tarpaulins was
received later.    Contact was swiftly made with a local firm to bring supplies of gaz
equipment into Sussex for our use and through another source the Branch was able to
obtain further supplies from the Midlands.

From Day 1 of the emergency volunteers from Raynet (Radio Amateurs Emergency Network)
who are affiliated to the Sussex Counties Red Cross, set up and maintained a service
alongside the Red Cross volunteers, also on a 24-hour basis.    During the emergency
valuable help was also given by various local Radio Stations, as a result of which the
Branch received 2,280 direct calls requesting assistance.    Each caller received a personal
visit from a Red Cross member and physical help was given where possible in the form of
temporary roofing, heating, cooking facilities and lighting, in many instances neces­
sitating more than one visit.    In addition, visits were made to Residential establishments
and similar assistance rendered.

In areas where power was not able to be restored for some considerable time, the need to
set up soup  kitchens became imperative and temporary housing provided for "evacuees"
in several Red Cross Centres.
As well as the direct requests reaching BHQ from individuals, the fullest possible
assistance was rendered to many people referred by other voluntary bodies and statutory
services.
Many of the calls received were from distressed and shocked people, particularly the
elderly, which required special visits to provide emotional reassurance and comfort - a
state of affairs which has continued well beyond the immediate emergency.   From our
observations, the resulting hardship and stress occasioned through this disaster will
continue to cause considerable problems to many people, in which the Society will no
doubt be involved for some time to come.




                              —o—o—o—o—o—o— o—o— o—o—




                                           -I-
                B R I T I S H      R E D   C R O S S   S O C I E T Y
                                SUSSEX COUNTIES BRANCH


                      H U R R I C A N E      E M E R G E N C Y




Friday, 16th October 1987   -   Day 1

05.30 hrs.    Lyn Covey contacted by Hastings Centre, who were asked by Police
              to help evacuate people from collapsed hotel.  Hastings Centre
              went on stand-by from 07.00.

07.45 hrs.    Di Churchill arrived at Branch HQ and rang Director about plans.
              Spoke to Lyn Covey hourly (latter unable to reach Branch HQ immediately).
              Tried to contact Centres to assess situation in their areas* Continuous
              up-dates given to Lyn Covey and the Director.

              Raynet put on stand-by, b u t they took   initiative and decided to set up
              control at BHQ - which proved to be       the right    decision in the   ensuing
              events.

15.00 hrs.    Lyn Covey arrived, received up-date from Di Churchill.

15.40 hrs.    County call-out plan put into operation with 30 Centres, each one urged
              to make contact with local Police to offer help.   In most cases this
              was noted by Police but rarely taken up.   26 Groups were able to be
              contacted and put on stand-by with requests for two members to report
              to Centres, to open up and report back to BHQ when in operation.  All
              other members to remain on stand-by at home.

              In 50% of areas telephone communication was very difficult.  Many of otir
              own Centre buildings had suffered some damage.   Most of Sussex was by
              this time without power.   Unable to contact most Branch Officers and
              Co-ordinators because of telephone problems.
 Approx.
 16.00 hrs.   Alerted NHQ that County on stand-by.  Informed us that NHQ had no staff
              in but note was made to the effect we were on stand-by, but Steve Davey
              rang back shortly afterwards.

              By this time, some Centres were reporting back.   Selsey were already
              working although totally cut off, so we dispatched an ambulance with
              Cellnet telephone to Selsey Centre to establish needs because the
              Centre Organiser otherwise had to go out of the town to find a working
              telephone.   Because'of their previous experience with a tornado in
              1986, the town's major disaster plan went very quickly into action.

              Hastings we knew were already working.         Our only contact with a member
              in Uckf/foi<j lfa s— w±nh. a young Pioneer whose home was devastated by a
              tree, but she gathered together young people - Red Cross and St. John -
              in North Uckfield and Maresfield and checked on elderly and infirm and
              helped people in their homes.         This was the only place, to our knowledge
              where we were involved with First Aid.
.17.2D h r ' S .     Power lose ac BHQ.   Ravnec provided a generator and also at Brighton
                     & Hove Centre.   Raynet cover was provided in Centres without
                     communications.

                     BHQ was rather disappointed by the attitude of a few Centres who did not.
                     seen to appreciate the severity of the situation because their own 7
                     immediate areas were comparatively undamaged.   We found there was need
                     for constant pressure from BHQ to motivate these Centres to> look beyond.
                     their immediate surroundings to their outlying areas.  However, some were
                     opening their Centre buildings to house displaced persons overnight..

                    Some ambulances were dispatched along the coastal areas to provide help
                    if necessary.    Little at this stage required as most people were still
                    in a state o>£ shock and had not emerged from their own homes and were
                    consequently unable to assess what kind of help they might need.

                    The decision was taken to man BHQ_2 4 hours round the clock until _furtb.er_
                    notice, which proved a worthwhile decision..

                    Control consisted of 2 rooms and 2 key personnel - Lyn Covey and Di ,
                    Churchill.    Room One housed radio control.with Raynet 2m and our own
                    high band radios, manned entirely by Raynet personnel.        Boom Two was
                    the Operations Room, manned by the team, which proved.essential, to the.
                -   whole..operation.   Extra personnel_were_..calle£Lin...as._required,..with..
               __ _shifting teams of Red. Cross .members and other personnel, coming and going.,

 Saturday, 17th October 1987 - Day 2

06.30 hrs.           BHQ began to receive up-dates from Centres which had provided overnight
                    accommodation within Centre premises.

During the         ; Local media was contacted ^to publicise the Red Cross central tel, no. and.
morning              the type of help available.

                    Calls were beginning to come in for help - particularly tarpaulins - local
                    supplies by now being exhausted.

                    Di Churchill contacted NHQ to ask if they could supply tarpaulins. Steve
                    Davey rang back to ask our needs and offered supplies from the Kingsbury
                    warehouse.   He also offered blankets which were gladly accepted, ETA
                    early evening.   We then contacted the media again to tell them we would
                    have a supply of 250 tarpaulins and 500 blankets.

                    By this time BHQ was becoming inundated with telephone requests for all
                    kinds of help, but predominantly tarpaulins.

                    Offers of help were also being received from the public, eg. drivers,
                    which were taken up to help distribute tarpaulins.

                   --Anathpr nppH quickly e a t a h l w a g fnr-    kitchens^ and about 8
                     Centres swung into action and set up feeding centres and the first supplies
                     of food obtained from local sources was dispatched by 09.00 hrs.  Contact _
                    was made at this stage with whdssalers who proved most unhelpful.

                    It became apparent now that freezers would be out of action and more
                    supplies of food would be necessary, so local radio was again contacted
                    to put out requests for food, resulting in a large number of gifts.




                                                  -3-
             Calls were also now being received from Social Services, asking us to.
             check on their own Residential Homes with whom they could not communicate
             by telephone.  In some cases direct visits were made by members to assess
             needs.  In some instances it involved complicated communication links
             via radio and t.elephone links.  CEPOs (County Emergency Planning Officers)
             East and West Sussex were informed’of our action.

             Call made at Nursing Home, Chelwood Gate, to deliver water, heat and light,
             brought to our notice elderly lady agitated about having had to cancel
             flight to Canada due day after hurricane.   Would she be able to use ticket
             Welfare Officer later checked with Air Canada and as a result was'able to
             send message via Postmistress at Chelwood Gate to reassure old lady the
             airline will honour her ticket when she is ready to travel.

 Mid-day     Many Red Cross Centres now directly involved with providing urgent local
             needs, eg. establishing thoroughfares to provide access for the emergency
             services,etc.   Food shortages were occurring in local villages.

14.30 hrs.   The Welfare Officer, Barbara Stanlake, had by now been able to reach BHQ
             as third member of the control team and continued as such on a daily basis.

15.00 hrs.   We were now contacting local Scouts re. provision of gaz carriers and
             heaters.  Local Councils were requesting our services re. visits to assess
             individual situations.

             A number of ambulances were now involved in these specific visits and
             collection of food, heaters and lighting appliances.

19.30 hrs.   A juggernaut arrived_at-BHQ-_w±th the tarpaulins and blankets-.from.NHQ----
             warehouse.      (We could have used a fork lift truck!)     All hands on deck
             to unload and begin deliveries.         Basically, we were unable to use private
             cars, except estate vehicles, due to the length and weight of the
             tarpaulin s ._____________ _________________________

             9 ambulances pressed into service for transport of tarpaulins throughout
             East and West Sussex.   At this stage tarpaulins delivered and personal
             calls made, but due to the lateness of the hour unable to fit some and
             would necessitate second call next day in some cases.

20.00 hrs.   Large areas of Mid Sussex now without water.   Waterboard erected stand­
             pipes and bowsers where possible, but many elderly and isolated Resthomes
             unable to collect.   Red Cross members sent out from BHQ to deliver water
             and purification tablets.

             When called to a specific address checks were made in neighbouring houses
             and districts known to be without power and/or water.

21.25 hrs.   Contact with Scout Shops, Worthing, via BRCS member, to purchase light,
             heat, cookers, torches, water purification tablets, batteries and supplies
             of gaz.

22.50 hrs.   Fire Service requested our assistance re. tarpaulins..      Notified certain
             Centres supplies now available.




                                         -4-
Sunday, 18th October 1987 - Day 3

00.15 hrs.
              fire.   Ambulance dispatched to Countv Camping Sfnre...-Ur.kf-lp.-l.d-,— to--------
              collect camp beds and extra water containers.   These 9 evacuees housed
              in Brighton & Hove Centre by 02.15 hrs._____

07.00 hrs.   5 local Councils liaising with us re. collecting tarpaulins for their own
             properties.   Many offers of food being received from people as a result
             of freezers being out of action.   Now receiving urgent calls from all
             directions, particularly from frail elderly who needed TLC as well as
             tarpaulins.

              Continuous requests for and distribution of tarpaulins.

             Follow-up of several Social Service calls for visits to elderly. Requests
             from several Resthomes who were running short of food, as freezers out of
             action.  Assisted with supplies of cookers, food, etc.

              Barbara Stanlake in touch with BHQ whenever her telephone was working.
              Continuous calls meanwhile from National media.   We had to ask NHQ to.
              take pressure off Branch and handle all such enquiries.

12.00 hrs.    Vehicles now on permanent stand-by at BHQ day and night until further
              notice.

13.00 hrs.    Request for generator for Nursing Home - liaison with local radio produced
              one.   General public who heard our plea on local radio offered to help
              set up "soup kitchens" with our back-up, i.e. provision of food, utensils,etc

             Welfare Officer returned'to BHQ to assist team and liaised with Guest_____
             House owner who had taken in an elderly gentleman with Parkinsons Disease,
             needed continuous care (incontinent, etc.)  and contacted Social Services
             Duty Officer, West Sussex, who arranged alternative accommodation.

             Delivery of tarpaulins, heating and lighting continuing non-stop. Reports
             coming back via members.making deliveries, of people in various stages of
             distress, i.e. sitting in cold, dark, damp homes.   Apathy setting in.
             Therefore, carried out a number of second visits - in many instances
             Centres asked to liaise directly and to maintain support where necessary.

             Where possible a "suitable" person was recruited to co-ordinate voluntary
             effort in outlying villages, sometimes Red Cross, sometimes a Parish
             Councillor, sometimes a local parson, etc.  Barbara Stanlake liaised with
             County Organisers of WRVS, Age Concern,in both East and West Sussex, to
             inform them of what we were doing and facilities we could offer.

             Hove Council Housing Dept, contacted us re. people needing rehousing.
             Social Services asked for a visit to be made to Newick to old man very
             distressed - dispatched member to see him.

             Frequent contacts by National Press again.

             London Red Cross member living in Worthing offered BHQ spare freezer -
             collected from her.




                                       -5-
20.00   hrs.    Due to repeated calls, ambulances still being dispatched to deliver
               he.it, light, cookers, throughout County.  Progress severely hampered
               by no street lights, signposts down, roads flooded, familiar landmarks
               disappeared, unsuitability of available maps.    Many roads impassable
               and personnel progressed on foot to deliver goods.          ».
                                                                            i     •
               BBC contacted Di Churchill again re. our efforts and said they would
               visit BHQ with camennan, Monday am.

               Contacted NHQ with request for more tnrpnulins - .sending us further 100,
               making total of 350.

               Two further Care Homes in severe difficulty - sent heat, light, etc. with
               members.

22.35   hrs.   Received information from NHQ that tarpaulins ETA at BHQ would be 02.30 hrs.
               Requested 5 ambulances to assist at 02.30 hrs. with unloading and
               distribution.   Meanwhile deliveries of water and purification tablets
               continuing in Mid Sussex areas.

23.00   hrs.    "Happy Birthday" to Di Churchill for 19th October.

Monday, 19th October 1987 - Day 4

00.14 hrs.     Report from Hastings Centre re. up-date of services they have supplied,
               needs for morning, including heat, light, food and tarpaulins.

02.30   hrs.   Tarpaulins arrived from NHQ.

07.00   hrs.   Offers from general public of cookers, gaz, etc., begin to       come in.

               Di Churchill contacted by BBC News requiring up-date on our services.

               BHQ contact made with Water Board and Southern Water requesting details
               of areas still without water.   They asked about services we were
               providing and promised to liaise with us in the near future, which they did.

               Endeavoured to make contact with Electricity Boards - unobtainable.

08.11 hrs.     Rector of Horsted Keynes asked for heat, light and cookers       for village -
                dispatched.

               Urgent requests from Selsey and Hastings in dire need of tarpaulins -
               dispatched.

09.20 hrs.     Urgent call from Watersfield (nr. Pulborough) - mother with 4 children
               and young baby.   No heat, light, etc., needs help to make baby's feed.
        X      Ambulance dispatched immediately.

10.40 hrs.     BBC arrived - now filming.

               Surrey Branch offers personnel and vehicles.

10.50 hrs.     Scout Shops inform BHQ awaiting delivery of gaz supplies from Northamptonr
               shire.  Direct contact made with supplier who said no vehicles available.
               No other gaz supplies are available in Sussex.    Liaison made with_____
               Northamptonshire Red Cross Welfare-Officer who organised a lorry and two_
               Red Cross''memberi~‘on~stand-by to deliver if necessary.



                                        -6-
11.35   hrs.   Liaised with Kent Branch re. request received to check on Nursing
                Home in Tunbridge Wells.

12.00   hrs.   Re-negotiated with Scout Shops Lancing re. collection of gaz from
                Northamptonshire.

                CEPO East Sussex rang.  Long discussion about provision of our service.
           \    He had "no idea we did so much"!I

12.45   hrs.    Kent Branch Welfare Officer rang re. Tunbridge Wells Nursing Home. They
                need a generator - advised her to contact Radio Mercury.

                Several requests for candles - we only issue with discretion,particularly
                not to the elderly.

15.15   hrs.   Received go-ahead from Scout Shops to collect gaz.   Northamptonshire______
                Red Cross advised driver would now lea v e .

15.35   hrs.   Several calls from Social Services re. elderly needing visits and follow-
                through.

               Throughout dav Welfare Officer contacted as many Centres as possible
               for up-date of state of Centre, requests received by Centre, help given,
               state of general public in surrounding areas.     Response patchy - some
               Centres doing sterling work, others unaware of any problems, had to be
               urged to go out and l o o k . Few in touch with other major organisations,
               eg. WRVS and Age Concern.     Again, urged to make contact and cooperate
               with eachother wherever possible. ...                           ....

20.45 hrs.     Northamptonshire vehicle arrived Lancing Depot.   9 ambulances dispatched
                to pick up supplies and deliver all over the County.

Tuesday,   20th October 1987 - Day 5

013.30 hrs.    Most deliveries completed - some further   follow-ups required.

08.15   hrs.   Several calls re. areas needing gaz.   Ambulance   dispatched to deliver.

08.45 hrs.     Mid Sussex Water urgently need water (!)   to be delivered to Rest Homes
                in Crowborough area.

               Welfare Officer had requested Crowborough Centre Organiser to visit
               Horder Centre for Arthritics said to possibly have problems with water.
               She meanwhile continued to contact Centres for up-dace, etc., as per
               Monday.

               Water barrels loaned from University of Sussex as and when needed.

               Typical examples coming to BHQ attention : water leaking through
               house, pouring down power lines, contact with Police and Social Services —
               suggested re-housing, occupant declined.  Second visit later, water
               pouring through house, now definite need to be re-housed.   Throughout
               day hundreds of calls for assistance due to deteriorating weather.
               People now very frightened about safety in their own homes.

               Surrey Branch rang and offered personnel and vehicles, glady accepted -
               also offered water containers.




                                           -7-
   Heavy rain now falling.    Telephone calls coming in - over 100 calls
   within 50 minutes.    All available personnel called in. Some crews
   unable to reach BHQ due to severe flooding on major roads.   Horrendous
   situation.    Members involved in re-housing, pulling down treacherous
   ceilings, use of hard hats essential, climbing into attics to sort out
  .leaks, isolating power, liaising with fire service (though all their
   fire appliances in East and West Sussex out in that first hour). Most
   calls to BHQ start with "I rang the Fire Brigade and they said to
   'phone you'".

  All Centres in worst hit areas opened ready to accept evacuees.  Severe
  flooding in most areas.   Detailed members just to sit with frightened
  householders until our relief teams arrived to give practical assistance.
  Members continued deliveries of lights, cookers and tarpaulins until
  midnight, but remained on stand-by at BHQ throughout the night, including
  some of the Surrey team.

21st October 1987 - Day 6

  Eventually stood down all working teams.  Team members slept at BHQ in
   readiness, in anticipation of returning deluge.   Calls received during
   night from Radio Sussex for up-dates and how we "were coping with the
   storm".

  TVS rang wanting to interview evacuees.

  Di Churchill went to Brighton & Hove Centre and met up with TV and
  Radio.   2 evacuees interviewed.   Some hassle because they wanted names
  and addresses to go and do doorstep interviews and film houses. Refused
  in accordance with Red-Cross policy of confidentia lity.   Then requested
  to take one evacuee home and film.   We insisted on using Red Cross
  transport with personnel — TV crew made evacuee go in and come out and
  then filmed her going back in again.   Di Churchill contacted NHQ to
  confirm we were right not to give names.

  Warnings of severe flood damage throughout Sussex, coming in constantly
  from Police, radio, drivers, etc.

  Mention must be made here that throughout the emergency a Survey was
  being undertaken in the village of Ardingly and the first draft report
  was received at BHQ.   This Survey was first suggested by a local doctor
  as we were interested in checking on secluded villages and Ardingly was
  felt to be a good example as it was completely isolated and this doctor
  was prepared to carty this out.   Stage one will be reported on in a
  separate appendix.   This will also be an ongoing exercise, to see how
  they eventually recover.

  Very short of Sussex personnel, but Surrey personnel arrive - 12 members
  plus vehicles.

  Many re-visits required to people who had been helped in the middle of
  the night.   Checked on all families where there were serious structural
  problems - and some further evacuations were made.
   Still in close contact with local radio to broadcase our services.  In
   constant demand, members continuously visiting homes, many requests for
   cookers and light.

   Wu scill had 3 or 4 Centres coping with evacuees and members on ducy
   round che clock.
             The same vehicle continued to tour the Mid Sussex villages, in addition
             to two more vehicles sent out from BHQ.    These were mainly knocking on
             doors asking if occupants needed assistance of any kind.    They also
             tried to discover the most likely responsible person who could be a "king
             pin" in each village.   This task was continued over the next 5 days,
             wherever our teams found themselves.    However, in many areas drivers were
             still experiencing difficulties getting through to the more isolated
             villages and again often having to proceed on foot.

             Reports coming back were more and more to the effect that people were
             experiencing reaction, having come through the numb stage and now often
             suffering from acute depression, but they were very relieved to see our
             members bringing relief.

             Typically the media were becoming less interested.

             CEPO - East Sussex rang.   He thought the situation in the villages had
             been somewhat exaggerated in the media - we quickly disillusioned him! We
             also explained that in many villages we had had to stir up a community
             effort.

             During the morning Oxfordshire Branch rang and offered assistance, e.g.
             blankets.   We asked them Co hold these in case of need later.

             More Surrey personnel arrived to help.

             Call received from Thames TV, asking Di Churchill to appear live next
             morning on "The Time, the Place" programme.   Consulted NHQ for approval,
             but received call back vetoing this.

             90% of Mid Sussex villages checked by now, most still without power, some
             without water.   Wherevec possible areas continue to be checked by
             individual visits, light and heat given out in addition to BHQ telephone
             number.

            -Mada_ cant a c t with Rev. Amos in East Hoathly.    The morale of this village
             very low.       Until now~tRe~s£hool kitchen ha<3 been" unsafe” to use, but- now ""
             considered a viable proposition lrTWhlch lu eblablish-a spgp^kitchen and^
             with our backing, the kev. Amos would undertake this task.                      *

             Meanwhile, Ditchling soup kitchen was checked and more supplies of food
             handed over.   Village support was excellent there, largely due to the
             efforts of our own Centre Organiser.______

            .Welfare Officer spoke to Mrs. Lindley. WRVS East Sussex-Conntry Off-Lg.*
    x:      and updated her on types -of help we      were giving.    She herself had been
            flooded at home, sent SOS to us and       very      grateful for our help from a
            very nice man sent from our BHQ.

            Throughout the whole operation we were constantly        checking and re-checking
            areas known to be in great need.

Friday, 23rd October 1987 - Day 8

            Dispatched heaters and gaz bottles to several Residential Care Homes
            and Homes for Handicapped people.   As weather was colder, calls coming in
            all the time now for heaters as well as light and cookers.




                                       -10-
            The same vehicle continued to tour the Mid Sussex villages, in addition
            to two more vehicles sent out from BHQ.    These were mainly knocking on
            doors asking if occupants needed assistance of any kind.    They also
            tried to discover the most likely responsible person who could be a "king
            pin" in each village.   This task was continued over the next 5 days,
            wherever our teams found themselves.    However, in many areas drivers were
            still experiencing difficulties getting through to the more isolated
            villages and again often having to proceed on foot.

            Reports coming back were more and more to the effect that people were
            experiencing reaction, having come through the numb stage and now often
            suffering from acute depression, but they were very relieved to see our
            members bringing relief.

            Typically the media were becoming less interested.

            CEPO - East Sussex rang.   He thought the situation in the villages had
            been somewhat exaggerated in the media - we quickly disillusioned him! We
            also explained that in many villages we had had to stir up a community
            effort.

            During the morning Oxfordshire Branch rang and offered assistance, e.g.
            blankets.   We asked them to hold these in case of need later.

            More Surrey personnel arrived to help.

            Call received from Thames TV, asking Di Churchill to appear live next
            morning on "The Time, the Place" programme.   Consulted NHQ for approval,
            but received call back vetoing this.

            90Z of Mid Sussex villages checked by now, most still without power, some
            without water.   Wherever possible areas continue to be checked by
            individual visits, light and heat given out in addition to BHQ telephone
            number.

          — Made— contact with Rev. Amos in East Hoathly.   The morale of this v i llage
            very low.    Until now tne school kitchen had been unsate co u s e , but"now
            considered a viable proposition in Which lu establish a soCp ''kitchen and,
            witTT our backing, the Kev. Amos would undertake this task.

            Meanwhile, Ditchling soup kitchen was checked and more supplies of food
            handed over.   Village support was excellent there, largely due to the
            efforts of our own Centre Organiser.___

            Welfare Officer spoke to Mrs. Lindleyr WRVS East. Sussex .County Officer,,----
            and updated her on types o-f help we were giving.   She herself had been
            flooded at home, sent SOS to us and very grateful for our help from a
            very nice man sent from our BHQ.

            Throughout the whole operation we were constantly checking and re-checking
            areas known to be in great need.

Friday, 23rd October 1987 - Day 8

            Dispatched heaters and gaz bottles to several Residential Care Homes
            and Homes for Handicapped people.   As weather was colder, calls coming in
            all the time now for heaters as well as light and cookers.




                                     -10-
      Contacted Daily Mail and The Mail on Sunday re. specific disaster
      situations.   Discussed in general terms and gave areas of particular
      hazard, eg. Wisborough Green/Saltdean, but no individual names.

      Mr. John Fullard, Regional Officer (West), arrived to assess our operation
      so far and after discussions he was taken on a tour of some of the most
      damaged areas on the coast.   We also visited the Ditchling'soup kitchen
      and met some of the local inhabitants.

      We were contacted by the Social Services Area Director at Haywards Heath,
      regarding provision of soup kitchens by Red Cross in h is area.   He was
      sending out his people to check on each of his villages (he gave us a list)
      and would report back to us.   So far from the reports he had received
      everyone was managing.   It was pointed out to him that this was perhaps
      not quite accurate as there was still a vast area of Mid Sussex without
      electricity, with a considerable number of elderly in the isolated areas
      who would still be having great problems (no warmth, hot meals, etc.).
      We felt these people were just "existing" - our aim was to improve their
      quality of life as far as was possible in the circumstances.    A typical
      report from a social worker went : "Mrs. X has a candle and is managing to
      cook over an open fire - she seems to be alright"!!

      Petworth Centre had been giving us daily reports and now informed us that
      another village had been opened up.   They, therefore, needed extra stocks
      of heat and light.   An ambulance was dispatched immediately with supplies.

      At this point we were still the only suppliers of gaz and tarpaulins in .
      the Counties.' By this time    we had been receiving calls from people to
      whom we had given tarpaulins   saying they had used only a portion of a
      tarpaulin or, in a very few cases, had not had to use ours after all.
      Therefore we were now in a position to get these back and re-distribute.

      Up to now the Fire Service had been almost entirely occupied in hosing
      down salt-encrusted power lines and removing unsafe structures, eg. chimney
      stacks, etc.   However, due to our constant pestering they were now able
      to send an officer to assess the severity of damage in individual cases on
      our recommendation and, where applicable, would send a team in to make safe
      some of the roofs where we had only been able to put up makeshift covering
      in situations which were too dangerous for our members to undertake.

      Local Radio was now asked to publicise our need for the return of unused
      part or whole tarpaulins.

     In some cases which came to light following the heavy rain storm on Tuesday
     night, we had been providing a continuity of help to cater for both physical
     and emotional needs, eg. helping to^fill in insurance claims, shopping,
     house clearance, putting up curtains, rolling up carpets, etc.

, 24th October 1987 - Day 9

     _Wg still have all Centres on   standby and 24-hour coverage..^ t BBQ ..and «nmo —
      Centres.

     Up-dates were given to CEPOs East and West Sussex.
              Several calls now coming in from people distressed because where there
              is now power their street appears to be neglected and still without power.
              Having gone through the depression stage, people were now becoming angry
              at the apparent neglect by the "service authorities".  The following was
              typical of a number of telephone calls we were now receiving : The caller
              was very irate at lack of interest shown by the SEGB, but.how kind we,
              BRCS, had been as we were "the only people who had listened and said we
              would try to help."

              Surrey Branch members were still supporting us.

              Vehicles again dispatched throughout Sussex still searching out areas in
              need, re-filling gaz cylinders, householders still being encouraged.

 Afternoon   After Welfare Officer had contacted County Organiser East Sussex WRVS,
              arrangements made for immediate collection by local WRVS of a quantity of
              perishable food (including a large consignment from a Harvest Festival
              collection) as they had facilities for cooking and also had had their own
              stocks depleted by the current emergency.

23.30 hrs.   Late call from a single parent family at Forest Row - with young children     -
              had run out of gaz - no heating.   Ambulance dispatched.

Sunday, 25th October 1987 - Day 10

             Team reported back - an arthritic lady found without heat.  In summer her
             back boiler broke and Social Services had supplied gas heater.  No repair
             made to boiler.   Gas cylinder now empty, but as she lives two flights up
             cannot carry up replacement.
                                                                                               k
09.00 hrs.   Welfare Officer requested Forest Row Centre to visit and assess, with view
             *to getting Social Services to do something about repairing boiler, before
             winter sets in.    Forest Row reported they were following up.

             gards now being prepared to distribute where re-housing had taken place,
             stating our BHQ telephone number if further help required.

             All caravan parks from which people had been evacuated re-checked with
             sice managers and practical help (blankets, crockery, cutlery) offered.

             Contacted by Southern Electric asking venues of soup kitchens - BRCS or
             other - so they could send a representative to talk to public about the
             general situation.

              Informed radio media that we are still operational.

             Di Churchill had further conversation with Radio Brighton and gave an
             up-date.

             Throughout weekend reports from Youth Groups coming in.   They were helping
             their local communities by clearing rubble, stacking logs, hanging curtains,
             etc.

             Still some concern about isolated areas in Mid Sussex which perhaps we
             still had not reached.  Therefore had BHQ tel.no. broadcast over CB._____
             offering help.
                Several calls coming in as result of Radio Sussex Help Line.      Teams
                dispatched.

                Roofing teams were still out throughout day and evening.

                After lunch were pleased to welcome Steve Davey from NHQ who spent a
                considerable time in the Operations Room, observing the comings and goings.
                Later, accompanied by Di Churchill and also by Brian Purvis who had been
                very heavily involved in roofing operations especially in the Rottingdean/
                Peacehaven areas and thus had firsthand knowledge of what had been achieved
                Mr. Davey toured some of the worst coastal areas.

               Work was now severely hampered due to the clocks having been put back the
               previous night.   The loss of this hour of daylight created quite hazardous
               conditions for the teams.

23.45 hrs.     Lyn Covey and Di Churchill settled down in their sleeping bags for an
               "early night"!   Woken abruptly by telephone (ever tried answering a ’phone
               call when cocooned in a sleeping bag?!).   An elderly lady to whom a gaz
               cylinder had been delivered (complete with guidance as always from the team!
               was trying to make herself a late hot drink.  Couldn't light the cylinder,
               could smell the gaz, should she light a match to see better!!  Strongly
               exhorted not to do so, to wait and do nothing except open windows and
               vacate room.   Kept reassuring her and meanwhile on other line BHQ tried to
               contact local Centre - no luck - so contacted County Police.  Were then
               able to assure caller local police on their way to her.

               This had been by comparison a fairly quite day!!

Monday,   26th October 1987 - Day 11

08.00 hrs.     Rang late night caller to check she was all right.   Then sent a team to
               check on her and they showed her again how to use appliance.

               Now becoming besieged by calls for light, heating,   tarpaulins.

               Weather deteriorating - more rain forecast.

               CEPOs East and West rang to say they were closing down their emergency line

               Roofing team sent on urgent call to Saltdean.   This call involved First
               Aid/Nursing/Welfare, as well as roofing.   Elderly man had heart attack in
               haght of hurricane, was now home from hospital, had cut hand severely
               trying to do repairs, very distressed.   Elderly wife severe bronchitic,
               needed making comfortable.   Roof had 15' hole which needed urgent
               attention.   Roofing-team spent over 7 hours caring for this couple and
               repairing roof, but by the end of the day whole situation eased, the couple
               considerably relieved and neighbours made aware of situation and prepared
               to help.

               As the weekend had been comparatively quiet we had not expected such a
               busy Monday.   In the event, it turned out to be hectic for which we were
               unprepared and had only 2 vehicles on call.   By this time our teams, who
               had been so splendid over the past two weeks, were having to return to work
               A vote of thanks is due to those employers who cooperated with us in this
               as far as possible.   Some other members, we suspect, had a convenient
               attack of ’flu' for a couple of days!




                                         -13-
              Further teams from the north of the Counties had to be called in to BHQ
              during the afternoon, these members having previously been involved in
              working in their own areas but were now needed to provide back-up throughoi
              the Counties.

              Throughout, we had been receiving offers from the public ’of clothing,
              bedding, furniture, etc.   /The Welfare Officer suggested, as we.- were
              totally occupied with emergency calls and could not possibly make use of
              all these, that we should share these with the other major organisations
              likely to be invovled with elderly and handicapped people in need as a
              result of the emergency.    She, therefore, sent copies of the lists to East
              and West Sussex County Organisers for WRVS, Age Concern, the Associations
              for the Disabled and Blind, who were most appreciative and, in many
              instances, (we heard later) were able to take up some of the offers.

              During the afternoon we also received a visit from a senior South Coast
              SEEBOARD official, who brought us a very helpful map and list of direct
              emergency lines for the whole oT~Sussex g   He also presented us with^a
              cheque towards continuing services we were supplying.    He also wanted to
              know how he could help us - possibly yet again providing personnel at each
              of our soup kitchens to help allay fears and discuss problems within small
              communities.    In principle, this was a good idea but difficult to pv.t into
              practice because by this time the majority of our soup kitchens were moving
              their locations.

              Following discussion with Steve Davey on how we would be able to continue
              ~o provide help on a 24-hour basis (especially as our telephone number had
               een broadcast continuously throughout Sussex and people were recognising
               t as a 24-hour help line) Di Churchill obtained a telephone answering
               achine for BHO. __This-would not only be useful in the current emergency
               ut also valuable for future eveftcuaixcl'fis:'

               s Raynet had been stood down on Sunday evening, we were now using our own
               adios which, although normally work efficiently all over Sussex, we
               ave experienced some difficulty in the past with taxi firms.   However, due
               o the emergency obviously many more short-wave radios were brought into
               he Counties which almost totally blocked our net/YRiftughout the normal
               orking day.  They, therefore, proved almost useless, unfortunately, at
               his time.

              On many occasions throughout the day we liaised with various Electricity
              Boards, either informing them of problems in particular areas or asking for
              their assistance, eg. water pouring down power lines in houses or fallen
              1     resting on power lines.

                  ipur personnel cover at BHQ discontinued and Ansaphone brought into
              operation, providing 2 alternative emergency numbers.

Tuesday, 27th October 1987 - Day 12

07.30 hrs.   All messages left on Ansaphone
                                  ,         now dealt with.  On this we received call
             from a builder offering assistance as a result of hearing on radio about
             elderly couple with no money, not insured, tree through roof and no means
             of removing it.   We had no knowledge of this radio appeal (although the
             details were technically correct as we knew from our records).   We had '
             visited them on several occasions during the crisis and although we had
             provided TLC and some practical help we had so far failed to find anyone



                                       -14-
                Co remove che cree from Che middle of Che roof.    Therefore, chis
                builder's offer seemed providential.    We senc him wich a Red Cross
                escorc.   Lacer, che builder rang us - again racher irace - saying
                Chis couple's need was noC as greac as Che media had made ouC, they
                obviously had means, had a n ew car in Cheir garage (chis Curried ouC
                Co be a 9-year old car and, anyway mighc noc have belonged’ Co chem).
                Lyn Covey poinced ouC chac Red Cross is noc in Che business of choosing
                ics clienCs or assessing means before offering help.    He CoCally refused
                Co assise in repairing che roof chough he had broughc cools with him, but
                he did assist our roofing Ceam in hauling che cree off che house, afcer
                which our ceam swung inco accion Co make a Cemporary repair.

                Calls now coming in from a differenc cliencele, i.e. people of cercain
                means who would normally never ever call on Social Services or a Charicy
                for help.   These people were in Cheir way jusc disCressed and coming Co
                Che end of cheir cecher - even if Chey could afford to pay for services
                che help simply was noc available - builders by now had such long liscs.
                All ocher sources had been Cried and eicher non-exiscenc or promises made
                which were noc kepc.   We were licerally Che lasc resorc.

                We spoke wich the Councy Organisers of WRVS Ease and WesC Sussex fo find
                ouC whae services Chey were still providing, e.g. soup kitchens.   They
                had increased the number of individual visits wich meals, but had closed
                down their feeding stations..  However, chey would be willing Co open up
                again ac our requesc if we found a need, or would take on individuals
                referred by us._____

                It became apparent that by now Red Cross were the only people still ’              f
                providing any form of emergency service in the disaster-scrudc Mid Sussex
                areas.   All other emergency services appeared to have shut down and
                returned to their non-emergency state.

                As a result we made contact with Mid Sussex villages, either through Ked
                Cross Centres or by making some individual visits to ascertain present
                needs, and looking to areas which may need continuing help in some form or
                other.   The result of this showed a considerable number of villages still
                without total power - CEGB estimated 40,000 homes at this time.

                Southern Sound rang to enquire how else they could help us and we asked
                could they put an appeal out for location of areas still without electricity
                and any other particular needs - especially soup kitchens, heat, light.
                After giving them an up-date they commented how impressed they were with
                the services we were still continuing to give.   We subsequently received
                several calls as a result which highlighted some hitherto unrecorded areas
              . without power.

Wednesday,   28th October 1987 - Day 13

07.45 hrs.     Red Cross posters giving our emergency help line were drawn up for______
                distribution in as many areas of Sussex as possible, mainly put into
                sub-Post Offices.                                            '

10.00 hrs.     Weather improved — consequent drop in telephone calls, but roofing team
                still active.

              — jjgMyg.             was receiving enquiries from o ther_areas qf che UK abouC
              . rela tiv es. ancL.al.SQ. received , an. enquiry" via .NHQ. fromTcEe" .Canadian
                                                                                        Red Cross.-
                abo.uc an.„.e.lderly..lady...iB che Hastings area. She follnved rh-fg up rhrr?ngh   ■
               _£h.e Hastings Welfare Officer and received a report back in a few hours
                that all was well.         Routine calls during the rest of day.       ...... ....
                                              -15-
Thursday, 29th October 1987 - Day 14

09.00 hrs.   As things somewhat quieter we were asked to close down the Operations.
              Room, though we realised we would still continue to receive some~
              enquiries which were then handled from our respective offices.

              Later, an urgent call came in from occupants of flats in Hove - pre­
              viously assisted by our roofing team - now the ceiling of top flat had
              collapsed and occupants of lower flats very concerned about top flat's
              occupant, and elderly man urgently in need of help.   Team sent to locatior
              found total destruction of top flat, everything saturated and rotting with
              overpowering stench.   Team removed carpets with difficulty, mov*d
              furniture where possible but, in their opinion, nothing salvageable.   They
              suggested the room be allowed to dry for about 10 days and then to call us
              again.   Meanwhile, the elderly man evacuated to temporary accommodation.

              Such teams as we still have now involved in collecting tarpaulins, used
              but no longer required, plus cookers, lights and heat.  BHQ marrying these
              calls up with any adjacent requests for help.   However, the collection of
              no longer needed equipment could prove a daunting task due to our now
              limited resources and diversity of deliveries.

Friday 30th October 1987 - Day 15

              Continued collection of goods, thus able to redistribute tarpaulins for
              occasional new request, including a farmer desperately needing cover for
              his haystack!

              Sundry other requests, e.g. from business houses and estate managing
              agents who had been unable to procure -ta rpaulins from other sources.

              Orraslnnal rails from Soria! Services for assistance.'1' Call from
              Storrington area from neighbours, worried about elderly lady in her 80s
              who had coped very well throughout crisis but now reached breaking point.
              Still without electricity, etc.   Neighbours asked us not to revaal they
              had rung us.   Member dispatched to call discreetly on elderly person
              saying he was checking all houses in her road.    She broke down, was
              comforted and member promised to see what he could do.   Spoke to electric!-
              men repairing cables and got their promise to give her house priority.He
              returned to house, switched on at mains and "hey presto", there was power!
              Red Cross does it again!!   One very satisfied and grateful old lady.

Saturday 31st October - Day 16

              Several calls on a n s a p h o n e . Requests still fnr taryauHns? also
              collections of heat and light.          All dealt with during morning.

              Stock of equipment at BHQ slowly sorted and taken to new temporary storage
              area.   In the future we will urgently require storage premises in East,
              West and Mid Sussex, in preparation for winter and any future emergency.

              During afternoon, request from family in isolated area near Petworth who
              had been told their telephone would be out of order for many weeks.
              Urgently require some form of communication as this family caring for two
              elderly people.   3 CB sets dispatched and left with household in working
              order.

              JlitckldLa-g   soup   Kitchen served its last meal!


                                            -1 6 -
Sunday, 1st November 1987 - Day 17

              Continued clearing up at BHQ and re-distributing tarpaulins as
              requested.

              Gifts of heaters' and blankets still coining in.  Collections arranged
              as and when convenient, but now experiencing considerable problems in
              collection of cookers, heat and light equipment, firstly because of
              shortage of vehicles and drivers and secondly because people were now
              trying to pin us down to specific times which, in most cases, was im­
              possible to meet.    Therefore, several abortive trips made.

Monday/Tuesday,   2nd/3rd November 1987 - Days 18 & 19

      I ,    Occasional enquiries and requests coming in.   Ansaphone still proving
     A /     its worth.     Welfare Officer received 2 enquiries via NHQ from Canadian
       Y\    Red Cross on behalf of people who could not get news of relatives since
       A     hurricane.     We anticipate a trickle of such enquiries and requests will
              continue for some time.




                                         -17-
     B R I T I S H              R E D           C R O S S                S O C I E T Y
                         SUSSEX COUNTIES BRANCH


           H U R R I C A N E                        E M E R G E N C Y
           a s a s a s s a a a a n a s s a a s s a s a B M S s a B a a a s a i s s s s




Listyd below          LOGGED PHONE CALLS - wich specific requests for help

                      Tarpaulins                                                    585
                      Roof repairs                                                  302
                      Reassurance/welfare                                            90
                      Cookers                                                       249
                      Lights                                                        273
                      Heaters                                                       233
                      Gaz cylinders                                                 376
                      Blankets                                                       60
                     Food                                                            15
                     Candles                                                             6
                     Tree-felling                                                        2
                     Ariel removal                                                    1
                     Beds/rehousing                                                  53
                     Water/Tabs                                                       5
                     Torches                                                          9
                     Shed                                                             1
                     Haystack                                                         1
                     Generator                                                        3
                     Plumbing                                                         J

                                                                                             (actual visits in many
                         Total                                                 2,280         cases doubled this number)


                    Old people’s homes visited                                       38
                    Nursing homes/homes for
                      handicapped                                                    16
                    BRCS Centres used for re­
                    housing                                                              5
                    BRCS 'soup'kitchens set up                                      11
                    Mid Sussex villages without
                      power, checked & supplies
                      taken (blankets, heaters
                      lights, torches, etc.)                                      181


  Many old people, single-parent families, shocked and distressed,
  art constantly being revisited.

  Estimate of total mileage involved is thought to be in the region
  of 9,000 miles approximately.




                                                           -18-
CENTRE ORGANISERS OVERVIEW


Initial problems - 16.10.87 AM.

Centre Organiser and probably other members unable to get out of house/drive/road etc.

Telephones out of order - fortunately some phones able to recieve incoming calls.
Great difficulty assessing extent of damage in village, with houses without power, etc.
and wheze greatest needs lie.

P M - (when possible to leave home)
Made contact with village G.P. and went through list of those at particular risk
(especially of hypothermia) and accounted for other lone residents.         Visited and
reassured where necessary, delivering hot water and some food.

17.10.87

Contacted some Red Cross members - all contacts had to be made personally, as still no
telephone.      Arranged to serve soup and hot drinks and fill thermos in local Scout Hut

during morning.      Not a great response, but it could only be publicised by blackboard
at Post Office and by word of mouth.       Continued to liaise with surgery and members in
their various areas and help where possible.

18.10.87

Ventured further afield into adjoining parishes checking on conditions and those
possibly in need.      No supplies available yet, but hot water available and reassurance.

19.10.87

Telephone working!      Contact with County branch.   Supplies coming.     By this time we
had a good idea where there were real problems and where there were gas cookers, Agas,
hot water and, in a few cases, light.      Anyone who was alone and without any services
was either visited or accounted for by asking neighbours to watch.        Three persons
had been taken into hospital by now as enough care could not be arranged at home
(two had had falls).      Continued liaison with surgery.    Doctor requesting varying
assistance.      Still supplying hot* dtfinks, etc. and realising the crisis would be with
us for some time.      In hindsight, it could have been useful to contact other welfare
organisations by now.

We had been given free use of the Village Hall which was on power and has gas cookers.
Hot lunches could now be served and these were offered to anyone with no means of
cooking, but especially with elderly and young families in mind.         We fed 40-50
persons each day in a fairly organised fashion and the atmosphere was fantastic.          We

used supplies from the Red Cross, gifts of food from freezers which had to be emptied

and bought the rest with donations.      Junior members came to help, as did the Brownies
one day.      These lunches continued until the last of the houses without power had

been restored, for those who wished to come.      Our greatest problem was communication.
Duplicated slips were posted through letterboxes to probable customers, local radio,-
personal contact and blackboards were used in the village and the news spread fairly
quickly through the outskirts via the driver of the Village Rider bus.       Meanwhile,
more heaters, lights and cookers had arrived and could be handed out or delivered.
                                                                         «
By this time some of those who thought they could manage for a few days had begun to
realise that a long-term problem was here and more requests for help came in.       It was
difficult to judge how many would come for lunch, but with judicious serving and quick
snacks in reserve, no one was left wanting.      There were still old people who refused
to leave their homes, either for a meal or for temporary admission to hospital and
this increased the work-load, as we had to go in to them at least twice a day or send

in supplies with the District Nurse.     Several were afraid of Gaz appliances and so
could not be helped in this way, but I feel it is .wiser in any case to use candles for
light, as this is what they are used to.      At least two elderly men were put off
coming for lunches as "soup kitchen" had been mentioned.      Apparently wartime memories
and the idea of "charity" were too much for them.      The term had not originated with
us, but with the local police, who were otherwise most helpful buzzing round checking
on houses for us and suggesting sources of equipment and arranging transport.         As
more people were re-connected,   the demands obviously became less.

Summary of observations & lessons learned

Daylight hours, during which so much.sorting out had to be done, were restricted and,
in some cases, conflicting loyalties arose.     As the novelty of the situation wore off,
stress began to show and tempers frayed.      Of course, one needs people with local
knowledge to help other locals, but I feel it is worth bearing in mind that outside help
from non-involved adults may be necessary.     Delegation is never easy, but we tended to
run into trouble with some members who tried to do too much and others who considered
they should have been allowed to do mpre (regardless of capability!).        As things were,
a number of those who would normally be at work were unable to be so and, therefore,
available to me.     I wonder whether they would have been freed to help under other
circumstances.     I understand that employers were most cooperative, but it worried me
to see how exhausted some of those who delivered to us were.      We tried to make sure
they were fed and watered and at least that the drivers were refreshed and rested
briefly.

I was dismayed to find that initially we had overlooked several seemingly able-bodied
persons, assuming they were capable of coping or finding help for themselves.         Two
independent, intelligent gentlemen who had been checked and were happy with their
arrangements were later found to be in the early stages of hypothermia.       A single

                                                                        •../...
parent with three children and a senile mother-in-law was found to have no means of
cooking or heating water - she had had a Gaz cooker (which I knew about from the last
lengthy power-cut) but had thrown it out when it sprang a lead and never got round
to replacing it.   She was ashamed to admit her failure and had becomfe depressed,
especially as she had suffered severe damage to her business premises.    An hour after
setting up a two-ring Gas cooker, she was a different woman.   We were also struck by
the lack of cooperation and concern from relatives (particularly children).    It
wasn't safe to assume that they had had any contact with their parents.    In fact, any
assumptions were dangerous!   Checking and re-checking was essential.
           SOUTH SUSSEX RAYNET - SUMMARY OF OPERATION ’ BIG BLOW

                                       lo   -   25 OCTOBER 1 9 8 7

On t h e e a r l y m o r n i n g o f F r i d a y 16 O c t o b e r 1 9 8 7 a s t o r m ,                    the
f e r o c i t y o f w h i c h h a s n o t b e e n s e e n i n S u s s e x f o r 300 y e a r s , h i t
w i t h o u t b e i n g f o r e c a s t . A w i n d o f s p e e d s u p t o 1 0 8 mph h i t t h e
South East of England,                       the County of Sussex ta k in g a s e v e re
b a t t e r i n g c a u s i n g chaos and d e v a s t a t i o n . Not o n l v d i d 6 . 0 0 0 . 0 0 0
t r e e s g e t blown down,               b u t t h e m a j o r i t y o f b u i l d i n g s h a d some
d a m a g e r a n g i n g f r o m t h e o d d t i l e o f f t o c o m p l e t e d e m p l i t i o n . Many
p e o p i e w e r e ma d e h o m e l e s s a n d w e r e d e a l t w i t h b y l o c a l c o u n c i I s .
B .R .C .S . and n e i g h b o u r s .

During           the     late    m orning,         a c a l l was r e c e i v e d by o u r d e p u t y
c o n t r o l l e r f r o m t h e S u s s e x B r a n c h o f t h e B r i t i s h Re d C r o s s S o c i e t y
r e q u e s t i n g a r a d i o s t a t i o n t o b e s i t e d i n t h e i r B r a n c h H. Q. i n Hove
t o l i n k t h e o t h e r C e n t r e s a s t h e t e l e p h o n e s y s t e m wa s n o t r e l i a b l e . -
Th e S e t t i n g up o f t h e n e t wa s s l o w d u e t o r o a d c o n d i t i o n s , b u t d u e
t o s o me m e m b e r s b e i n g h o m e , b y mi d a f t e r n o o n , t h e r e w e r e l i n k s o u t
to v a rio u s c e n t r e s .

R a y n e t members o v e r t h e weekend a s s i s t e d the B.R.C.S. in having
m e m b e r s i n Red C r o s s C e n t r e s a n d o n v e h i c l e s . T h e N a t i o n a l R e d
Cross H eadquarters                 s e n t an a r t i c u l a t e d       l o r r y down w i t h h e a v y
p l a s t i c s h e e t i n g f o r r o o v e s . a n d b l a n k e t s . A l l o f o u r member s w e r e
u s e d i n s o me c a p a c i t y , s o me g r e a t e r t h a n o t h e r s .

On S a t u r d a y a t a b o u t 2 0 . 4 5 , a c a l l wa s r e c e i v e d a t t h e Red C r o s s
emergency c o n tro l,               from West S u s s e x R a y n e t Group C o n t r o l l e r ,
r e q u e s t i n g S o u t h S u s s e x R a y n e t to h e l p c o v e r t h e West S u s s e x
C o u n t y C o u n c i l s u r v e y o r s h i g h w a y n e t a s t h e i r PMR l i n k wa s d o w n .
Mi d S u s s e x G r o u p w e r e c a l l e d o u t t o c o v e r t h e n o r t h e r n e n d a t
Broadbridge Heath.

On T u e s d a y , m e m b e r s f r o m S u r r e y R a y n e t c a me d o wn t o s u p p l e m e n t o u r
m e mb e r s i n t h e o p e r a t i o n .     L a t e r in the e v e n i n g ,        s t a t i o n s were
h a v i n g s t a n d o w n f o r t h e n i g h t , wh e n a t a b o u t 2 0 . 0 0 . i t s t a r t e d t o
r a i n h a r d . T h i s commenced t h e s t a r t o f 100 p h o n e c a l l s an h o u r
c o m i n g i n t o t h e Re d C r o s s . C o n t r o l f r o m p e o p l e w i t h l e a k i n g r o o v e s .
T h a t n i g h t , s t a t i o n s who h a d b e e n s t o o d d o wn w e r e b e i n g r e - c a l l e d ,
s ome b e i n g a g a i n s t o o d d o wn a t 0 4 . 3 0 t h e f o l l o w i n g m o r n i n g .

 Th e s e c o n d h a l f o f t h e w e e k wa s i n v o l v e d i n t h e Red              Cross     taking
 o ut gas h e a t i n g , l i g h t i n g and co ok in g f a c i l i t i e s i n t o        areas     of the
• c o u n t y w h i c h h a d no e l e c t r i c i t y .

By T h u r s d a y , m o s t w o r k i n g me mbe r s - h a d r u n i n t o t h e p r o b l e m w h e r e
t h e i r e m p l o y e r s w e r e no l o n g e r g i v i n g t h e m t i m e o f f . T h i s ma de
t h i n g s v e r y t i g h t w i t h o n l y o u r r e t i r e d m e m b e r s , t h o s e o f f wo r k f o r
v a r i o u s r e a s o n s and s t u d e n t s b e in g t h o s e o n l y a v a i l a b l e d u r i n g th e
day.

R a y n e t r e c e i v e d s t a h d o w n f r o m t h e Re d C r o s s o n S u n d a v 25 O c t o b e r .
Th e o p e r a t i o n h a d l a s t e d „10 d a y s a f t e r a r o u n d 2 9 9 9 man h o u r s .

                                                -42-
T h a n k s m u s t g o t o a l l m e m b e r s who a s s i s t e d i n c o n t r o l , o t h e r S u s s e x
g r o u p s a n d S u r r e y f o r t h e i r t i m e g i v e n . A n u m b e r o f p r o b l e m s c a me
out of the o p e r a tio n ,           f o r s u c h an on g o i n g i n c i d e n t , member s a r e
u n a b l e t o t a k e mor e t h a n 2 - 3 d a y s o f f wor k w i t h o u t c a u s i n g g r e a t
problems w ith t h e i r e m p lo y e r s . There is a l s o the problem w ith
t i r e d n e s s w i t h s u c h l o n g h o u r s wh e n t h e r e i s n o t e n o u g h m a n p o w e r
a v a i l a b l e . We h a d p r o b l e m s w o r k i n g m o b i l e s ^ who h a d g o n e o u t i n t o
t h e c o u n t r y d u r i n g t h e l a t e r p a r t o f t h e w e e k , wh e n t h e r e w e r e n o
l i n k s t a t i o n s . More u s e o f r e p e a t e r s m i g h t b e made n e x t t i m e .
These,           among o t h e r s ,       w i l l h a v e to be p l a n n e d f o r in f u t u r e
incidents.




                                                     -43-
                         COUNTY HEADQUARTERS OBSERVATIONS OF
                     BRITISH RED CROSS WORK DURING THE HURRICANE


One telephone number
It proved vital to publish and broadcast our one "Helpline" number.              People in
an emergency need to phone just one organisation that will then consequently
filter calls and contact other organisations if necessary.

Organisations we liaise with :-
             WRVS East & West                            Social       Services
             Age Concern                                 Fire Service

             East Sussex Association for Disabled        Police
             West Sussex Association for Disabled        Parish       Councils
             Seeboard - Southern Water                    C E PO ’s

Ambulance Crews * Call-out

Much time was wasted trying to contact ambulance drivers through a normal Centre
call-out.      In future Centres should complete a separate call-out for crews so that
they may be contacted direct in an emergency.

Branch Officers Call-out

Many valuable members were not used in the emergency as their names do not appear
on any call-out sheets.      Branch staff who initiate the call-out purely work from
established call-out sheets.      They do not go through membership lists to see who is
missing!

Centre Call-outs

Valuable time was wasted looking up STD codes.      These must be on all call-out sheets
Greater clarity of whom to call at the head of the list would be appreciated.

County Maps

Although every Red Cross vehicle has in its Major Disaster box a Sussex street map
book and the 7 county OS maps, considerable problems were experienced in trying to
find isolated unfamiliar areas - particularly at night.       All familiar landmarks
and signposts appeared to have been blown down and people had considerable difficulty
in describing how to get to their homes.

N.B. This problem has now, hopefully, been solved with the advent of the two new
County books - these are basically OS maps with street names that cover the entire
area of East & West Sussex.

BRC Radios

Considerable difficulties were experienced when members were working in the Brighton
area as many other short-term hire radios were brought into the County for the
emergency and they all appeared to be on our wavelength!       Hopefully we will
                                         -48-                                         .../...
eventually have our own wavelength, so that the problem will not arise again.            ' .

Numbered Job Sheets

All calls to Branch Headquarters were logged and numbered.       This prevented the
problem of confidential information being passed over the radios and repeat calls
were able to be checked back.     Different coloured cards were used for different
types of requests - welfare, manual work, gaz, etc., thus enabling volunteers to
select appropriate tasks.

Media Coverage

We realised far too late that we were missing out on very valuable media coverage.
Although constantly being besieged by National Press & TV* we were slow to realise
that we should have had a photographer out with the teams as they aorlcpH -in t-he

villages.    Also, considering the work we were doing, we received very little local
publicity.    If anything like this should every happen again we feel that we must
have a National Headquarters Press Officer on hand to help us deal with national
media and a photographer to record our activities.

Rest Room for Workers

Many of the workers were involved in the emergency for several days and nights.and we
realised (quite late in the day) that we had overlooked the fact that some workers
were under considerable stress and_ were frequently exhausted.      It soon became
apparent that we should have set aside an area at Branch Headquarters where the
volunteers could eat and rest undisturbed by other work at Headquarters.      In ideal
circumstances it would be advantageous to have showering facilities, plus a volunteer
solely responsible for feeding the troops. We found that we were responsible for helpir
to feed many hundreds of people around the County and had completely forgotten
ourselves.

Storage of Equipment

All County resources were pooled at Branch Headquarters to facilitate ease of dis­
tribution.    However,   this caus-ed considerable inconvenience to Branch staff who
were continuing with the everyday running of the office.      However, we felt that it
was so advantageous to have all the equipment at one site and would probably repeat
this procedure in any other emergency.      A further problem - as the distributed goods
were gradually returned to Branch Headquarters,    future storage had to be looked into.

Long-term Availability of Volunteers

As the emergency progressed, members who had taken days off to assist felt duty-bound

to return to their normal employment.      As teams were still needed, Branch HQ

contacted employers direct to ask for further leave of absence.       Most firms when

told of circumstances were only too willing to comply.      However, the general

concensus of opinion was - if the emergency had been declared a major disaster,
firms would have released VAS members with no questions asked.

A large source of our manpower came from the student membership (in Sussex the
Pioneers) who were able to adjust studying schedules and, therefore,, were able to
help us throughout the emergency.____

Use of Vehicles

Our ambulance fleet proved an unusual resource.     Several days into the hurricane
emergency, it became apparent that many Mid Sussex villages were still without power,
telephones, etc. and it looked as if it would remain that way for some time to come.
We equipped out vehicles with all our emergency resources, such as blankets, heat,
light, spades, sand-bags, information hand-bills and posters, etc.       They were then
dispersed to allocated areas and the drivers were instructed to make themselves
known and to publicise our help-line number and offer any form to assistance as
required.

Emergency Equipment at Branch Headquarters

In the event of another disaster it is imperative that the Branch Headquarters control
has prior knowledge of the location and availability of equipment such as generators,
four-wheel drive vehicles, C.B. radio and other such emergency equipment.

Liaison        ,

It proved a tremendous advantage being part of a national network.      We received excel­
lent   back-up and cooperation from other Branches and National HQ, without whom we
would not have been able to function so well.

Branch Headquarters Control Team (

A deliberate decision was taken with regard to how many persons would be involved
in receiving calls on the help— line.    It was felt that the persons who contacted us
in distress would need continuity of voice and care -    although it is realised that
over a larger period this would,, perhaps, not be an ideal situation.     As the days

progressed and more calls were received, extra volunteers were called in to help
with the administration of control.

Centre Reaction

Those areas not too badly affected by the storm needed considerable convincing of
the work they should have undertaken in the surrounding areas.     It was felt that, in
some cases, perhaps not enough effort was put in to the initial recce.      Control's
task would have been made easier if all Centres had responded immediately and accepted
Branch's word on the state of affairs.
Utilization of Offers of Help

Direct offers of gifts, i.e. blankets, clothing, bedding, etc., were accepted with
grateful thanks.      We realised an early mistake - accepting goods on,loan, such as
gaz appliances.     These were lent after an appeal was broadcast on the local radio.
We accepted the offers without realising the enormous task ahead of us when we had

to collect equipment back and return it to the rightful owners - (seven months on
we are still continuing).

Various members of the public offered their time and skills if needed.
During periods of great activity these offers were accepted, but at all times
accompanied by uniform members of the Society and it was clearly explained that they
were working at their own risk.

Distribution of Gaz Equipment, etc.

We distributed appliances upon request, with no questions asked of the person's
circumstances.     We fully appreciated that we would not get all the equipment back at
the end of the emergency.     As each appliance was handed out, full instructions were
given as to its usage and it was left in full, working order.

Uniform

All members were asked to wear uniform throughout the emergency, particularly
reflective jackets and hard hats (the latter worn for our own personal safety). This
proved an excellent PR exercise as well as affording immediate recogniton from the

public.      ID cards were worn, which helped to allay many householders'   fears - as
we were frequently distributing goods and answering calls for help in the middle of
the night.

24-hr. Service

Our help-line was opened 24 hours a day, which proved extremely beneficial - as all
the late calls received proved to be very urgent - such as escaping gaz from cylinder,
ceiling collapse, stream diverting through a house!

Communications

With a majority of phone lines in the County out of action, Raynet proved indis­
pensable.     Where possible, all vehicles and main Centres had direct Raynet contact
with Branch HQ.     Where vehicles had no radio they were instructed to phone control
hourly when and where possible, to receive update and further instructions. However,

due to the unreliability of the telephone service, firstly before vehicles left we
endeavoured to plan a route for the day and crews were licenced to make their own
judgment and decisions on the spot.

Training Boundaries

It was felt quite strongly that we should ignore training boundaries set up by the
Society. All of our trained membership are taught to care and cope in a crisis.
The public frequently needed just an ear to listen to their problems, tender
loving care and the ability to think clearly in an organised way - something
that all of our trained members could undertake.

Assumptions can be dangerous.

On repeated occasions families who were thought to be coping were later discovered
to be in a state of shock and unable to think for themselves. This particularly
occurred with young competent families who were assumed to be coping admirably
with.the situation, however on checking these families on a second occasion
many were found to be lacking in the basic daily needs such as provisions of
hot food, lighting, heating etc. Therefore, any assumptions were dangerous -
checking and re-checking was essential.




                                   -52-
G eneraiiv speaking,                 Red C r o s s w o r k e r s
s e n t i n t o h e l p w i t h a d i s a s t e r w i l l be
f i t a nd w e l l t h e m s e l v e s and b a s e d in a
normal e nvironm ent, w ith only th e u s u a l
p e r s o n a l p r o b l e m s . I n t h i s i n s t a n c e , we
were a i l h a n d icap ped to a g r e a t e r or
l e s s e r d e g r e e , by l a c k o f p o w e r , l o s s o f
personal               possessions           and     g e n e r a l
d i f f i c u l t i e s a t h o me .

Sussex        Counties           Branch          responded
ad m ira b ly to a d e v a s t a t i n g emergency.
Mer aoer s. g a v e f r e e l y o f t h e i r s k i l l s , t i m e
and e n e r g i e s with l i t t l e            thought for
t h e i r own h u r r i c a n e r e l a t e d p r o b l e m s .

Throu gho ut t h e co un ty Youth. P i o n e e r s and
A d u i t me m o e r s w o r k e d h a n d i n h a n d w i t h
one        aim only           . . . .    to e i e v i a t e    the
s u f f e r i n g o f t h o s e a f f e c t a d bv t h e s t o r m .




                             -63-
Merseyside Fire & Civil Defence Authority
E m ergency Planning Gnit
                                      MRHA - MEDICAL

                                          18 J A N *989



Mr B Morgan
Acting Health & Emergen<
Planning Officer
Mersey Regional Health i                            RT/lOM/18
Hamilton House                            Yourref
Pall Mall
Liverpool 3                                Date     16 January 1988

Dear Mr Morgan

Meeting to consider resumption of the Merseyside
County Joint Emergency Executive Committee

Could I refer you to your recent telephone conversations with my
colleague, Roderick Tann, regarding a date for meeting on the
above matter.

It would now appear that the date of Monday 30 January is
satisfactory to those involved. Unless therefore I hear from you
to the contrary, I will look forward to seeing you in
Mrs Downham's office at 4 Tuebrook Terrace, 346 West Derby Road,
Liverpool 13, at 5.30 pm on that day.

I am enclosing a copy of some notes I prepared from our last
meeting on 31 October 1988.

Yours sincerely
                               aI   i i       I




CHIEF EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICER




  The Podium # Mulberry House # Canning Place # Liverpool •           LI 8JB
            Telephone 0 5 1 -7 0 8 5515 # 0 5 1 -7 08 8 5 4 8 (Fax)
            W R Holland # Chief Emergency Planning Officer
DRAFT


        MERSEYSIDE COUNTY JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
                                              11 OcJheLis
A meeting of this Committee will be held on      q-nptrmhrr 1988 at
                                                     f U Crrt\
                                 AGENDA           -------- ---

1   To appoint (or affirm) a County Co-ordinator and Secretariat
     for this Committee.

2   To receive apologies for absence.

3   To receive a verbal report from the CountyCo-ordinator on
     the present position of this Committee.

4   To receive a verbal report on the recently issued DHSS
     Circular 'Emergency Planning in the NHS: Health Service
     Responsibilities in Civil Defence'.

5   To consider the position on exercises.

6   To consider the position on the level andactivation          on
     Resources held by MCJEEC members.

7   To receive a verbal report on the proposedmeeting between
     VAS representatives from Counties in No 10Region with
     HM Armed Forces representative, North West Region.
8   Any other business.
                             *
9   Date and venue for next meeting.
' Merseyside Fire & Civil De                                uthority
 Emergency Planning Unit




 With Compliments

    * CLnuft




  The Podium # Mulberry House # Canning Place # Liverpool #      LI 8JB
            Telephone 051 -7 0 8 5515 • 05 1 -7 0 8 8548 (Fax)
            W R Holland # Chief Emergency Planning Officer
          BJM/MPT
                                                             Mr. B. J . Morgan
                                                             I z t . 2161

26th October 1987

Mrs. R. H* C. Sovnhaa J.P., 3.R.V.,
County Branch Director,
fhe British Bod Cross Society,
Rod Cross House,
346 Yost Derby Road,
Liverpool,
L1? 7H0

Soar Mrs. Downham,

Merseyside County J o in t Em vgm m r ftw w ttw Co— ltto o

I was pleased to ho able to attond the Mooting of the Merseyside County Joint
Baergency Executive Coaaittee on Tuesday last, 20th October 1987.

Ye touched on the question of the possibility of a saall stock of blankets
being held for the ¥A3, on certain preaises you have in aind.

Perhaps, I could call to see you soaetlae to follow this aatter up*

Vlth kind regards,

Tours sincerely,




B* J. Morgan
Acting Health Baergenoy Planning Offioer
r>aA' w
 o *. I fast- I jo t***
   MERSEYSIDE COUNTY JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

   A meeting of this Committee will be held on   MDctober
   1987, at BRCS Headquarters at Tuebrook Terrace.
             j
                                       AGENDA

«/ 1 .        To receive a verbal report from the County Coordinator
             on the present position of this Committee.

✓ 2.       Minutes of the last meeting          held on

 X 3-      Matters arising from Minutes of last meeting

/ 4*
           To receive a short presentation from the Chief
           Emergency Planning Officer on his work, with particular
           reference to -

           a) \ a n initiative on the recruitment and training of
                 Community Volunteers.

           b)         Table top exercises to test emergency plans.

    5.     To receive information from the Mersey Regional Health
           Authority representative of the progress of the draft
           DHSS Circular' HDC( 77)1 .

   6.      To discuss recently issued NJEEC Circular 5/87 & 6/87
           respectively./

   7.      To discuss need and form of future MJEEC meetings.

   8.      Any other^JatrSiness

   9.      Date of next meeting.




                  y— ”




                           y   ^   r              2c.     /•
                                                                   National Headquarters
- I - B ritish Red Cross                                           9 Grosvenor Crescent London S W 1 X 7 E J
                                                                   Telephone 01-235 5454 •Telex: 918657
                                                                   Cables: Redcros, London swi
                                                                   Fax: 01-245 6315
DDC/RH/EP14A




Distribution Below                                                             6th November 1987


Disaster Response Meeting

In answer to my letter of 1st September as amended, you kindly
agreed to attend the above meeting to discuss possible roles for
the BRCS in a disaster situation.

The meeting will be at the BRCS National Headquarters, 9
Grosvenor Crescent, London, on 12th November starting at 11
o'clock. We expect to finish by three o'clock.

The nearest underground                  station        is     Hyde       Park     Corner       on    the
Piccadilly Line.

Previous meetings within the Society have produced a number of
possibilities, a list of which I attach to this letter. The aim
of our meeting on the 12th, is to discuss these roles very
informally from the practical aspects of NHS planning, and
consider any other roles which you may suggest.

I look forward to seeing you next week.

Yours sincerely




Lt Col D Chapman
Emergency Planning Officer

Distribution

G P Tunley                                           J T James
B J Morgan                                           J A Costley
Air Com J G Greenhill                                M Howell
J E Barnes                                           J T Ashworth
L Coe                                                Dr G Bungay
E Bailey                                             P Cornford




    The British Red Cross Society   Incorporated fay Royal Charter 1908   Registered Charity No. 220949
ROLES


©        (A/N )         FIRST AID - CASDOCUMENTATION
 2   .   (*)            CRISIS CARE X 2 SURVIVORS AND RELATIVES
                                         WELFARECRASH OUT KIT
         (N)            NURSING - HOSP
         (L/N)          NURSING - HOME
 5.      (P)            DOCUMENTATION - RECORDS/REGISTRATION
 6.      ('*)           GUIDES

08 .     (F/A)
         (*)
                        BEARERS
                        MESSENGERS
 9.      (P)            COMMUNICATIONS - TELEPHONE ENQUIRIES
 10.     (*)            ESCORT
         (L/N/A)        TRANSIT CARE
                           ■—


 12 .    (F)            RESCUE
 13.     (L/WRVS)       REFUGEE - CAMPS/DOCU/EDUCATION
 14.     (WRVS)         CATERING
         (A)            CAS EVACUATION
         (P)            OTHER EVACUATION
 17.     (P)            MORTUARY DOCUMENTATION
 18.                       EMERGENCY NUMBERS
19.                        MEDICAL LOANS
20.                        INTERPRETERS
 21 .                      POST INCIDENT SUPPORT (SEE 4)
22 .                       CARE OF THE CARERS
23.                        SHELTER/WARMTH        (SEE 13/16)


A -      Ambulance service
N -      NHS
P -      Police Force               Services usually responsible
L -      Local Authority
F -      Fire Service
        BJM/KC

        DDC/M/SP14A
                                                     Mr. B. J. Morgan
                                                     Ext. 2161

19th October 1987


Lt. Col. D. Chapman,
Emergency Planning Officer,
British Red Cross,
National Headquarters,
9 Grosvenor Crescent,
London.
SW1X 7BJ


Bear Colonel Chapman,

Diaaater Response Meeting

I refer to your recent letter concerning your meeting with Health Emergency
Planning Officers on Thursday, 12th November 1987.

I shall be pleased to attend on that date.

Yours sincerely,




B. J. Morgan,
Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer.
4 i B ritish Red Cross                                              National Headquarters
                                                                    9 Grosvenor Crescent London swix 7E J
                                                                    Telephone 01-235 5454 ■Telex: 918657
                                                                    Cables: Redcros, London swi
                                                                    Fax: 01-245 6315




DDC/RH/EP14A
                                                                           -f)Ip



Distribution Below


Disaster Response Meeting

Reference my letter EP14A                  dated 1 September 1987.

I do apologise for not being aware of the HEPO Annual Conference
and withdraw the suggested date of 26th October from my
referenced letter.

May I suggest Thursday 12th November for our meeting,                                     I would be
pleased to hear you can come.

Yours sincerely




Lt Col D Chapman
Emergency Planning Officer

Distribution

G P Tunley                                           J A Cooper
B J Morgan                                           J A Costley
P Young                                              J T James
Air Com J G Greenhill                                M Howell
J E Barnes                                           J T Ashworth
L Coe                                                Dr G Bungay
E Bailey


For information

Dr L Martin




    The British Red Cross Society   Incorporated by Royal Charter 1908   Registered Charity No. 220949
                NATIONAL JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

                          Chairman: Major-General P. R. Leuchars, C.B.E.
                             Vice-Chairman: The Countess of Limerick
  Telephone                                                                   Chairman’s Office
  01-235 5454                                                                      9 Grosvenor Crescent
    Telex                                                                              London, S W IX 7EJ
    918657




                                                                       27 January, 1987


TO:   CHAIRMEN COUNTY JEECs
Copies to: CO-ORDINATORS COUNTY JEECs



1. I felt that the start of 1987 would be a good time to bring
you up to date with the activities of the NJEEC.  It may appear
that things have been rather static over the past nine months,
but this in fact has not been the case; it is simply that we
have been waiting for a number of important decisions from other
agencies which unfortunately have not been forthcoming.

Role of the Voluntary Aid Societies (VAS)                                     --

2. Perhaps I could start by reminding you of the two roles of
the VAS - still I might add awaiting the official approval of the
Home Office.

     a. Support of the Armed Forces in time of war or peacetime
 crisis. This role is confined to service within the United
.Kingdom.

    b. Support of the National Health Service (NHS) in time of
war and in a major peacetime catastrophe by the provision of
both personnel and ambulances.

    c. In both these circumstances the VAS would come under the
control of the NHS.

Support of the Armed Services

3. The terms of Service for the VAS have been agreed and are at
Annex A.

4. The Ministry of Defence (MOD) proposed originally that the
VAS should provide doctors, SRNs, First Aid trained personnel
and ambulances for the manning and movement of personnel for:-

                              Medical Reception Stations                                 t
                              Port Medical Squadrons
                              Ambulance Train Staff
                           -   2 -



                        Railhead Detachments
                        Rehabilitation Units

in connection with the evacuation of casualties from the
Continent and within the United Kingdom.

5. It was obvious that the manpower bill for all these would be
beyond the resources of the VAS, anyway at present. Furthermore
we believe that in the event the majority of our doctors and SRNs
would be required by the NHS and would not therefore be available
to the VAS. After discussion with the MOD it has been agreed
that we will only be responsible for the provision of First Aid
trained personnel and ambulances connected with Military
Reception Stations and Rehabilitation Centres, although doctors
and SRNs should be earmarked.

6. We are currently waiting for confirmation of the numbers,
locations and exact VAS requirements for these establishments.
We will forward you this information as soon as it is available
and ask you to let us know how many people you can earmark for the
particular establishments in your area. The Chief Medical Officer
in Army Districts will be able to assist in the completion of
these figures.   VAS on the Reserve List may of course be
earmarked.

Peacetime

7. I am most anxious that we pursue our training towards the
all hazards approach. As many of you know we have already
been used in a number of disasters - and proved to be very
successful.

8. It is of course possible that we could already be involved in
manning a number of First Aid Posts (FAP) or Emergency Aid
Centres (EAC) (as para 13 a. below) prior to being required for
our role above.  If this is the case I understand that clear
instructions will be given in plenty of time to transfer from
one role to the other. I have to admit though that the chain of
command for this decision is still to be decided!

VAS Ambulances

9. The NHS have defined a role for VAS Ambulances in support of
the National Ambulance Services, both in peace and war.  In
discussion we have said that it will be difficult to ensure their
availability until we have the information about the exact VAS
personnel rquirement in support of the Armed Services. Also that
a proper command and control organisation must be established.
There would also be problems due to not all VAS ambulances
having radios and some that do, not being compatible with their
County Ambulance Services.

10. The NHS, in conjunction with the MOD, are at present trying
to resolve a command structure for the use of their ambulances
in time of war. There is little planning that we can do until
this has been resolved.
                           -   3 -


11. Meanwhile as far as peacetime goes, it is suggested that if
you have not already done so, you liaise with your County
Ambulance Service and formulate some form of co-operation.

Points From Exercises

12. Members of the NJEEC have attended several County JEEC
Exercises' during 1986. As a result of these visits a number of
points have been noted that need resolving.  Some have been noted
by the NJEEC for some time, but it is regretted little progress
made.

13. I felt it would be of interest for you to know the matters
that we are at present pursuing either with the DHSS and Home
Office and/or within the NJEEC.

  a. Terminology There is still considerable confusion over
terminology with regard to First Aid Posts, Emergency Aid Centres
etc.   Some organisations are still using the term, Casualty
Collecting Post.   As far as the VAS are concerned, there are two
"Posts" in which they become involved, and to which all their
training is directed:-

      (i)      A "Post" set up and manned solely by the VAS, providing
Triage, First Aid and the Evacuation of casualties to hospitals
and their homes or rest centres.

    (ii) A "Post" set up and manned by the NHS, but
incorporating VAS, providing minor surgery in addition to the
facilities provided by the "Post" above.

 it has been proposed thri the "Post in (i) should be known as a
 First Aid Post (FAP), and that in (ii) an Emergency Aid Centre
 (EAC).  It is of course perfectly possible for a First Aid Post
 to be absorbed in an Emergency Aid Centre.   This Terminology is
 still awaiting DHSS approval, but meanwhile should be used by
'all CJEECs.

  b . Stocks of First Aid Equipment for use in Emergency Aid Posts in
Disasters There is a need for both the BRCS and St John Ambulance to
hold Disaster First Aid Packs throughout the counties, to be readily
available in the case of a Disaster.   The NJEEC will provide a
suggested list of items to be held.   The provision of these
Packs, and Packs for training, is under discussion with the NHS.
There is a requirement for a system of replenishment once an FAP
or EAC has started operating.

  c. WRVS    The actual role of the WRVS in a Disaster needs to be
clarified.

  d . Command Control of a First Aid Post/Emergency Aid Centre
The Leader of a First Aid Post/Emergency Aid Station must be
clearly identifiable to all and sundry. He must not allow
himself to become involved in the detailed operation.   It is
the Leader's task to co-ordinate and control the work of the
other members, reinforcing areas of pressure as quickly as
                           -   4 -


possible.   Those carrying out the duties of Triage, Treatment
Leader etc should also be easily identifiable,   The NJEEC are
considering a common system of labelling and the writing of a
specimen instruction regarding the Command and Control and
operation of an Emergency Aid Station.

  e. Training It is essential that a number of people are
trained as Leaders of Teams for FAPs/EACs who would at least be
available to organise a Station even if those who were available
at the time had not been trained.

  f. Documentation There is still a need for a nationally agreed
Casualty Card which allows the following details to be recorded
for each casualty: Time in FAP/EAC, Time Out, Disposal Destination.
Whenever possible the following additional information should also be
recorded: Next of Kin, address, marital status.    It is debatable
when or where this information should actually be transferred,
but a patient must never be lost through the inability to
keep some form of central information system.

  g.  Presence of non Medically Trained Personnel There is a
requirement for a number of non medical personnel to be included in
an FAP/EAC to carry out documentation etc.

  h. Welfare Personnel There is a definite requirement for Welfare
Personnel in a FAP/EAC.   NJEEC have written a draft circular on their
role which it is hoped to issue shortly.   The application of "Tender
Loving Care" and dealing with distressed relatives will be be all
important in an emergency situation.

  j. Treatment of Casualties Categorisation under the TRIAGE system
should be changed as necessary whilst a casualty is in a FAP/EAC.
It is important that the state of a casualty is monitored and
amended on the casualty card where applicable.

  k. Accommodation The importance of suitable access for
ambulances to an FAP/EAC and a good access with a separate entry
and exit door to the actual Post/Centre cannot be stressed too highly.

  1.     Communications (i) Liaison should take place over the use of
ambulances and their command and control with the County Ambulance
Service.     (ii) The possible involvement of a civilian radio
communications network, ie RAYNET.

  m. Operation Orders, Organisation of First Aid Posts The
NJEEC is currently writing a specimen Operation Orders and
Pamphlet on the Organisation of a First Aid Post for issue to all
CJEECs.   It is hoped also to make a Video on the organisation of
an FAP available late 1987/early 1988.

Dates

14.   It would be greatly appreciated if you would forward the
date and location of any study days, exercises etc, that you are
holding.    It is of great benefit to the NJEEC if one of its
Members could, whenever possible, attend these events.
                              -   5 -


Circulars

15. Circulars, expanding on the role of the VAS in support of
the Armed Forces in time of war, and the progress with regard to
decisions on the subjects mentioned in paragraph 13 a - m, will
be issued as soon as possible.




                          (Major-General P.R.Leuchars)
                         NATIONAL JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
mi

                                    Chairman: M a jo r-G en eral P. R. L eu ch ars, C.B.E.
                                       Vice-Chairman: T h e C o u n te s s o f L im erick
      T e le p h o n e                                                                                Chairman's Office
     01-235 5454                                                                                          9 G rosvenor C rescent
         T e le x                                                         L o n d o n , S W I X 7EJ
        918657



 H2


                                                                                                15th May, 19 87



 TO:                CHAIRMAN COUNTY JEECs

 Copies to:                 CO-ORDINATORS COUNTY JEECs




           TERMINOLOGY.          EMERGENCY MEDICAL CENTRES/FIRST AID POSTS



 Ref:               Chairman, NJEEC's letter of 27th January, 1987

 1. Since the Chairman's letter of 27th January, 1987 there
 has been further discussion concerning the Terminology
 connected with Emergency Medical Centres and First Aid Posts,
 which were referred to under Po" .ts from Exercises,
 paragraph 13a of the letter.

 2. As a result of these discussions, the existing paragraph
 13a should be deleted and the new one, shown at Annex A to
 this letter, which has been agreed with the DHSS, should be
 inserted and implemented in all current and future planning.

 3. All reference to Emergency Aid Centres throughout the
 original letter should also be amended to Emergency Medical
 Centres (EMC).




                                  Brigadier R C Middleton
                               General Secretary (Logistics)
                                                       ANNEX A




a. Terminology There is still confusion with regard to
terminology used in establishment of Medical organisations
connected with the evacuation and treatment of casualties as
a result of a disaster. As far as the VAS are concerned,
there are two organisations in which they become involved,
and to which all the training is directed.

    (i) Emergency Medical Centres (EMC) These are a
National Health Service responsibility, with a likely place
of use identified in advance. They would also be set up in
time of war when the National Health Service resources were
considered to be overwhelmed, either regionally or nationally,
or Central Government was no longer able to function. In
these circumstances, the assistance of the VAS in manning
EMC's would be essential, and would take priority over all
other tasks except our Priority One Role; Assistance to the
Medical Services of the Armed Forces in time of war.

    (ii) First Aid Posts In peace time, or up to the
situation mentioned above, in a disaster there is no recognised
National Health Service organisation outside the Health Service.
If called upon, it is at the discretion of the VAS to form
First Aid Posts at a location selected by themselves which
is suitable to deal with the casualties. In a major disaster
the National Health Service Ambulance Service will provide
Triage, Medical First Aid and undertake the evacuation of
casualties to hospitals. It is likely that National Health
Service Surgical Teams would only be deployed if it was
essential for surgery to be undertaken at the actual scene,
eg. an amputation for a trapped victim. It is more efficient
and manpower effective to retain these teams in hospitals.
Whatever National Health Service facilities are involved in
peace time, the VAS involvement will be referred to as a
First Aid Post.
                  THIS    BRITISH   R5D   CROSS   SOCIETY
                         in^RSBYSID^ COUNTY BRAI1CH


Minutes of the Merseyside County Joint Emergency Executive Committee
Meeting held on Tuesday, 26th February 1985 at 7.30 p.m. at Red Cross
Headquarters, Orphan Drive, Liverpool L6 7UL.


Present:- Col. R. Jones               -    S.J.A.B.    (Chairman).
          Dr. Cutliffe                -       »
          Mrs. E. Bird                -       w
          Mrs. R.H.C. Downham         -    B.R.C.S.
          Mr. J.1I. Rimmer            -       M        ;
          Mr. T* Campion              -    C.^.P.C.
          Sgt. J. Baton               -    Merseyside Police.


1*   Agologies were received frora:-
            Dr. T. Hobday
            Mrs. B. L’lfetrance Moore.
            Mrs. M. Walbank.
            Mr. J* Crosby.
            Mr. Pimblett.

2#   Minutes for the Meeting held on 11th December 1984 were signed as
     correct and approved.

3.   Members are to forward expenses for attending Meetings to B.R.C.S.
     Headquarters.

4.   Sxeroise "FLASHPOINT".
     After a lengthy discussion it was proposed by Mrs. R.II.C. Downham
     and seconded by Mrs. E. Bird that the Exercise should be postponed
     until September 1985 , Mrs. Downham is to telephone British Red
     Cross National Headquarters and enquire if this date is suitable
     and request the data on the Exercise to be sent to B.R.C.S.,
     Orphan Drive.                                     „

     Mrs. Downham is to arrange a Meeting witLJSr. W. Holland and
     Col. R. Jones to discuss finance*

     She future of the ©ommittee was discussed and it was agreed that
     enquiries should be made, as we live in a ”nuclear free zone”.
                                               MED MPO Division
                                               DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                               EUSTON TOWER       Room 1838
                                               286 EUSTON ROAD
                                               LONDON NW1 3DN

                                               TELEPHONE01-388 1188EXT   3747

Your reference                                                 13 February 1987
Our referenceRLQ 31
  Brigadier R C Middleton OBE
  Chief Secretary
  HQ St John Ambulance
  1 Grosvenor Crescent
  LONDON SW1X 7EF
                                                                   *id
                                                              *     S s n   .
                                                               4



  Thank you for your letter of 11 February which arrived hard on the heels of another
  from one of our Regions, drawing my attention to Major General Leuchars’ letter to
  Chairmen CJEEC dated 27 January.

  I am sorry to say that the position on VAS support for the NHS far from being
  clarified seems to have become totally confused.

  The principles behind our revision of          casualty policy were as follows:-

          (a)    that the two tier system of     FAPs and CCCs was too          complex and likely
                 to be unworkable;

          (b)    that VAS support was a precious resource and would work best in a
                 single all-purpose setting with the advantages of professional
                 supervision and support.

 As you know, the consultation draft which we sent out in June 1985 was prepared,
 so far as relevant paragraphs were concerned, on the basis of advice from
 Maj Gen John Gray and the late Brig Peter Body representing       the VAS; copiesare
 attached for ease of reference to the   sections dealing with     VAS, individual
 volunteers and EMCs.

 After consultation some modifications were made in the light of comments received
 from the NHS and through Home Office from County Emergency Planning Officers.
 A copy of the final post-consultation draft of the VAS paragraphs is attached;
 these were agreed with you.

 VAS support to the NHS in a peacetime catastrophe is presently outwith my remit
 but so far as support in wartime is concerned our circular leaves no doubt that
 the FAP concept of the earlier guidance (HDC(77)1) has disappeared; so has the
 CCC. What replaces both and is more like the latter than the former is the
 Emergency Medical Centre or EMC. We have never proposed or used the term
 Emergency Aid Centre.

 You will have realised from our consultation draft that we see the concept of
 a supporting tier of care as possibly necessary in conventional war, if the work­
 load became too great. But it would certainly be essential in the nuclear scenario
 when the number of casualties would overwhelm surviving NHS facilities. Although
 this is clearly stated in the final draft we have never pressed the matter in the
 field or on VAS courses at Easingwold, because of the sensitivity of the issue.
 This is something which will need to be considered cautiously and in longer time;
 you and I might talk about this informally on 23 April.

                                                                                  /It may
                                   - 2 -



It may be that we shall need to act jointly and quickly to prevent the spread
of confusion which I believe will unfortunately be engendered by Maj Gen Leuchars'
letter. If it would help I am more than willing to meet with yourself and
representatives of BRCS and the NJEEC to clarify the position.




                                                       L J l -Martin
                                                      'Senior Medical Officer




 PS   I will respond separately to the other points you raise   (equipment,
      WRVS and documentation).
               NATIONAL JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
                           Chairm an: Major-General P. R. Leuchars, C.B.E.
                              Vice-Chairm an: The Countess of Limerick

 Telephone                                                                       Chairm an’s Office
 0I-23S 5454                                                                          9 Grosvenor Crescent
   Telex                                                                                  London, S W IX 7EJ
   918657

                                                                             16th March, 1987


TO:     Co-ordinators of County JEECs
        England and Wales                                                10 copies each

        Commander of the Order of St John
        Priory for Wales
                                                                          1 copy each
           BRCS Regional Officers




                            NJEEC CIRCULAR 3/87




           HOME OFFICE INFORMATION MATERIAL ON CIVIL PROTECTION


1. The Home Office has recently issued a number of publications
and other information material on Civil Protection.

               Booklet                                > ,
               Three copies are attached (Co-ordinators copy only).
               Should you require more copies, they should be
               available from your County Emergency Planning Officer.

               Folder
               Three copies are attached (Co-ordinators copy only).
               A small supply is held at NJEEC but bulk requests
               should be made to your County Emergency Planning
               Officer.

               Quarterly Periodical
               The stock of, the first of these regular issues is
               exhausted and Home office cannot obtain more.
               However, three copies of the second and all subsequent
               issues will be mailed direct to County Co-ordinators
               by the Home Office.



                                                                                           contd..2
   d.   Film/Video - Should Disaster Strike
        This film shows the work of district and county
        emergency planning staff and volunteers on the ground.
        It is presented by Julian Pettifer and is an
        excellent introductory item. One copy of the video
        (VHS) is held at NJEEC which may be borrowed by CJEEC'
        for viewing. CEPO's also have copies which may be
        available to CJEEC for short loan.




2. Should CEPO be unable to supply copies of the Booklet
or Folder, CJEEC's may forward a request for supply direct to

            Miss H Rafalowska
            The Home Office
            Queen Anne's Gate
            London
            SW1H 9AT

3. Any difficulties should be notified to NJEEC as they
occur.




                                       D D O'BRIEN

                                       R C MIDDLETON

                                       Joint Secretaries
                                       for Chairman
         BJM/UI
                                                             Mr. B*J. Morgan
         AD(K)1/MS                                           1st. 2161
         VP10(a)

20th August 1986


A.A. KcGae, Ssq.»
Assistant Secretary (Clinical Servioes),
lorthern Regional Health Authority,
Bsnfield load,
Hewcastle-upon-Tyne,
HE6 4PY.

Dear Hr. Mod®®,

Voluntary Aid Societies - Finaoolal Assistance for
Training and Sgercisea la ABaooiation with tiis B.H.3.   ■

Thank you for your letter of 11th August 1986.

fhe quote froa the CEPO Society aay b® Just about acceptable in teras of
paraphrasing but the resulting interpretation of the local CIPO ia aurely
wrong.

In my opinion, we aust undoubtedly keep to the terns of the M S S letters of
30th March 1983 (Mike MoCurry) and 29th Kay 1986 (Peter Coraford) as addressed
to all HBPOs vis.

“If the VAS aake requests for-assistance for activities which you have
initiated on behalf of KHS Civil Defence Planning and you consider it to be a
legitimate charge on HH3 civil defence funds (which after all is Home Office
money) you aay reooasend payment."

Unless and until the D.H.S.S. revise the instructions, would we not leave
ourselves open to eriticls® froa HHS and Government Auditors to any wider
personal interpretation.

My line on this, like yours, would be to work precisely within the published
parameters, it is disappointing to think that having had these sharpened up
they are in danger of becoming blurred again!

With kind regards.

Yours sincerely,




B.J. Morgan,
Assistant Secretary (Medical)
Northern Regional Health Authority
        Benfield Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE6 4PY. Telephone (091) 265 4188 Fax (091) 2
                                                           if telephoning
        our ref A D (M )1 /M S    your ref                 please ask for     Mr A A McGee
               WP10(a)                                                        Ext. 3282

         11 August 1986

         TO HEALTH EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICERS

         Dear Colleague

         VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES - FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR TRAINING AND EXERCISES
         IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE NHS

         Further to Peter Cornford's Circular letter of the 29 May 1986 you may
         be interested to know that recently I received the following communication
         from a County Emergency Planning Officer in this region.

               We have been notified by the County Emergency Planning Officers'
               Society that the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for
               Health has stated, in a letter to Gerald Bowden, TD, MP, that
               "Officials of his department have discussed the funding of
               civil defence training for Voluntary Aid Societies with Health
               Emergency Planning Officers, who have agreed to regard the
               use of limited NHS funds available for civil defence planning
               purposes as proper to the funding of NHS/VAS joint training
               exercises".

               Our interpretation of this agreement is that Exercises such as
               "Crashpoint"will now be funded by DHSS.

         As a preliminary step I approached the DHSS in the belief that when
         we discussed this topic at Easingwold in April this year, it was against
         a background that NHS funding would only apply for those exercises mounted
         at the initiative of the Health Authority or for an exercise agreed
         between the Voluntary Aid Society and the Health Authority before hand
         but that National exercises such as "Crashpoint" would remain a Local
         Authority commitment. However in his reply Dr L Martin suggests that
         a more flexible interpretation might be applied i.e. the real point
         at issue is to what particular permutation of VAS, Local Authority and
         NHS a given exercise belongs; this in practice may vary according to
         local levels of liaison and co-operation.

         To avoid any possible frustration or misunderstanding and consequential
         embarrassment it might be desirable for Regional Health Authorities
         to consider adopting a common approach as far as practice and precedent
         permits. To this end I would appreciate your views on the topic and
         also details of any arrangements in your Region^ or to be introduced
         in your locality^for funding such training exercises.

         I shall of course be prepared to summarise the responses and circulate
         a copy to all HEPO's.

         Yours sincerely



        A A McGEE
        Assistant Secretary
        Clinical Services Section.
     3



                                                                                         O ur Ref: R L Q 31


    Mr J G G r e e n h i l l - N E T h a m e s RHA
    Mr L G C o e - N W T h a m e s RHA
    Mr J E B a r n e s - S E T h a m e s RHA
    Mr J T E d w a r d s - E a s t A n g l i a n RHA
    Or 0 Ro b i n s o n / M * r ^ B M o r g a n - M e r s e y R H A
    Mr A A M c G e e - N o r t h e r n RHA
    Mr E B a i l e y / M r 0 W a r d - N o r t h W e s t e r n RHA
    Or G B u n g a y - O x f o r d RHA
    Or J L y o n s - S o u t h W e s t e r n RHA
                                                                                                             2JUN&86           j
    Mr J A C o o p e r - S o u t h W e s t e r n RHA
    Mr J A C o s t l e y - T r e n t RHA
    Mr J T J a m e s - W e s s e x RHA
    Mr J T A s h w o r t h - Y o r k s h i r e RHA
    Mr M H o w e l l - W e s t M i d l a n d s RH A




    U S E OF C I V I L O E F E N C E F U N O S

              T h e q u e s t i o n of f u n d i n g N H S / V A S j o i n t t r a i n i n g w a s d i s c u s s e d in A p r i l at the
    H E P O C o n f e r e n c e at E a s i n g w o l d , w i t h p a r t i c u l a r r e f e r e n c e to S e c t i o n 19
    ( p a r a g r a p h s 26 a n d 27) an d A n n e x A, of t he E m e r g e n c y P l a n n i n g G u i d a n c e to L o c a l
/   Authorities (copies enclosed).

              It w a s a c k n o w l e d g e d t h a t t h e p r e s e n t a r r a n g e m e n t s for f u n d i n g V A S t r a i n i n g
    w e r e l e s s t h a n s a t i s f a c t o r y b e c a u s e w h e r e a s C o u n t y C o u n c i l s ha d d i s c r e t i o n to
    p r o v i d e f i n a n c i a l a s s i s t a n c e to t h e V A S w h e r e t r a i n i n g w a s u n d e r t a k e n in s u p p o r t
    of l o c a l a u t h o r i t y c i v i l d e f e n c e a r r a n g e m e n t s , t h i s w a s n o t th e c a s e for t r a i n i n g
    in s u p p o r t of N HS c i v i l d e f e n c e a c t i v i t i e s .

              Th e V A S c o n s i d e r t h a t t r a i n i n g for t h e i r N H S s u p p o r t r o l e in w a r s h o u l d not
    be a c h a r g e on t h e i r c h a r i t a b l e fu n d s ; t h e i r c o n t e n t i o n is t h a t s u c h t r a i n i n g
    s h o u l d be f i n a n c e d by c e n t r a l g o v e r n m e n t .      T h e H o m e O f f i c e f eel t ha t t he n e c e s s a r y
    f u n d s s h o u l d be p r o v i d e d out of t h e N H S V o t e.               In t he c i r c u m s t a n c e s , H E P O s w e r e
    g e n e r a l l y s y m p a t h e t i c to the s u g g e s t i o n th a t m o n i e s for N H S / V A S j o i n t t r a i n i n g
    s h o u l d be m a d e a v a i l a b l e f r om RH As ' c i v i l d e f e n c e a l l o c a t i o n s , a nd a g r e e d to
    c o n s i d e r m a k i n g p r o p o s a l s , as a p p r o p r i a t e , w i t h i n t h e i r o w n a u t h o r i t i e s .

              I n o t e t h a t in a l e t t e r d a t e d 30 M a r c h 1 9 8 3 w h i c h w a s c o p i e d to all H E P Os ,
    M i k e M c C u r r y a d v i s e d t h a t " I f t he V A S m a k e r e q u e s t s for a s s i s t a n c e for a c t i v i t i e s
    w h i c h you h a v e i n i t i a t e d on b e h a l f of t he N HS c i v i l d e f e n c e p l a n n i n g and you
    c o n s i d e r to be a l e g i t i m a t e c h a r g e on N HS c i v i l d e f e n c e f u n d s ( w h i c h a f t e r all
    is H o m e O f f i c e m o n e y ) you m a y r e c o m m e n d p a y m e n t . "     Taking into account this
    a d v i c e , t o g e t h e r w i t h the s i m i l a r i t y in w o r d i n g b e t w e e n H o m e O f f i c e C i r c u l a r
    E S I / 1 9 8 2 a n d t h e a f o r e m e n t i o n e d A n n e x A to S e c t i o n 19, I f eel we are m e r e l y g i v i n g
    e m p h a s i s to, a n d e x p a n d i n g u p on , an e x i s t i n g u n d e r s t a n d i n g r a t h e r t h a n i n t r o d u c i n g

                                                                                                                   /a new
a new precept.                I n d e e d , I c o n s i d e r the a d v i c e c o n t a i n e d in M i k e M c C u r r y ' s l e t t e r
of 9 F e b r u a r y 1 9 8 3 to be l a r g e l y e x t a n t : t h e r e is s t i l l no p r o p o s a l for h e a l t h
a u t h o r i t i e s to r e i m b u r s e V A S e x p e n s e s i n c u r r e d in l o c a l a u t h o r i t y c i v i l d e f e n c e
exercises.            I w o u l d lo o k to C E P Q / H E P O c o n s u l t a t i o n to i r o n out a ny a r e a s of
p o s s i b l e m i s u n d e r s t a n d i n g w h e r e b o t h l o c a l a u t h o r i t i e s and h e a l t h a u t h o r i t i e s
a re i n v o l v e d in t r a i n i n g e x e r c i s e s w i t h t h e V A S (in w h i c h c a s e a s h a r e d f u n d i n g
a r r a n g e m e n t m i g h t be a p p r o p r i a t e ) .

          T h e H o m e O f f i c e ha s b e e n a d v i s e d of t h i s s m a l l , b u t h e l p f u l a d d i t i o n a l f u n d i n g
f a c i l i t y , and h as b e e n t o l d t h a t its e f f e c t w i l l be fe lt g r a d u a l l y r a t h e r t h a n
immediately.




                                                                                                P S Cornford
                                                                                                MEO M P O , OHSS
                                                                                                R o o m 18 36
                                                                                                Euston Tower
                                                                                                2 86 E u s t o n R o a d
                                                                                                L o n d o n NW1 3 0N

                                                                                                Tel No: 0 1 - 3 8 8 1 18 8 ext 3 72 6

       M a y 19 86



cc:     Or L J M a r t i n
VOLUNTEER ACTIVITY

19.26 Reasonable out-of-pocket expenses incurred by volunteers attending
training, including both local training and training organised by or on
behalf of the designated Minister, will be eligible for 100/6 civil defence
grant. Reimbursement of any form of salary or other remuneration is
excluded.

19.27 Grant and is payable to voluntary aid societies, subject to prior Home
Office approval^in respect of their civil defence activities in support of
local authority arrangements: guidance on financial assistance towards the
civil defence activities of the British Red Cross Society and St John
Ambulance Association at county level is given at annex A. Expenses incurred
in local authority recruitment of volunteers, other than salaries and relate
costs, will be eligible for civil defence grant at the rate of 75?.

FIRE SERVICE STAFF OFFICERS

19.28 Civil defence grant at therate of 75? will, subject to audit, be
payable on the salary of a staff officer appointed to each regional fire
adviser and to each brigade, (see also section 8) to improve the co­
ordination of civil defence planning and training by fire brigades.
Reasonable expenditure on administrative suport will also be eligible subject
to prior Home Office approval for civil defence grant at the rate of 75?.

STAFF OFFICERS TO REGIONAL POLICECOMMANDERS (DESIGNATE)

19.29 Civil defence grant at therate of 75? will, subject to audit, be
payable on the salary of a staff officer to each regional police commander
(designate) appointed to improve the co-ordination of civil defence planning
and training by police authorities. Expenditure on administrative suport
will also be eligible subject to prior Home Office approval for civil defence
grant at the rate of 75?.

POLICE WAR DUTIES TRAINING

19.30 Regional police commanders (designate) have the function of co­
ordinating police war planning and training in peacetime. Expenditure
incurred in home defence training for the police is eligible for 100? civil
defence grant. Salary, any other form of remuneration and related costs are
not eligible.

POLICE DUTIES IN CONNECTION WITH THE AIR ATTACK AND FALLOUT WARNING
BROADCASTING SYSTEMS

 19.31 Police expenditure on the planning, installation, maintenance and
 testing of the air attack and fallout warning systems, which they carry out
 on behalf of UKWMO, the recruitment of volunteer warning point operators and
 the .provision of police and volunteer training in the operation of the
’warning systems is eligible for complete reimbursement. Full reimbursement
 is also provided for police travelling, accommodation and subsistence
 expenses and reasonable out of pocket expenses incurred by volunteer warning
 point operators attending for training. Salaries, any other form of
 remuneration and related costs for police and volunteers undergoing training
 are not eligible for reimbursement.
                                                        Annex A to section 19

FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TOWARDS THE CIVIL DEFENCE ACTIVITIES
OF THE BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY AND ST JOHN AMBULANCE ASSOCIATION AT COUNTY
LEVEL

1. Following the Government's decision in 1980 further to encourage the use
of voluntary effort in civil defence, the British Red Cross Society and the
Order of St John established joint emergency executive committees at county
level in England and Wales to facilitate the provision of medical support to
regional health authorities and to local authorities in peacetime emergency
or war. This objective is now being pursued on an increasing scale through
seminars and indoor exercises to brief volunteers for their role; field
exercises to practise them as units or teams prior to participating in full-
scale exercises organised by county authorities; and attendance at Civil
Defence College courses. In many cases county committees are already co­
operating closely with the local authority emergency services. The
importance of this contribution by the British Red Cross Society and the
Order of St John is fully recognised by the Home Office.

2. It is for local authorities to decide how best this voluntary
contribution can be integrated into their emergency plans; but the
Government regards this assistance as an essential component of voluntary
civil defence activity, and local authorities should plan to realise the full
potential of these voluntary aid societies to support their arrangements for
the handling of emergencies, whether in respect of the potential wartime role
of these societies or of their capacity to help in peacetime accidents or
disasters.

3. The co-ordination, organisation and carrying out of all activities
associated with training for these functions places a financial burden on
these societies. This burden includes such administrative overheads as
telephone and postal charges and a proportion of other office expenses. As
charities their funds are raised from the general public for a specific range
of activities which does not include civil defence. Some local authorities
make a grant to the local branch for use at its own discretion. In other
cases, where an activity is undertaken in conjunction with, or with the
approval of, the county emergency planning officer, it is the practice for
the local authority to reimburse some part of the costs incurred by members
(such as travelling or out-of-pocket expenses) or to assist the local branch
with charges (for example the hire of premises). The same consideration for
minimising the costs falling upon the voluntary aid societies has led to the
general undertaking that, where a local authority gives instruction or
training in any aspect of civil defence to members of these societies, no
charge is made for the services rendered or for the reimbursement of
associated expenses.

 4. Any remuneration to the voluntary aid societies is already eligible for
payment of grant under the civil defence grant arrangements subject to the
 usual Home Office approval. Finally, the Government wishes to encourage the
 attendance of members on such courses as are suitable at the Civil Defence
 College. The expenses involved in such attendance are all eligible for
 payment of civil defence grant at the rate of 100?.
                                                                                        T V * -
   ■ft

                apartment o f Health and Social Security                        Room
             Euston Tower 288 Euston Road London NW1 SDN
(DHSS)                               . Telephone 01-838 1188 ext                 938
                                                  .                         :

. J E Barnes Esq                                                   Your reference
  EPO
  'South East Thames- RHA                                          Our reference
  No 2 The Stables
  David Salornan1s House                                           Date
  SOUTHBOROUGH., K M T TN3 OTE                                     30 March 1983



  beay Joiu\, .

 USE OF CIVIL DEFENCE FUNDS

      At our meeting on 15 March we discussed your letter of 15 February and I
 promised to. let you have a formal reply in writing.

      Without going over too much of the ground already covered in my letter of
 9 February to Mr Willis of 111 Thames RHA, I would like to re-iterate the point
 that we should not be acting as agents for the Horae Office or Local Authorities.
 I am enclosing a copy of ES 1/1982 ’'Financial Assistance towards the Home Defence
 activities of the Red Cross and. -St John at County l e v e l " 'which exhorts LAs to
 aid the VASs as far-as'possible.     The circular makes no distinction between
 activities in relation... to the NHS and LAs and you will see references to "the
 provision of medical support to E RA s ’% end the attendance at the Eoms Dofence
 College,' Eaeing’wold,  Despite the inie ? or etat i on of S1 V},-* lio ?.), rrierifcxor.ea in.
 your letter, I suggest that it may be fruitful for the VASs to approach CEFOs
 again to seek, their approval to expenditure on !ifira.shpoint and spearpoint" and
 attendances at the Home Defence College.
                                                                            !
       However, if the VASs make requests for assistance for activities which you
  have initiated on behalf of the NHS civil d e f e n i e planning and you consider to
  be a legitimate charge on NHS Civil. Defence funds (which"'after all. is Hose Office
  money) you may recommend payment.                             J
                            ' ’        •                                i

       The problem will be solved to a large extent after the new Regulations have
  been approved an d -100^ payment will be re-imbursed for civil defence activities
  undertaken by VASs.

         I am copying this letter to all WHS EPOs.

                                                               lours        sincerely




                                                               M G McCurry
Soufh East Thames.
Regional Health Authority
No. 2 The Stables, David Salomon's House,
S outhborough, K ent T N 3 OTE
                                                                 ct r i
Telephone: Tunbridge Weils (0092) 36584

Your reference                              Our reference       Date

                                        1 7 4 6 /1 1 1 5    15th February 1983

Mr M & McCurry
Regional Liaison Division
Department of Health and Social Security
Euston Tower
286 Euston Road
London NW1 3DN




USE OF CIVIL DSPENCB FUNDS

Thank you for sending me a copy of your letter of 9th February 1983
which was of great interest. The penultimate paragraph is of particular
significance and reinforces my case, pursued throughout this year, that
tlx3. home defence budget must be considered strictly as a cost centre. I
am providing the Treasurer’s Department SSTRHA with a copy. {4 skta/m)

I attended a meeting of the Su3aox CJEEC on 7th February with the CSPOs
of East end West Sussex. As you might expect, finance featured on the
agenda and 1 consider it will be of interest to pass to you the general
tone of the CEFQ's comments. The salient points were:

        a.      Both East and West Susse;; County Councils home defence budgets
        8 3 /8 4 contain provision for VAS support. There was a non-growth/
        reduction in the total budget exercise hence sums are not great
        (circa £*>00). (At least the situation in the Shires is better than
        the &LC area).

        b.   The extent to which the financial cover will support VAS
        activity within the counties forever remains an area of un­
        certainty. The local authority do not allocate or otherwise
        control VAS attendance on courses at Easingwold. Because local
        authority home defence budgets are in gross terms and the cost,
        with travel, from this area to York results in student costs of
        £100+, you will note that about 4 VAS students annually per county
        swallows the total provision.

        c.   The CEPOs interpretation of local authority statutory
        responsibilities (SI 1974 No JO ) is that they are required to
        support any VAS activity towards enhancement of environmental
        health, which includes home nursing, as part of community training
        and preparedness. However they see any activity aligned to the VAS
        role as defined in HDC (77)1» ie First Aid Posts, as essentially a
        health service responsibility to lead and support, as necessary
        financially.                                              *



                                                             contd.».*•*
                               - 2 -




I am sure you will.immediately recognise the clash in the 'grass
roots’ interpretation at sub para C above and your remarks, at the
third paragraph of your letter, reference Exercises 'Spearpoint'
and ’Crashpoint1. I consider the local authorities have a point
and it is difficult to produce a counter-argument which has a ba:sis
of law and, it could be said, logic. One must ask if the sheltering
under the umbrella of local authority financial provisions, in respect
of VAS, emanates from the fact that in the past the NHS had no special
allocation and no other course presented itself? Whatever the history '
of the matter, it remains the case that currently, despite recent
Circulars, the VAS are piggy-in-the-middle. It is quite clear at any
meeting with the VAS, regardless of explanations presented, ultimately
they remain confused as to which way to turn for help and the overriding
fear is that they may eventually.feel their support is not wanted, or at
the very least not appreciated.

As an appeal from the level where face-to-face relationships exist, please
can this matter be resolved. My specific proposals would be that it is
formally agreed that:                                        •       .

       a.   The RHA home defence budgets should include provision for
       VAS expenditure on any activity aligned to FAP provision/training
       eg inclusive Exercise ’Spaarpoint' and 'Crashpoint’.

       b.   To gain most from any'local authority budget provisions, the
       Home Office covers costs associated with VAS attendance on courses
       at Easingwold as a package deal when vacancies are allocated to
       VAS national headquarters. At present with local authority gross
       budgets the current system perpetuates inequitable support, and
       hence activity, in direct relation to distance from York!

Finally may I request further definition of the basis and intent in respect
of the annual allocation of funds to VAS for 'disaster training'?




                     <r    i




J E Barnes
Home Defence Planning Officer



Copy to:    Mr L G Coe    NWTRHA
            Air CdLre J G Greenhill NETRHA
            Mr J T James    Wessex RHA
                                             H O M E OF F I CE
                                  Queen Anne’s Gate, L o n d o n , SW1H   9 AT
                                         Direct line: 01-213
                                        Switchboard: 01-213 3000
Our reference: CDA/SO. 14/5/1
Your reference:

The Director General
The Greater London Council
The Chief Executive     )
County Councils          ).     Bir,land and Wales
District Councils        ) in   ^ l a n d and Wales
London Borough Councils )
The Town Clerk
City of London
Chief Officers of Police ) in England and'Wales
Chief Fire Officers       ) (for information)                             9 July   1982



Dear Sir

HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO ES 1/1982
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TOWARDS THE HOME DEFENCE ACTIVITIES OF THE
RED CROSS AND ST JOHN AT COUNTY LEVEL

Following the Government's decision to encourage the use of voluntary effort
in civil defence and the appointment of Sir Leslie Mavor as co-ordinator, the
British Red Cross Society and the Order of St John have established Joint
Snergency Executive Committees at County level in England and Wales to facilitate
the provision of medical support to Regional Health Authorities and to local
authorities in peacetime emergency or war. This objective is now being
pursued on an increasing scale through seminars and indoor exercises to
brief volunteers for their role; field exercises to practice them as units
or teams prior to participating in full-scale exercises organised by County
authorities; and attendance at Home Defence College courses. In many cases
County Committees are already co-operating closely with the local authority
emergency services. The importance of this contribution by the British Red
Cross Society and the Order of St John is fully recognised in Home Office
Circular No ES 2/81.

It is for local authorities to decide how best this voluntary contribution can
be integrated into their emergency plans; but the Government regards this
assistance as an essential component of voluntary civil defence activity, and
local authorities should plan to realise the full potential of these voluntary
aid societies to support their arrangements for the handling of emergencies,
whether in respect of the potential wartime role of these societies or of
their capacity to help in peacetime accidents or disasters.

The co-ordination, organisation and carrying out of all activities associated
with training for these functions places a financial burden on these
societies for which they have virtually no resources. This burden includes
such administrative overheads as telephone and postal charges and a proportion
of other office expenses. As charities their funds are raised from the general
public for a specific range of activities which does not include civil defence.
Sorce local authorities make a grant to the local branch for use at its own
discretion. In other cases, where an activity is undertaken in conjunction with,
or with the approval of, the County Emergency Planning Officer, it ie the
practice for the local authority to reimburse some part of the costs incurred
by members (such as travelling or out of pocket expenses) or to assist the
local branch with charges (for example the hire of premises)* The same
consideration for minimising the costs falling upon the voluntary aid
societies has led to the general undertaking that, where a local authority
gives instruction or training in any aspect of civil defence to members of
these societies, no charge is made for the services rendered or for the
re-imbursement of associated expenses*

Any remuneration to the voluntary aid societies should be at a realistic
level and such expenditure by the local authority is already eligible for
payment of grant at the rate of 7596 under the civil defence grant arrangements
subject to the usual Home Office approval. Finally, the Government wishes to
encourage the attendance of members on such courses as are suitable at the
Home Defence College, Easingwold. The expenses involved in such attendance
are all eligible for payment of the.civil defence grant and the government hopes
that local authorities can make provision to meet the remaining 25# falling to
be met locally.

                                                      Yours faithfully




                                                 V    J A HOWARD




                                                     SIR LESLIE MAVOR
     t                                       initial
                         REFER TO                is          Return to
                                                 seen




                                                                 on

   TUS/VB
                                                            Return to File
                                       t u   r        X •   'jm Hobda
                                    14th February 1983

M. 6. McCurry, Esq.,
S0|ion»l Liaison Division,
Department of Health and Social Security,
Euston Tower,
286, Easton Road,
LONDON,
NW1 3DN.

Dear Mr. HcCwrry,
          Thank you very such for the copies
of the correspondence relating to the use of
civil defenee funds to m e t expenditure
incurred by the Voluntary Aid Societies.
                    Yours sincerely,



                   T. L. Hobday
               RSCM (Hone Defence)
                                     MfiHA   medium

 DHSS                                 11 FEB 1983
                                      TLH I J
                                                  r
with complii                                  .




Department of Health and Social Security
Euston Tower
286 Euston Road
London NW1 3DN
B Willie Esq                                                  '
Assistant Treasurer                            ,
North East Thames EHA
hO Eastbourne Terrace
LONDON W2 3QH
                                                   9 February 1933




Dear Hr   Willis                          ■f
USE OF CIVIL DEFENCE FUNDS

     Thank you for your letter of 12 January®

     The letter DA(81)9 of 25 March 1981 was as an official notification of the
availability of resources and also provided a suggested job description for the
planning post. Paragraph 3.4 of the letter states that "the appointed officer
will have a key part in training at all levels - medical, nursing, administrative
Voluntary Aid Societies, emergency services aimed at encouraging self-help in
first aid, home nursing and hygiene in the community”*

     In the light of that sub-paragraph, we suggest that it would not be
unreasonable to devote any resources, available from the specific allocation
for the pofst, to activities falling within the scope of the post - and clearly
training is a legitimate part of the duties.   Howe\fer, we have reservations
about the requests received from the London Branch of the British Red Cross.
We are aware that the GLC is not fulfilling its obligations to the VASs in
respect of reimbursement of civil defence expenditure{ in our view the costs of
Exercises 'Spearpoint* and 'Crashpoint * fall within the responsibility of the
GLC and Home Office and we cannot undertake to act as agents for them. As far
as the funding of Committee Expenses are concerned, we consider that this is a
matter entirely for the British Red Cross. In short, there may be occasions
when you are able to support training exercises but on this occasion we agree
that NHS funds would not be appropriate.

     As you probably know, the Home Office are proposing to amend the Civil
Defence (Grant) Regulations 1953 to increase the area of complete re-imbursement
on items of approved local authority civil defence expenditure. It is expected
that the revised Regulations will ease the financial burden borne by VASs.

     Also, you will be interested to learn that DHSS Ministers have recently
approved a grant of £10,000 per annum to both the British Bed Cross and the
St John Ambulance to assist with the administrative costs of implementing a
disaster training scheme.

                                                                  /Finally
     Finally, I would like to take the opportunity to remind you that funds
allocated under DA(81)9 are to be used solely for civil defence purposes and
may not be diverted to any other activity.  It is possible that a constant
underspending may result in a reduction in the allocation, in future years.

     I am copying this letter and related correspondence   to all NKS EPOs.

                                 •             Yours sincerely




                                               M G MeCurry
                                               Regional Liaison Division
Worth East Thames Regional Health Authority
40 E a s tb o u rn e T e rra c e L o n d o n W 2 3 0 .R   T e l e p h o n e 0 1 -2 6 2 8011   {E xt..

C h a irm a n S ir H a rry M o o re , CBE
R e gio nal T reasu rer J. S. C a tte ra li. iP F A                                              Y o u r R e f:

                                                                                                   O u r R e f:

Kr 14 KcCurry
Regional Liaison Division
Euston Tower
286 Euston Road
London 1JW1 3DH




 12 January 1983




 Dear Mr^HcCurry

 HOI®       DEFENCE)          PLAEJIKG USB OF FUNDS

 Further to our telephone conversation I feel it would be helpful ix I
 set out for your our problem regarding the above.

 We received an addition to our allocation under DA (81) 9 specifically
 to appoint staff for Home Defence Planning and in common with most Eegions
 have"done so. We have now been approached by Mr Coe, the Emergency Planning
 Officer for North West Thames, in his co-ordinating role for London, for a
 grant from the allocation for the Voluntary Aid Societies to allow them to
 carry out two exercises and to cover committee expenses, a copy of the
 Socieities letter to Dr P Walter is enclosed.

 As explained to you the sums involved are small and would not present a
 problem, the difficulty as I see it is that DA (8l) 9 restricts our expenditure
 to salary and associated costs and we have no discretion to make grants such
 as those requested. It is not however our intention to be obstructive ana
 before we confirm our seeming inability to accede to this request, X should
 be grateful for any guidance on DA (81) 9 you may be able to offer. I
 would point out that our time is limited and that the first exercise is due
 to taks place on 20 March.

 Yours sincerely




 B Willis
 Assistant Treasurer
  AhUiC&Tt                        oOc>of                                 LGC/WA1                       <>rd Hoy ,1932
 ! Medical O f f i c e r ,    Emergency Plriming Officer*
  »H«A t                      1 4 Bi chops Bridge Road, VIe2
 bourne Terrace, V t          TEL; ?23~^KX) Ext, 89




                                           the   BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY
                                                                   I fiC O S P O ^ A IF D   E.Y .- D T A ’.. C H A T T E R . TSCS



                                            .                  .      TH E         LON DOM. E R A N C H
                                                           *


Vent:                                                                           54 GROSVE\’OH GARDENS.
f;cs.i Hyiton-Fostur
                                                                                      LO N D O N S V .'IW 0£A
|A   Director:
-,e!M. U. Ryen, F-BfM                                                                       Tele*o'*onc>: 01~730 0372/7

                                                                                     25”Xoverber 1982.
     dc/ hr
                                                                                     go
     Dr. P.C. Walker,                   .
     Regional Health Director (designate)
     North-East Thanes Regional Health Authority
     40 Eastbourne Terrace
     LONDON W2 3QR.



     Dear Dr. Walker,

     LONDON JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE        ^                                                                            - „
     VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES                       ’                                        •     .
     I am writing to you as-Chairman of this Co-aittee who have =et quarterly jir.ee the
     inaugural meeting on 15 December IPSO.    Their cask as <.etxr.ee .1: .Ae ^
     Joint Emergency Executive Corsnittee circulars xs to superv.se cc-o e :      ^
     initiate various measures in regard to Emergency Pxanr.-ng xn ,-ie G.e&     o.x.n
     area which affect the Voluntary Aid Societxes.

     To assist us in this task we have co-opted Mr.L.G.Coe, tae ?.eg_ona_ ea^ta
     Emergency P l a n n i n g Officer for Xorth-Vest Thanes Regional
     member of the Committee and with hxs assistance and              _n_w    7‘
     we have been carrying out planning and training as far as Greater ^oncon „s
     concerned.                                              _                   -
     The Committee have approved a programme for 19S3 which contains two t^in traxnxng
     functions :
        A Study/Exercise on 20 March 1983, Exercise "SPEARPOINT", to,far£lxarise ’
        participants in the preparation, manning and operation or -'irs.    . -
        in a major crisis, followed by :                                           .
        Exercise "CRASHPOINT" a practical and field exercise wxth the sane 0 2 ;.ecu oc.
        the 16th October 19S3.
     The provisional p r o g r a m tor the Study <m 20th March is attached. The ^ t t e e
     vho have no specific funds for carrying out this vork ,.ave rejuestec t ^ . o ^ o u
     if consideration could be given to fxnancxal assistance -or — e ^o__c*— 0 —
      expenditure
.VaUcer,                            L ftG«Coe ,                             LG.C/1-I3/A1       ?Jrd Kov,1932
1 Medicol Officer,                  Emergency PI mining Officer,
                                    l,h BinhopG Bridga Read, W»2
.H.A s
bourne Tex-race, W .2               TEL.' ?2>‘^ 0 0 Ext. 8 9




    PC/HR                                                                 23 Novei±>er 1982.
                                                                      6
                                                                  I

    Dr.    P .O .   Walker

          k„ Exercise "SPS ARP PINT" - Sunday, 20 March. 19S3.
               The hire of premises, St.John HQ for Greater London
               and expenditure on services on 20 March ...                                     £ 200.00
               The provision of lunch and refreshments ...                                     £ _300.'C0
                                                                                                * JoO.to
      b. Exercise '’CRASHPOINT’' — Sunday, 16 October 19S3.
      '*       Eire of premises   ...                                                          £ 250.00
               Payments to the Casualties Union ...                                            £ 350.00
               Transport expenses ...             •                                            £ 280.00
               Labour charges ...            -            '                                    £ 275.00
                                                                                           •       in   s$777
 Commit te-.- Expenses                                                                         ‘
The Committee which was inaugurated on the 15 til December 19S0 and has met quarterly
since that date has, as has been stated, no specific funds for carrying out its vori
and is now faced with secretarial, admini strative ar.d clerical costs which it is
finding very difficult to meet.   The annual expenditure amounts to :

      a . • Stationery and postage ...                        '                                    £ 300.00
            (copying etc.)
      b.       Typing and clerical services ...                   •                            £    150.00
      c.       Travelling expenses ...                •                                        £ 600.00
               (plus salaries)                            -                                    j
                                                                                                   10 $0
The Committee would appreciate your consideration of these requests Co assist in the
expenditure detailed in this letter for the next 12 months.

V7e look forward to hearing from you in due course.                                                        » ^ 0 ' ''3

Yours sincerely,




CHAIRMAN.
HOME DEFENCE CIRCULAR




                           DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
      DHSS

To:   Regional Health Authorities                )
      Area Health Authorities                    )    for action
      Boards of Governors                        )

      Family Practitioner Committees              )   for information
      Community Health Councils                   )                                                  January 1977



           THE PREPARATION AND ORGANISATION OF THE HEALTH SERVICE FOR WAR


SUMMARY

This circular deals w ith the organisation fo r war o f the Health Service in England; the introduction o f an
erriergency system o f control, and cancels previous Civil Defence memorandum.

INTRODUCTION

1.     Existing plans fo r the Health Service in war are based on the HM(CD) series o f memoranda issued by the
M inistry o f Health. Since 1968 however successive governments have introduced m odifications to home
defence policies and these, together w ith the re-organisation o f the National Health Service, have rendered
obsolete the plans prepared by the form er Regional Hospital Boards. The HM(CD) memoranda are therefore
cancelled and this circular, which is the firs t o f a new series, explains the basis on which the Health Service is
now to be prepared and organised fo r war.

2.    The Home Office co-ordinates the issue o f guidance by centra) government departments about home
defence matters and has issued memoranda (under the ES series o f circulars) on home defence planning, to
local and other public authorities. Copies o f memoranda relevant to the Health Service have been sent to all
Health Authorities and copies o f this and subsequent circulars w ill be sent to local and public authorities as
appropriate. This circular should be read in conjunction w ith the Home O ffice memoranda and attention is
drawn particularly to:

      Home Defence Boundaries (ES1/1973)
      Home Defence Planning Assumptions (ES3/1973)
      Machinery o f Government in War (ES7/1973)
      Survival Under Fall-out Conditions ( ES I0/1974)

3.     The issue o f Home Defence planning circulars and o f this circular, does not mean that the Government
consider that war is im m inent or inevitable. It is however only prudent to take reasonable precautions to
m itigate the effects o f a possible attack and so to plan the organisation and control o f the Health Service that
it may be able to make an effective contribution to the subsequent recovery o f the country. The purpose o f
this circular is therefore to set out the preparations that Health authorities should now make and the
organisation they would adopt, to meet the effects o f any major attack on this country. Further circulars w ill
be issued from time to time to deal w ith particular aspects o f preparation fo r war and the action to be taken
after attack.

PLANNING ASSUMPTIONS

4.     Home Defence Planning Assumptions (ES3/73) d iffe r from the previous Civil Defence policy and certain
features o f the new policy have a particular bearing on Health Service planning. Health Service plans should
therefore be made on the follow ing assumptions:

      a.     The general aim in a crisis would be to keep disruption o f the social, economic and industrial life
      o f the country to a m inimum as long as possible. A ny large scale re-organisation o f the Health Service, to
      put it on a war footing, should therefore be avoided.




                                                       1
      b.    No part o f the country could expect to avoid the effects o f an attack. Those areas not directly
      attacked might suffer from radioactive fall-out; would certainly feel the effects o f the destruction and
      disruption elsewhere o f supplies, services and transport and might receive an influ x o f refugees. A ll
      Health A uthorities must therefore plan to meet the consequences o f an attack on any part of the
      country.

      c.     The pattern o f attack and radioactive fall-out cannot be accurately predicted. The public would be
      better protected by remaining in their own homes than by moving to other areas where the local and
      other public authorities might well be unable to provide shelter, food or essential services. The
      Government do not propose to arrange’ fo r any official evacuation of the public and, through press,
      television and radio, would advise against random movement.

      d.    Fall-out conditions are like ly to impose severe restraints on movement after an attack, possibly fo r
      several days. Immediate medical care fo r survivors might not therefore be possible and medical staff,
      who would be irreplaceable except in the long term , should not be wasted by allowing them to enter
      highly radioactive areas to assist casualties.

GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS

5.     It is possible th at a future war might begin w ith a period o f non-nuclear conventional war and small scale
attacks against vital installations or centres o f Government could not be discounted. It is unlikely however that
conventional war on this scale could continue fo r long w itho ut either a settlement o f the international dispute
or a sudden escalation into nuclear war.

6.     A nuclear strike would give rise to radioactive fall-out. The spread and intensity o f the fall-ou t would
depend upon many factors at the tim e, but it may be assumed that the greater part o f the country would be
covered, in varying degrees, by plumes o f highly radioactive dust, in many cases overlapping. The intensity o f
this fall-out would prevent, in most areas, any outside movement during at least the firs t 48 hours after an
attack and, in any case, the whole o f the United Kingdom would be under a RED Warning against the
possibility o f fu rthe r attacks during this period. For the firs t 48 hours after an attack therefore, little o r no
life-saving activity would be possible, except on the most lim ited self help basis.

7.    Radiation decays very rapidly in the firs t few hours and days after a strike, but thereafter decay is slow.
An initia l level o f 1000 rph may fall to 10 rph in 48 hours, but would would not reach 1 rph fo r 14 days.
Some people would receive an immediate radiation dose from the explosion but most would receive doses
from the subsequent fa ll-ou t, the amount depending in part on the protective factor o f th e ir accommodation.
Further exposure in the open to radiation would have serious and probably lethal effect u ntil the ambient rate
had fallen to 0.5 rph. When the dose rate had fallen to 4 rph however release from cover could be allowed fo r
1 hour in 24 and fu rthe r release periods could be extended as radiation levels decline. General life saving
operations in areas o f fall-ou t might not be possible therefore until days or even weeks after a nuclear strike.

8.     Certain b u ilt up areas may be regarded as potential targets but there are many possible targets in rural
areas. No part o f the country can therefore be assumed to be safe both from attack and from radioactive
fall-out fro m attacks elsewhere. Nevertheless, if the total destruction or isolation o f health service resources is
to be avoided, some redeployment o f medical and nursing staff, medical supplies, ambulances and equipment
would be essential. The major concentration o f hospitals lies in the centres o f large towns and cities and
contains a high proportion o f the most skilled staff and essential medical supplies and equipment, while a high
proportion o f patients attending those hospitals comes from the periphery o f the urban areas. The
redeployment o f resources could reduce the possibility o f total destruction and bring them closer to those who
would have most need o f them after an attack. As a pre-condition to redeployment, all patients medically and
socially f it to be sent home would have to be discharged and hospitals would have to accept emergency cases
only.

9.    The peace tim e administrative structure o f the Health Service is unsuited to the needs o f war, when a
clear system o f control would be needed fo r the rapid acquisition and redeployment o f surviving resources. A
control structure would be required which could be activated before an attack and which would relate to the
various levels o f wartime regional government.

10. The regions and sub-regions adopted fo r Government control (ES1/73) and the boundaries o f local
authority counties and districts do not, in many cases, match the Health Service organisation and where they
do, they match at d ifferent levels in the non-m etropolitan and the m etropolitan countries. It w ould be
undesirable however, in a period o f crisis, to add to the burdens o f the Health Service by altering the
administrative boundaries. I t is not intended therefore to alter boundaries or agency arrangements before an
attack, but to relate the health service structure to the regional government organisation as well as the present
relationship o f boundaries allows. Whatever the boundary arrangements, adjustment m ight well be needed
after an attack. Where discrepancies between local goverment and health authorities lead to practical problems
before then they w ill no doubt be the subject o f local consultation between the authorities concerned.



                                                         2
11. A fte r an attack, the number o f casualties might be quite beyond the resources o f existing health services.
Hospitals might be destroyed or isolated and the care o f casualties might have to be undertaken largely by
volunteers w orking in the com m unity under professional supervision. Whenever possible however the aim
should be to base the care of casualties on surviving and expanded hospitals, so as to sim plify the
re-establishment of control and the d istribution o f supplies; to provide centres fo r the medical care of serious
cases; to create u firm base from which the remaining staff could w ork and to raise morale o f both public and
staff by demonstrating a determ ination to re-build the Health Service, albeit in a modified form .

AIMS

12. The aims o f the Health Service w ill be to provide medical and nursing care fo r the casualties o f war and
the sick and to maintain a basis fo r future reconstruction.

LA Y O U T OF THE CIRCULAR

13.    The circular is in fo u r Parts:

       Part I (Preparation fo r War) sets out the measures that Health A uthorities may be required to take
       during a period of crisis, to prepare the Health Service to meet the effects o f war;

       Part 11 (Organisation in War) deals w ith the transition from the peace-time system o f adm inistration to
       a war-time system o f control;

       Part III   (Casualty Policy) outlines procedures fo r the care o f casualties after a major attack;

       Part IV    (Summary o f Action) lists the action that Health A uthorities should now take.

PART I - PREPARATION FOR WAR

14.    It is assumed (ES3/1973) that there would be three to fo u r weeks political warning o f the outbreak o f
war,but Health A uthorities must be prepared to complete essential action w ith in a much shorter period.The
aim o f the preparations would be to reduce the hospital population as far as possible, to provide space fo r the
care o f casualties, and to disperse staff, essential supplies and equipment, to reduce the risk o f the total
destruction o f resources. Health A uthorities including Boards of Governors should now plan fo r these
measures; implem entation would be authorised by the Secretary o f State, when circumstances required.

DISCHARGE OF PATIENTS

15. During a period o f crisis and when so directed, Health A uthorities should arrange fo r all patients in
hospitals, nursing and convalescent homes, whose retention was not medically essential, to be sent home. The
purpose o f this evacuation would be to free hospitals to deal w ith later casualties, to afford patients the greater
protection that dispersal to th e ir own homes would provide and to allow fo r the redistribution o f equipment
and staff. It is hoped that there would be sufficient warning o f an attack to allow seven days fo r the discharge
o f patients, but plans should allow fo r a more rapid discharge should this become necessary.

16. The selection o f patients fo r discharge should be made on medical grounds and on the availability of
home accommodation and care. For the latter, the advice o f the local a uth ority social services department
would in some cases be needed and arrangements should be made w ith local authorities to provide the
maximum e ffo rt to check home conditions. Discharge should not however be held up merely because home
conditions were not ideal or could not be checked and it must be accepted that the crisis would entail
hardship. Criteria fo r selecting patients fo r discharge should be based on those which would have to be
adopted, follow ing an attack w ith many casualties, fo r the selection o f patients fo r hospital treatment.
Consultants would therefore need to consider whether, after an attack, they would expect to retain or
discharge a patient in the same clinical condition as those under review. The numbers to be discharged cannot
be pre-determined and in some cases, fo r example, geriatrics, no discharges m ight be possible; it might be
expected however that the number o f patients to be discharged would be o f the follow ing order, although it is
stressed that these figures should in no way be taken as targets to be fu lfille d ;

       M aternity cases 70%                        Convalescents 100%

       Acute cases 60%                             Sick children 70%

       Non active infections and chest cases 50%

       Psychiatric cases 15%

The policy fo r the discharge o f patients would also apply to the nursing and convalescent homes w ith
contractual arrangements w ith an A H A and, at the discretion o f the Health A u th o rity , to private hospitals and
nursing homes. (Paragraph 26).

                                                         3
17. Atrangements should be made fo r the transport o f patients to their homes using where necessary
ambulances, tho hospital car service and hired vehicles. The remaining patients should be redistributed w ithin
the hospital or home to make the maximum use o f the protective factors in the building, and the
establishment should be prepared fo r a situation in which radioactivity prevented any movement outside and
all public u tilities were out o f action. A t least 14 days o f essential foods and 16 litres o f water per person,
should be stored during the warning period and kept topped up and, follow ing an attack, strict rationing
should be introduced.

18. Hospitals should continue to accept emergency cases during a period o f crisis but out-patient clinics
should be closed. Diagnostic pathology and X-ray services should continue on an emergency basis. Any cases
admitted should be discharged as soon as their clinical condition perm itted.

DISPERSAL OF M ED IC AL SUPPLIES AND EQUIPMENT

19. A high proportion o f the medical supplies and equipment most needed after an attack is concentrated in
hospitals situated in central urban areas. A single attack could therefore destroy the greater part o f a Health
A u th o rity's resources or could render them tem porarily inaccessible because o f radioactivity o r the blocking o f
roads. AHAs should therefore prepare to disperse, as widely as possible w ithin th eir Area, those drugs (and the
means o f administering them), anaesthetic equipment, dressings, surgical instruments and portable items o f
medical equipment, essential to the treatment o f casualties. Arrangements should be made to disperse these
p rio rity items in balanced packs to hospitals, nursing homes and other health service establishment, to provide
as wide a dispersion as possible. Where the greater part o f an A H A lies w ith in a b u ilt up area, the dispersal
arrangements should be made on a Regional basis. Plans should also be made to disperse any home defence
stores held by RHAs, and arrangements would be made to issue to RHAs any such stores held centrally.

BLOOD TRANSFUSION SERVICE

20. Blood and certain blood products are essential fo r the proper care o f casualties. RHAs should arrange fo r
the dispersal o f stocks o f such blood as may be available in Regional Transfusion Centres and earmark
refrigerators (preferably w ith independent generators) in advance. As much plasma volume expander (dried
plasma, plasma protein fraction, or plasma substitute) as possible should also be dispersed. A fte r an attack
great reliance would have in itia lly to be placed on local blood collection and stocks o f appropriate equipment
and blood grouping reagents should also be dispersed, Premises fo r re-establishing the RTC, should the need
arise, should be earmarked.

AM BULANCE SERVICES

21. The scope fo r the fu rthe r dispersal o f the ambulance service may be small, but the appropriate Health
A uthorities should prepare plans to leave in operation, before an attack, sufficient ambulances to support an
emergency service only and to disperse the remainder. In the case o f London, South West Thames RHA should
prepare a plan, in conjunction w ith the other Thames RHAs, fo r the whole GLC area.

22. Ambulances should be dispersed so as to provide an emergency wireless network between all the Health
Service headquarters and hospitals w ithin the Region or Area. While Ambulance Service wireless installations
would be vulnerable to the effects o f nuclear strike, any communications remaining after an attack would be a
valuable aid to the exercise o f control and the collection o f inform ation.

DISPERSAL OF STAFF

23. The same considerations that apply to the safety o f patients and equipment apply equally to staff. A
large proportion o f Health Service staff are concentrated in central urban areas which could become isolated in
the event o f attack. Trained staff are the most valuable asset possessed by the Health Service and could be
replaced only in the very long term. As soon as patients have been sent home therefore all staff not required to
operate an emergency service should themselves be sent home or dispersed w ith in the Area or Region, on the
same criteria as fo r equipment.

24. Some hospital staff, particularly nursing staff, either live close to hospitals in central urban areas o r have
homes to o far distant fo r them to be easily recalled. Arrangements should therefore be made fo r such staff to
be dispersed to evacuated convalescent homes, nursing homes o r other accommodation on the fringe o f the
urban area. Suitable accommodation should be earmarked and transport planned.

25. S taff may be recalled, during a period o f conventional war, to augment the emergency service o f their
hospital, but the numbers should be kept to the m inim um required to deal w ith the casualties and no general
recall should be ordered. A fte r a nuclear attack, radioactive fa ll-ou t, either in the area or d riftin g towards it,
might be at lethal or near lethal levels. It would be essential th a t staff, vital to the longterm recovery o f the
country, should not be wasted by allowing them to enter areas o f high radioactivity and no staff should leave
shelter u ntil authorised to do so by the D istrict Controller (see paragraph 36). Hospitals from which the staff
are originally dispersed m ight have been destroyed or isolated, or m ight n o t be best placed to handle the




                                                         4
    m ajority of casualties. When release from cover had been authorised, dispersed staff should report immediately
    to the nearest d istrict general hospital. If this were no longer possible, staff should report to their nearest
    Casualty Collecting Centre (see paragraph 60). As the situation became clear, staff m ight be redeployed to
    augment other hospitals or casualty collecting centres.

    HOSPITALS NOT VESTED IN THE SECRETARY OF STATE

    26. When empowered by an Order under Defence Regulations, the Secretary o f State may authorise AHAs
    to assume fu ll control over all private hospitals, nursing homes and convalescent homes in the Area. A t the
    discretion of the A H A , these establishment would be treated, fo r the purposes o f the dispersal o f patients,
    staff and supplies, in the same way as Health Service establishments.

    GENERAL M EDICAL PRACTITIONERS

    27. Before an attack, the return of hospital patients to their homes would increase the w ork o f the general
    practitioners and, after an attack, they would be fu lly engaged in caring fo r casualties and the sick in the
    com m unity. General practitioners should n ot normally be employed in hospitals after the start o f the dispersal
    of patients, nor should health authorities rely, other than in very exceptional circumstances, on general
    practitioners to augment the staff of hospitals after an attack. Exceptions, both before and after an attack,
    would be those general practitioners who work in hospitals, particularly Com munity Hospitals, which are
    entirely dependent upon their services. General Practitioners and their staff, if any, should be assigned to a
    Casualty Collecting Centre in their neighbourhood (paragraph 60), to which they should report immediately
    movement is allowed after an attack.

    D ENTAL PRACTITIONERS

    28. Health authorities should consider how best to employ the medical skills o f dental practitioners. While
    some might be assigned to hospitals, follow ing an attack, the m ajority might best be employed to assist in the
    care and sorting o f casualties at a Casualty Collecting Centre. A fter an attack, as soon as radiological
    conditions allowed, dental practitioners should, unless otherwise arranged, report to the Casualty Collecting
    Centre in their neighbourhood.

    D O M IC ILIA R Y SERVICES

    29. The dom iciliary services would continue to function norm ally until an attack. The return o f hospital
    patients and the withdrawal o f out-patient facilities would increase the w ork o f the dom iciliary services and
    health authorities should consider the augmentation o f these services from dispersed hospital staff, particularly
    midwives. Each member of the dom iciliary services should be assigned to a D om iciliary Team which should
    report, as soon as movement was allowed, to the doctor in charge o f the Casualty Collecting Centre fo r the
    neighbourhood.

    IN D IV ID U A L VOLUNTEERS

    30. It may be expected that, during a period o f crisis, many individuals w ith knowledge o f firs t aid would
    o ffe r their services. Volunteers should norm ally be directed to a Voluntary A d Society which could assign
    them to a proposed First Aid Post (see paragraph 59) near their homes. In addition, a national appeal would be
    made to ali those w ith medical o r nursing qualifications, which they were n ot exercising, to report to their
    nearest Casualty Collecting Centre (see paragraph 60) as soon after an attack as movement was allowed.

    M EDICAL SUPPLIES

^   31. Action would be taken by the Department, prior to an attack, to arrange the distribution to health
    authorities of any centrally held medical supplies. A fte r an attack, all supplies held by pharmacies, chemists,
    other retailers and wholesalers, would be requisitioned fo r the health services and made available to the public
    only in the course o f medical treatm ent through general practitioners and D om iciliary Teams. Further supplies
    might not be available fo r many months and the most stringent economy o f existing supplies would be
    essential. Further guidance on the d istribution o f supplies, including the medical stock pile w ill be given in due
    course.

    COMMUNITY HEALTH COUNCILS

    32. During the transition to war of the health service, involving the discharge o f patients and the dispersal o f
    hospital staff, the activities of CHCs may be suspended by direction o f the Secretary o f State and would be
    suspended in the event of a nuclear attack. The staff o f CHCs would be redeployed at the discretion o f the
    Health A u th o rity .




                                                           5
PART II - ORGANISATION FOR WAR

THE M ACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT

33. England is divided into 9 Home Defence Regions, each containing one or more Sub-Regions (ESI/1973)
and Commissioners would be appointed in war to exercise the functions of government (ES7/1973). Staff
would be appointed from the Department, to Regional and Sub-Regional headquarters (see also paragraph 46).

34. Below Sub-Region, the processes of government in war would be carried o ut at County and D istrict
level. (In London groups of London Boroughs would equate w ith County level). Each County and D istrict has
appointed a C ontroller (designate) (norm ally the Chief Executive) who would be empowered in war to
exercise the fu ll functions of government in his area. A chain o f government could thus be established from
the Region (when operational) through Sub-Region and County to D istrict, supported by a network of
communications.

35. The County or London Group C ontroller would determine priorities, plan fo r the most effective use of
surviving resources in the County and co-ordinate the activities o f essential services. The decisions o f the
County C ontroller would directly affect the provision and operation o f health services and vice versa, and very
close liaison between the County Controller and the appropriate level in the Health Service would be essential.

36. The D istrict or London Borough C ontroller would have similar powers and responsibilities w ith in his
D istrict and would be answerable to the County Controller, and, through him, to the Commissioner at
Sub-Region and later, at Region. A very close liaison between the D istrict Controller and the Health Service
would also be essential.

HEALTH SERVICE ORGANISATION

37. The peace-time organisation o f the Health Service does not lend itself to the rapid taking o f decisions of
the sort required in a war situation. It w ill be necessary therefore to provide fo r a control structure from the
Commissioner through Health Service Regions, Areas and Districts to Sectors and Units, and fo r effective
liaison w ith the appropriate County or D istrict C ontroller at each level. Health A uthorities, including Boards
o f Governors should therefore appoint a Health Director (Designate) to assume in war responsibility fo r all the
A u th o rity ’s functions; the responsibility fo r the preparation o f the A u th ority's war plans rests w ith the
authority itself who w ill delegate to their officers as appropriate.

REGIONAL HEALTH DIRECTOR (RHD)

38. RHAs should now appoint their Regional Medical O fficer as Regional Health D irector (designate) and
arrange to delegate to him when so directed by the Secretary o f State, or in the event o f enemy action
destroying communications w ith the Department, fu ll responsibility fo r the framing and execution o f policy.

39. In peace-time the RHA would be responsible fo r the co-ordination o f A H A plans and the preparation of
the Region's plans fo r war, in accordance w ith the Department's directives. In consultation w ith the Controller
(designate) o f any Metropolitan County w ithin the Region, the A u th o rity should plan fo r liaison officers to
the County's war tim e Control. In war, the Director would assume fu ll responsibility fo r all Health Service
functions in his Region, taking such action as he considered appropriate through other members o f the
 Regional team o f Officers, who would be answerable to him. He would be responsible fo r assessing the
resources o f the Health Service available to the Region; determining priorities in the allocation o r re-allocation
o f resources; he would act in consultation and co-ordination w ith the appropriate Sub-Regions and County
headquarters and would liaise as necessary w ith neighbouring RHDs. The D irector would be directly
answerable to the Commissioners at the Sub-Regions and later, the Regions, insofar as these included a part o f
the RHA. It is accepted th at in itia lly a RHD might have to be answerable fo r parts o f his Region to more than
one Commissioner, b u t adjustments to the Health Service Regional Boundaries would n ot be made until after
an attack, when the extent o f the destruction and the loss o f communications m ight well dictate a
 realignment.

AR EA H EALTH DIRECTORS (AHD)

40. AHAs should now appoint their Area Medical O fficer as Area Health D irector (designate) and arrange to
delegate to him, when sa directed or should communications be destroyed, fu ll responsibility fo r the framing
and execution o f Area policy.

41. In peace-time the A H A would be responsible fo r the preparation and submission to the RHA, o f Area
plans fo r war and fo r taking preparatory measures in accordance w ith the advice o f the RHA and Department's
directives. The A u th o rity , in consultation w ith Controllers (designate) o f any Non-Metropolitan Counties and
Metropolitan Districts should plan fo r liaison officers fo r their war-time control. In war, the D irector would
assume fu ll responsibility fo r the health services in the Area, taking such action as he considered appropriate
through other members o f the Area Team of Officers who would be answerable to him . He would be
responsible fo r assessing the Health Service resources available to the Area and determining a casualty policy.




                                                      6
     He would take action in consultation and co-ordination w ith the appropriate County or D istrict Controller. He
     would maintain as far as he was able, communications w ith the RHD and his DHDs and would liaise w ith
     neighbouring Area and D istrict Health Directors. He would report and be answerable to the RHD, or in his
     absence, to the Commissioner at Sub-Region. He might delegate any o f his functions to D istrict Health
     Directors.

     DISTRICT HEALTH DIRECTORS (DHD)

     42. AHAs should appoint D istrict Com munity Physicians as D istrict Health Directors (designate). D istrict
     Management Teams would draw up their war plans as directed by the A H A ; this would in the case of
     non-m etropolitan counties include the plans fo r liaison officers at the local authority's D istrict war-time
     Control. In war, the D istrict Health D irector would carry out such functions as might be delegated to him by
     the AHD and would be responsible to the AHD fo r the execution of the Area casualty policy in the Health
     D istrict. In the absence o f the AHD he would assume fu ll responsibility fo r the deploym ent of resources
     w ithin his health D istrict and, in consultation and co-ordination w ith the appropriate D istrict Controllers, fo r
     the implementation o f a casualty policy.

     SECTOR AN D U N IT HEALTH DIRECTORS (SHD AN D UHD)

     43. AHAs and Boards of Governors in consultation w ith the appropriate A H A should arrange fo r an officer
     in each Sector and U nit to prepare in peace, war emergency plans fo r the hospitals and establishments in his
     Sector or U nit and in war to assume fu ll responsibility under the DHD or AH D , fo r those establishments. As
     arranged by the AH D or DHD he would establish liaison w ith the appropriate D istrict Controller. In the
     absence o f the AHD or DHD he w ould, in consultation and co-operation w ith the D istrict Controller, take
     such action as seemed appropriate.

     SPECIAL HOSPITALS

     44. When directed by the Secretary o f State or in the event o f an attack severing communications w ith the
     Department, special hospitals would come under the control of the AHD in whose area the hospital was
     situated. A U nit Health Director (designate) w ill be appointed fo r each hospital and be responsible in peace fo r
     any planning required by the A H A concerned, but should subm it his plans to the Department fo r approval. In
     war, the U nit Health Director would be responsible to the AHD fo r the conduct o f his hospital. Patients
     should after an attack be discharged only on the authority o f a Commissioner at Region or Sub-Region.

     COMMUNITY HOSPITALS

     45.    Few Community Hospitals have, so far, been established and guidance about how they m ight be fitte d
     into the health service organisation in war w ill have to w ait until more knowledge has been gained about how
     they w ill operate in peace and the type o f patients they w ill hold. Meanwhile, AHAs w ith such hospitals in
     their area should consider how they should be used follow ing an attack. They might, fo r example, provide
     accommodation fo r a casualty collecting centre (see paragraph 60), be staffed as a casualty hospital or used as
     a hostel fo r patients, particularly the elderly, who could not otherwise be discharged.

     REPRESENTATION A T SUB-REGION

     46. In addition to the officers appointed from the Department (paragraph 33) each RHA w ill appoint an
     adm inistrator and a medical officer to the appropriate Sub-Regional Headquarters. The m ajority o f RHAs
     cover parts o f the area o f more than one Sub-Region and further guidance w ill be given about the
     appointments to be made.

€.   LIAISON WITH COUNTY AND DISTRICT CONTROLLERS

     47. The importance o f establishing liaison between health authorities and County and D istrict Controllers
     (designate) has been stressed. D ifficulties arise however, because the boundaries o f RHAs and Health Districts
     do n o t necessarily match Home Defence Regions or local authority boundaries respectively and A H A
     boundaries may be co-terminous w ith tw o different types o f local authority ie County or Metropolitan
     D istrict. A further d iffic u lty arises in London, where London Boroughs are grouped under five Controllers
     (ES7/73) and AHAs may cover the area o f more than one local authority n o t all o f which w ill necessarily be in
     the same group. Any attem pt to alter Health A u th o rity boundaries to provide fo r easier liaison, would create
     administrative d ifficulties during a period o f crisis and boundaries m ight in any case need adjustment follow ing
     an attack. Health authorities must accept that they would have to liaise w ith several local authorities of
     d iffe ie n t types and responsibility lies w ith Health A uthorities to plan fo r effective liaison in war w ith the
     County and D istrict Controllers in their area.

     48. Non-Metropolitan Counties. AHAs are co-terminous w ith the areas o f non-Metropolitan Counties and
     the A H A should establish liaison w ith the County C ontroller (designate). AHAs should also arrange, if
     necessary through D istrict Management Teams, fo r liaison w ith D istrict Controllers.


                                                           7
49. M etropolitan Counties. AHAs are co-terminous w ith Metropolitan Districts and should establish liaison
w ith the D istrict C ontroller (designate). RHAs should arrange fo r liaison w ith the Controllers (designate) of
the M etropolitan Counties.

50. London. AHAs should liaise w ith the London Boroughs they cover and RHAs should liaise w ith the
London Groups. The three Northern London Groups consist of the London Boroughs covered by N orth East
and North West Thames RHAs and the tw o Southern London Groups by South East and South West Thames
RHAs. Each RHA should establish liaison w ith the London Group covering the m ajority o f their area, b u t
North East Thames RHA should liaise w ith both North West and North London Groups. This liaison must not
be allowed to affect the line o f control between RHA and its own AHAs.

LIAISON OFFICERS

 51. AHAs should consult w ith the appropriate County or D istrict Controllers (designate) about the number
o f liaison officers required and their location before an attack; which w ill depend on the situation o f their
 respective headquarters; the space available at the local authority headquarters and other local factors. The aim
should be to establish effective liaison in war between the Director and the Controller, which would provide
the form er w ith inform ation about the post attack situation in his areas and advice on the resources and
intentions o f the Controller, and provide the latter w ith inform ation about the resources and capabilities of
the Health Service to deal w ith casualties and advice on the health and care o f the com m unity. Liaison officers
should therefore be able to advise on medical, nursing and administrative matters and, ideally, one officer from
each o f these branches o f the Health Service should be appointed, although, in practice, this m ight not be
feasible.

JOINT CONSULTATIVE COMMITTEES

52. JCC's provide a valuable lin k between health and local authorities in peacetime and m ight be able to
foster co-operation and encourage progress in jo in t planning. They would have no role once hostilities began
and they would remain in abeyance fo r several months at least, u ntil the longer-term decisions on the future of
the health service and local government were taken.

MEDICAL ADVICE FOR LOCAL AU TH O R ITY FUNCTIONS

53. NHS Medical Officers appointed by local authorities as "proper officers" fo r their environmental health
functions, should remain w ith their local authority as medical advisers to the Controllers. These officers would
be very fu lly employed and should not, in addition, be appointed by health authorities as their liaison officers
w ith the local authorities. Where a Doctor has been appointed as "proper o ffic e r" by more than one local
authority, or the DCP as D istrict Health Director (designate) is himself a "proper o ffic e r" the A H A and the
local authority should jo in tly agree the nom ination o f additional doctors so that, in war, each D istrict
Controller would have his own medical adviser on public and environmental health.

PART III - CASUALTY POLICY

GENERAL

54. This Part suggests how the preparatory measures and the organisation fo r war o f the Health Service, set
out in the preceding Parts, might be applied to a situation follow ing an attack. The detailed procedures by
which resources might best be applied to achieve the aims o f the Health Service in war, however, require to be
evolved through consultations between Health Directors and County and D istrict Controllers; seminars and
exercises w ith Health A uthorities and at the Home Defence College and discussions between the departments
and services concerned. The proposals in this Part are designed to provide a frame-work on which health
authorities can build their plans. Further guidance w ill be given as procedures are developed.

55. As explained in paragraphs 5 to 7 above; radiological conditions may be expected to prevent any
organised life saving operation fo r days or weeks follow ing an attack. Trained health service staff would be
vital to the future and should not be wasted by allowing them to enter areas o f high contamination where
casualties would, in any case, have small chance o f long term recovery. County and D istrict Controllers would
receive inform ation about radio-active intensities in their area, forecasts about the decay rate and predictions
of further fall-out, carried by wind, from other areas o f destruction. The Health D irector should liaise w ith the
C ontroller to fin d out when and fo r how long, measures to avoid further loss o f life could be taken in the
open. In areas o f great destruction, w ith a consequent loss o f communications, the Health Director concerned
might, in itia lly , be the Sector, or even U nit, Director.

56. No Director w ould be able to rely on receiving or giving assistance to neighbouring Authorities and, in
the firs t instance, would have to concentrate on making the best arrangements possible w ith the resources
available to him. As Directors at successive levels were able to review the situation over wider areas,
arrangements could be made fo r the transfer o f casualties to make the best use o f all available resources and to
relieve the areas hardest hit.


                                                      8
57. When movement became possible, emphasis would have to be placed on self help, w ith m inor injuries
being treated by relatives or friends, to avoid overburdening the health services w ith cases o f superficial injury.
More serious casualties would be treated at First Aid Posts (FAPs), established by the Voluntary Aid Societies.
Casualties requiring fu rthe r treatm ent would be sent to nearby Casualty Collecting Centres (CCCs) run by
general medical practitioners w ith the assistance o f D om iciliary Teams (see para 30) and volunteers. CCCs
would treat and sort casualties fo r p rio rity admission to hospital, return to the com m unity or temporary
retention. The resources available to the health services however would dictate that the m ajority o f casualties
would have to be cared fo r by relatives, friends or volunteers, in their own homes or local authority rest
centres, w ith assistance from general practitioners and members o f the Dom iciliary Teams based on the CCCs.

THE COLLECTION OF CASUALTIES

58. The Regional or Area Health Director concerned would be responsible fo r the deployment o f
ambulances but, in his absence, the highest Director able to exercise control would take this responsibility.
Additional vehides might be obtained by requisition, in conjunction w ith the County or D istrict Controller. In
high casualty areas however, no arrangements fo r the deployment o f ambulances could deal adequately w ith
the numbers involved. The immediate collection and transport o f casualties would be a matter fo r the public
themselves and it may be expected that, as soon as movement became possible, there would be a substantial
flo w o f casualties into First A id Posts. As ambulances became available they could be concentrated on clearing
the more distant and d iffic u lt areas, but Directors would need to attach ambulances to CCCs to collect
casualties from FAPs and to deliver p rio rity cases to hospitals.

FIRST A ID POSTS

59. AHAs should plan w ith the Voluntary A id Societies in their area fo r the establishment and manning o f
FAPs as soon after an attack as possible. These Posts should be set up to provide cover fo r the whole area and
should be located next to local authority rest centres; in Health Service property (such as health centres and
clinics and vacated convalescent and nursing homes) and in property earmarked in peace w ith the Controllers
(designate) fo r immediate requisition in war. The purpose o f FAPs would be to give immediate treatm ent and
to sort casualties into those who could be returned home or to a rest centres, and those requiring further
treatm ent at a CCC.

C ASUALTY COLLECTING CENTRES

60. The number o f casualties may be expected greatly to exceed surviving hospital resources and Directors
would have to impose strict admission priorities. Casualty Collecting Centres would therefore be established,
between the FAPs and the hospitals to treat, sort and hold casualties until they could be accepted by a
hospital. CCCs should be set up in each neighbourhood, in premises previously earmarked, near to but separate
from FAPs and local authority rest centres. Each CCC should be staffed by 4 to 6 general medical
practitioners, normally practising in the area, and one o f the GPs should be appointed doctor in charge. The
GPs should be assisted by the local D om iciliary Team (see para 30), and volunteers. As soon as any FAP could
be closed, the staff should be redeployed to augment a CCC. Medical supplies would be obtained from
requisitioned stocks. Ambulance vehicles should be attached to CCCs to collect casualties from FAPs ( if the
distance required it) and to convey p rio rity cases to hospitals. CCCs would, in itia lly, have no administrative
organisation and Directors would have to arrange w ith D istrict Controllers fo r the provision o f food, and, if
necessary, o f water; medical supplies from requisitioned stocks; kitchen and unskilled staff and the removal
and burial o f the dead.

61. CCCs would undertake emergency treatment, including m inor surgical procedures. A main function
however would be to sort casualties into those who could be returned home or to a rest centre, after
treatm ent; those who should have p rio rity fo r admission to hospital, and non-priority and radiation only cases
who, fo r the time being, would have to be retained. Treatment and care would have to be simple and
improvised. Casualties retained at a CCC would have to provide as much basic nursing care fo r each other as
their injuries allowed.

HOSPITALS

62. Despite any damage and the disruption o f public utilities and service, the surviving hospitals might be
expected to o ffe r the best facilities fo r surgical procedures. The Director would have to enforce strict priorities
fo r the admission o f casualties to prevent hospitals being overwhelmed. In general, hospitals should, in itia lly ,
accept only those casualties who, after lim ited surgical procedures, would be likely to be alive after seven days,
w ith a fa ir chance o f eventual recovery. The more complete the recovery that could be expected, the higher
the p rio rity fo r admission. People suffering from radiation sickness only, should not be admitted. There is no
specific treatm ent fo r radiation injury, although spontaneous recovery may be assisted by good nursing, and all
radiation cases should be nursed in the com m unity. Hospitals would call forward p rio rity cases from CCCs as
space fo r th eir treatment became available. Casualties would be returned to the comm unity as soon as their
clinical condition allowed.
 D O M I C I L I A R Y SERVICES
 63. The m ajority o f casualties would have to be cared fo r in their own homes or in a local authority rest
 centre, by relatives, friends or volunteers. GPs and members of the D om iciliary Team at a CCC would visit
 casualties, at the discretion o f the doctor in charge, to assist in their care. Members o f D om iciliary Teams
 could not themselves however undertake the continuing care of casualties in the com m unity. Their purpose
 would be to advise and assist those caring fo r the casualties; to carry out certain nursing procedures; to provide
 drugs and dressings, to advise the Director, through the doctor in charge o f the CCC, of cases which should
 have p rio rity for admission to hospital and o f the general casualty situation in the com m unity.

 PART IV ■ SUMMARY OF ACTION

 PLANNING
 64. The plan o f action set out in this circular is as simple as a realistic approach to the problems o f placing
 the health service on a war footing allows and should be capable o f being implemented, if necessary, w ith in a
 relatively short period of time. The more prc-pterming that can be done the more complete and effective
 would be the transition to war o f the Heafth Authorities, although it is appreciated th a t Health Authorities
 may not, at present, tie in a position to undertake much detailed planning. The follow ing paragraphs outline
 the main action that should be taken as time and resources permit. Any plans mu st be co-ordinated w ith those
 of the locci authorities and should therefore be prepared in consultation w ith the appropriate Controller
 (designate).

 DESIGNATION OF HEALTH DIRECTORS

65.   Regional and Area Health Authorities should designate their Directors; the latter should also designate
Directors for health districts and, as necessary, arrange fo r designation o f Directors fo r Sectors and Units.
Boards o f Governors should, similarly, designate Directors fo r their own hospitals.

 REGIONAL PLANS

66.     RHAs should, arrange fo r the preparation and subsequent co-ordination o f plans fo r their Region, fo r:

        a.      discharging patients.

        Ij .    dispersing medical supplies and equipment, bfood supplies, ambulances and staff,

        c.      form ing D om iciliary Teams,

        d.      taking control o f private establishments.

        e.      liaising w ith local authorities,

        f.      appointing medical advisers to local authority Controllers, and

        9-      dealing w ith casualties.

AREA PLANS

67. AHAs should prepare their contribution to the Regional plan as may be required by the RHA and, in
particular, should arrange w ith:

        a.      The V oluntary A id Societies, fo r the setting up o f FAPs and the staffing o f CCCs,

        b.      the Family Practitioner Committee fo r the assignment o f GPs to CCCs and

        c.      local a uth ority Controllers (designate), fo r liaison and for the earmarking fo r requisition, o f
                medics! supplies, vehicles and accommodation, not in the ownership or occupation o f the NHS
                and its servants.

T R A IN IN G

68. The Home Defence College offers places, through the Department, on courses and seminars. Health
A uthorities should accept as many places as possible to give their staff a background to home defence policy
which w ill enable them to contribute to discussions on the development of casualty policies. As plans are
completed they should be made known to all staff in senior and middle level posts.


From:

Establishments and Personnel Division 2A
10 John Adam Street
London WC2N 6HD
01-217-5275                                                                              S/H08/02C

This circular has been issued on a limited basis.

Further copies may be obtained (by written request wherever possible) from: DHSS Store, Schoiefield Mill, Brunswick Street,
Nelson, Lancs B89 OHU Tel: 0282-62411/2 Ext 17
           •n
4 JjL



      U {AS f ■         £Lj-ir
                                                 Z. 9        f?
  0                                            ^<xV<h\       CUl^

 i l ) l*t(j ho-»(Lt   MoC ^HJ)^               kkts*-*, ^ hsfc


                                 -         ^     £k .Cs-z^


                                 djTsh p   h*(<is-S )
             BJM/LM
                                                              Mr. B.J. Morgan
                                                              Ext. 2161


15th August 1967


I. Bailey, Esq.,
Eegional Health Emergency Planning Officer,
forth Western Regional Health Authority,
Sateiray House,
Piccadilly South,
Manchester,
X60 7LP.

Dear Mr. Bailey,

▼AS Kxerciae : 20th September 1987

Thank you very much for your letter of 11 th August 1987.

I shall be pleased to attend the VAS Exercise at Pendleton Sixth For® College,
as an observer.

Tours sincerely,




B.J. Morgan,
Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer.
                     North Western                                             Assistant General Manager
                                                                         (Planning, Im plem entation & Review)


                     Regional Health A uthority                                   R. P O P P L E W E L L
                                                                                      B.Sc. M .A .




GATEWAY HOUSE, PICCADILLY SOUTH, MANCHESTER M60 7LP.                       Tel : 061-237        2360
                                                                                    Please ask f o r
Y o u r re f:
                                                                                  Mr.*...Bailey
O u r r e f:    EB/SBB
                11th August, 1987



                Mr. B. Morgan,
                Health Emergency Planning Officer,
                Mersey Regional Health Authority,
                Hamilton House, Pall Mall,
                Liverpool,    L3 6AL.



                Dear Mr. Morgan,

                VAS Exercise: 20 September 1987

                I write, following our recent meeting, to let you have some particulars of
                the Voluntary Aids Society exercise which we are to run in conjunction with
                the Local Authority on Sunday, 20 September this year as in the subject.

                The venue has been chosen at the Pendleton Sixth Form College in Manchester
                and I have included in this letter copies of handouts which I think should
                give you a flavour of the exercise. I have also included a map for
                location purposes.

                You will note that there is no start or finishing time on the enclosures
                and this is because we wish to inject into it some realism and call out
                the contributing services on something of an ad hoc basis.

                May I extend to you a cordial invitation to attend the exercise as an
                observer and for your purposes it will be appropriate to begin at the Sixth
                Form College from 9.30am. on the day when the preliminaries should have
                been begun, and it is expected that the exercise should terminate at
                approximately 3pm.

                1 trust that there will be sufficient information for your purposes here
                but should there not be, please do not hesitate to contact me.

                Yours sincerely,



                E. BAILEY
                Regional Health Emergency
                Planning Officer
                                 Exercise T ristar



The concept of exercise ‘Tristar‘ is to provide a scenario that will place the three
voluntary services into a situation that will leave them isolated from the three main
services eg Police Fire and Health/Ambulance Services. With the objective of
identifying a t r i —service response to a major disaster/mass casualty situation.


There will be no provision of information other than location, an estimated number of
casualties, an a non scaled map of the college. The only information source provided a t
the scene of the incident may be information on the college provided by the caretaker.
Other than this any officer not of the three voluntary service's involved will have an
observer status only.
The aim of the exercise is to identify areas that will, or will not work in a tri service
response to a major /mass casualty incident.
The approach to this exercise is not to become burdened with paper work in the writing
of the disaster scenario,the concept should lead us through several stages.
1) WRVS team will be on site for feeding purposes, but not the documentation team
they m ust be called out from co/d.
2) S t John and Red Cross teams to be called out from cold, and not with ambulance
waiting round the corner.



HOPEFULLY THIS EXERCISE WILL PROVIDE THE UNEXPECTED, IT IS
IMPORTANT TO RECOGNISE THAT IF THINGS GO WRONG OR ABSOLUTE
CHAOS ENSUES MUCH CAN BE LEARNED FROM THIS.
  On Sunday 20th September 1987, an incident will occur at Pendleton 6th Form College,
  involving approximately 200 hundred students. The information supplied on the disaster
  is as follows:—


  1) There are no emergency services available due to a major disaster involving many
  hundreds of casualties in another part of the county, the emergency services have
  requested that the voluntary services deal with disaster at the college. And requested
  that they offer triage, (First, aid, comfort, and doccumentation of the casualties until
  assistance can be provided by the late afternoon.



  2) For the purposes of the exercise, it will be taken that the Fire Service has sent out a
  token machine and declared Hie area safe for first aid purposes,

  3) The scene will be as follows, an explosion has occurred in classroom D2„ affecting and
  injuring the students quite severely in D1 and D2, in the corridor there are
  approximatley 30 —50 students awaiting there lectures they also will be blast and shock
  victims. In classrooms D1Q, 09, D8 there will be further students who will be slightly
  injured and in shock.


_ 4) The Gym and the refectory are the only areas suitable for setting up first aid, triage
  and registration of casualties. A temporary morgue will have to be identified and
  liaison with the caretaker of the college who is not injured may advise as to a suitable
  area.


  5) For catering purposes the WRVS can utilise the area just outside the A6 classroom,
  which will provide some cover should the weather prove to be poor.

  6) Other than this there will be no electric, gas or water. And the services will have to
  be self sufficient.                      __ "
  7) There will be no bed availability at any of the hospitals, and the voluntary services
  will have adopt a containing role until notified that casualties can be moved to
  hospitals, m s announcement wf!f also Indicate the end of the exercise.
                                                                                                                                                                           •Mim




                                                                                                                           ecroft                                           a jm q -n c                                                                           wm— w          iiiiiwiii»
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jii||
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              i—
                                                                                                                                                                                          mex


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   tew* Xvi*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sc*\\
                              ^NCASHjftp
                         .Qokbooa
                                                                                                                                                                                               • ' Pityinc
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       I      Ug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Uim
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n js}>&ptit4c*
                      (Hams                                                              I®
                                              U vhi                                                                                                                                         Hioh Scfl
                                                                                    Summ^fvtUt                                                                                                                                         tweian          £*}/'* Mv#0
                                                                                                                                                                        #                                                                                    Vi/log*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M)li


                                         fiecreat

        Tm .:k j Vz                                                                                                  Bolton                                                                                                                                                                                   8rovQ*tOfl
                                                                                                                        P loying Fields
                                                im w * $
                                                                                                                              OpenAh                                                                                                 u*fk                                                                                           IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ftkiSWj
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HV S«M |s«rm
            ;n n      if t i S i M p s                                                                                                                                          Mills      M tllSXi

                                                                                                 'Pbndtel                                                                                                    i f / - ? 1* -                        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                               k\ s\     / ^ c a - ''S f " 8 S y
                                                                                                 PColieoe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          'Ch&)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9tt0w                                                                              1
                                                                                         Pldyingfields      Su/n/T+thiit
■is H     Cnraet.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o pfe to rR
   H      Oround8* 18                                                                                                       tfSSTR                                                                                                                                     £///(/(6?wj
                                                                                                              5u//e H///
                                                                                                             /V/bA 5c/i                                                                                                                                                RlCf'CQlJW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3/
                                                                                                                                                             m ine*.
                                                             ■:.B W L £                  Tull^-jSSparK                                    liwOLO

                  <(V'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                nougnj.o
                                                             J*t'’              ,;/'MuSium~X}'                                J                                                                                                                    f XW,r*,n;fr53
                                                    x 'A   A /\< h \      T e n n is r    ^                          — $>J3§
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Bowling-.;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   swis:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n'i/c
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  &h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   <>ci&o\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ao   a                   ess                                                                V*/ a
                                                                                                                                                               vViywy ££*                        BteadwvrP                                                           'JPEELuhIt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  "P A R K o t
                                                             CncMei                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        & r s m
                                                                                                                                               il
                                                                                                                                              (I ANfiHfc*-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Universtt



                                                             w ffis n s                                                                                                                                                                                                     lt/rt/v'9/j/fy
                                                                                                                                                                                          MATV                                                                                                                             is
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            no / Sdlford
                                                                                                                                          m
                                                                                                                                                                       W l***


                                                                                                                                                                                                                              j$£

                      B oltdn
0       C o lle g e O f f i c e            F.T.    Female toilets

p       P rin cip al                       S.T.    Staff to ile ts

V.P.    V ice-P rin cip al.s'              C.H.    Changing rooms
        Office s                                   Medical room
                                           ME D
C.L.    Cloakrooms
                                           BEP     Biomechanics
c       Caretaker
                                                   and Exercise
M.T.    Male t o i l e t s                         Physiology
P.R.     P r i n t Room                    M.G.        Mini-Gym.




        jj R ,o w n €        m    D   ( \o ^ 5

        S A kr^ft^                    n(   t                  ,




                                                           CORRIDORS
                                               m   m

                                                           S T A IR S



                                                                    fT^s 6»»   <£*»&   8 g JKf f^S J&s*
                                                                               vV?^      <>*'?*WVW» V'W #7W»
       P g N D L I
          BJM/MFT
                                                         Mr. B. J. Morgan
                                                         Ixt. 2161

4th September 1987

Lt. Col D. Chapman,
Emergency Planning Officer,
British led Cross,
Batlonal Training Centre,
Barnett Hill,
Wonersh,
Guildford,
Surrey,
QU5 W J

Bear Colonel Chapman,
M — »t»r Reaponae Meeting

Thank you for your letter of 1st September 1967 concerning a possible meeting
with Health Emergency Planning Officers*
I personally, would welcome such a meeting with you, hut on 26th-28th October
1987 we would all be attending the Health Emergency Planning Officers* six
monthly meeting, this time in Edinburgh.
I shall be pleased to attend your meeting whenever it is re-scheduled.

With kind regards,

Tours sincerely,



B. J. Morgan
Health Emergency Planning Officer
          British Red Cross               National Training Centre
                                          Barnett Hill, Wonersh
                                          Guildford, Surrey GU5 ORF
                                          Telephone:
DDC/RH/EP14A                              Secretary’s Office      Guildford (0483) 893361
                                          Students’ private calls Guildford (0483) 892294




Distribution Below                              1st September 1987
                               1

Disaster Response Meeting

The British Red Cross Society is presently re-examining and
assessing it's response in times of disaster and emergency. As
part of this process we would very much like to meet with the
Health Emergency Planning Officers to discuss with you common
objectives and mutual assistance. I should say that the
discussion will be primarily Peacetime orientated as our response
in war is more correctly determined by the National and County
Joint Emergency Executive Committees.

The proposed date for this meeting is 26th October 1987. Would
you please indicate whether you would like to attend this
meeting. It is expected that the meeting would start about
11 am, probably continue chatting during a buffet lunch, and
finish about 3 pm.

I will send a further letter closer to the date, which hopefully
may help to structure the day productively.

Thank you in anticipation of your assistance.

Yours sincerely




Lt Col D Chapman
Emergency Planning Officer.


Distribution

J T Edwards                        Or J Lyons
B J Morgan                         J A Costley
A A McGee                          J T James
Air Com J G Greenhill              M Howell
Dr C P W Fairfax                   J T Ashworth
J E Barnes                         Dr G Bungay

For information

Dr L Martin
      THE BRITISH RED C R O SS SOCIETY
               M ER SEY SIDE COUNTY BRANCH




         Mrs. R. H. C. D O W N H A M
                                        J .P .. S.R .N .
             C O U N T Y B R A N C H D IR E C T O R

RED CROSS HOUSE.
4 TUEBROOK TERRACE.
346 W E S T D E R B Y R O A D
L IV E R P O O L                                      0 5 1 - 2 2 0 1971
M E R S E Y S ID E L t3 7H G                          051-428 2274
Action:

Date:



                                   MEMORANDUM

To:       Mr B J Morgan - Acting       From:       Regional Treasurer
          Health Emergency
          Planning Officer             Our Ref:    1Q/100/54/PJL/PM
Date:     23 September 1987            Your Ref:   BJM/DT




CIVIL DEFENCE BUDGET
VOLUNTARY AID SOCIETIES (VAS)


Further to your recent memoranda and your subsequent discussion with
Mr Lang of my staff, I would advise you that the funds for the
training video can be found from within your existing budget which is
currently showing a substantial underspend.

The other point you raise regarding the provision of a grant to each
of the County JEECs within the Region. In principle I foresee no
problems making a budget provision in your 1988-89 budget for
expenditure of this nature.   As the sums involved are relatively
small I would suggest that this matter is considered during the
1988-89 budget setting discussions.

I trust this response satisfies your enquiry. Should you wish to
discuss this matter further please contact Mr Lang of my staff.




Regional Treasurer
Action

Date


                                  MEMORANDUM

To:     Regional Treasurer                 From B.J. Morgan
                                           Acting Health Emergency Planning Officer
Date: 24th August 1987                     O/R: BJM/BMD



CIVIL DEFENCE BUDGET
Voluntary Aid Societies (VAS)

You will be aware that Health Emergency Planning Officers have an important
role in relation to County Joint Bnergency Executive Ocxnmittees (County JEECs)
which comprise officers of the British Red Cross and St. John Brigade.
Essentially, the County JEECs organise training and casualty simulation
exercises far members of their associations. We have two such County JEECs to
which I relate in this Region, i.e. Merseyside JEEC and Cheshire County JEEC.

There are occasions when the Health Service would wish to initiate exercises
with the relevant JEEC, and on these occasions, we must be prepared to make a
contribution towards such an exercise.

The amount of such a contribution far our Civil Defence Budget would be, say,
{.700 a year to each County JEEC. A Department letter indicates their approval
to this form of expenditure, i.e. provided it is initiated by the relevant
HEPO.

Would you kindly let roe know if you would agree in principle to this type   ef
hoc disbursement to our two County JEECs.




B.J. Morgan
Acting Health Bnergency Planning Officer
             BJM/LM
                                                               Nr. B.J. Morgan
                                                               Ext. 2161


20th August 1987


Lt. Col. D. Chapman,
Assistant General Secretary,
Hational Joint Emergency Executive ConuLttee,
9 Grosvenor Crescent,
LONDON,
SV1X 71j.

Sear Colonel Chap&an,

Mersey Bsglonal Health Anthorlty

I write to acknowledge and to thank you for your recent despatch of HJ1BC
circulars (latest being the aaendaent to IJBBC 6/87), to Dr. D. Bobinson.

Dr. Bobinson has now left us and I should be grateful if any correspondence and
IJEEC circulars could be sent to oe at this address.

Haturally, I shall be pleased to help at this end, in any way possible.

Tours sincerely,




(Hr.) B.J. Morgan
With Compliments
        REGIONAL EMERGENCY PLANNING OFFICER




             %           i




South EastThames
Regional Health Authority
No. 2 The Stables', David Salomon's House,
Southborough, Kent TN3 OTE
Telephone: Tunbridge Wells (0892) 38684
                NATIONAL JOINT' EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
                               C hairm en: Major-General P. ft.. L eu chirj, C.B.E.
                                  Vice-Choirmon: The C ountess of Limerick
 Telephone                                                                              C n o if m a n 's Office
 01-225                                                                                        9 G r o iv e n o r C r e s c e n t
                                                                                                     London. S W I X 7EJ
     918657



H2                                                             2     w a v     /98?




TO:       CHAIRMAN COUNTY JEECs

Copies to:          CO-ORDINATORS COUNTY JEECs




      TERMINOLOGY.         EMERGENCY MEDICAL CENTRES/FIRST AID POSTS



Ref:          Chairman,   N J E E C 1s letter of 27th January,                        1987

1. Since the Chairman's letter of 27th January, 1987 there
has been further discussion concerning the Terminology
connected with Emergency Medical Centres and First Aid Posts,
which were referred to under Points from Exercises,
paragraph 13a of the letter.

2. As a result of these discussions, the existing paragraph
13a should be deleted and the new one, shown at Annex A to
this letter, which has been agreed with the DHSS, should be
inserted and implemented in all current anc future planning.

3. All reference to Emergency Aid Centres throughout the
original letter should also be amended to Emergency Medical
Centres (E M C ).




                             Brigadier R C Middleton
                          General Secretary (Logistics)
t
                                                                   ANNEX A




    a.   Terminology       There is still confusion with regard to
    terminology used in establishment of Medical organisations
    connected with the evacuation and treatment of casualties as
    a result of a disaster.              As far as the VAS are concerned,
    there are two organisations in which they become involved,
    and to w.hich-_a 1-1- t-h-e -t-r-a-i-n ing is directed.

         (i ) Emergency Medical Centres (EMC)   These are a
    National Health Service responsibility, with a likely place
    of use identified in advance.    They would also be set up in
    time of war when the National Health Service resources were
    considered to-be overwhelmed, either regionally or nationally,
    or Central Government was no longer able to function.    In
    these circumstances, the assistance of the VAS in manning
    EMC""S'Wu 1d be essential, and would take priority over all
    other task"s'~except our Priority One Role;  Assistance to the
    Medical Services of the Armed Forces in time of war.

           (ii)
           First Aid Posts  In peace time, or up to the
                     above. in a disaster there is no recognised
National Health Service organisation outside the Health Service.
 If called upon, it is at the discretion of the VAS to form
First Aid Posts at a location selected by themselves which
is suitable to deal with the casualties.   In a major disaster
the National Health Service Ambulance Service will provide
Triage, Medical First Aid and undertake the evacuation of
casualties to hospitals.   It is likely that National Health
Service Surgical Teams would only be deployed if it was
essential for surgery to be undertaken at the actual scene,
eg. an amputation for a trapped victim.   It is more efficient
and manpower effective to retain these teams in hospitals.
VJhatever National Health Service facilities are involved in
peace time, the VAS involvement will be referred to as a
First Aid Post.




       {

                                                           i
5



    South East Thames                                                    B E
    Regional Health Authority
    No. 2 The Stables, David Salomon's House,
    Southborough, Kent TN3 OTE
    Telephone: Tunbridge Wells (0892) 36584
                                                                 3--June 1987
    Your reference                              O ur reference          Date

        Distribution below:


        Dear Colleague

        THE VAS EMERGENCY ROLE

        No doubt you will have received or seen a copy of Brigadier Middleton's
        letter of 15 May 1987 to Chairmen of CJEECs on the subject of
        terminology.   The letter Is an attempt to resolve the confusion which
        arose following the NJEEC Chairman's letter of 27 January 1987.

        Brigadier Middleton attended a 6.1 Zone combined CJEEC meeting on 16 May
        1987 and used the opportunity to provide advance notification of the
        content of his letter.    The consensus view of those present was that
        confusion and uncertainty still reign, In particular In the matter of
        the transition In role FAP to EMC and the approach to be adopted In VAS
        training.

       Prompted by the content of the letter and with the advantage of
       Immediate awareness of the reaction of all the CJEECs In 6.1 Zone, I
       have prepared a paper on the VAS Emergency Role a copy of which Is
       attached.   This may be seen as an extension of the limited discussion
       of the Immediate care response capability which I Introduced at the last
       Health Emergency Planning Conference (Newsletter March 1987 para 74
       refers).   I trust that this paper may be considered as a basis for
       further discussion at the next Conference and that the distribution well
       In advance will enable due thought to be given to the subject on an
       Individual or group basis.

       With best wishes,

       Yours sincerely,                                                          .


                                                                   0 8 JUN1987

       J E BARNES
       Regional Emergency Planning Officer.

       Distribution:
               All HEPOs England
               Med MPO Division DHSS
               Dr D G Wilson, Scottish Home & Health Department
               Mr A Starkey, Welsh Office
               Mr B Corry, DHSS Northern Ireland
               Dr M J Rooke, Civil Defence College
                                                         HD/18


THE VAS EMERGENCY ROLE - DISCUSSION PAPER


BASIC CONSIDERATIONS

1.   'All Hazards' Concept.   A fundamental factor in the 'all hazards'
approach to emergency planning is that basic roles and responsibilities
should be unchanging, regardless of the cause of any crisis.   This
approach leads to a single framework for response, eliminating the
confusion and uncertainty that can otherwise occur as a result of
multiplicity in contingency plans.

2.   Co-ordination and Integration.   If the full weight of resources is
to be brought to bear in response to any major emergency, co-ordination
and integration of all organisations, professional and volunteer, is
vital.   Spontaneous reaction is required on the part of individuals
when a potential or actual emergency is identified, to trigger an
alerting system.  However, thereafter spontaneous response should be
curbed to minimise risks of counter-productive effort on the part of
'organised' bodies.   It must be acknowledged that unwanted help,
however well meaning, can be a distinct impediment in the inevitable
excited circumstances surrounding any disaster.   There should be no
fear that curbing spontaneous group reaction will add significantly to
response time.   A clear understanding of responsibilities and roles,
which must include the communications chain for cascade alerting, call­
out and deployment to tasks, can lead to a more effective total
response, including the timely disposition of resources.

 3.   Civil Protection Policy.   The recently introduced Civil Protection
 policy advocates recognition of the potential 'all hazards' role of
volunteers, with due acknowledgement of the need for formal training and
organisation, primarily under local authority arrangements.    There can
be criticism that this approach is bureaucratic but there should be some
recognition of the need for a universally applicable, positive course of
action.    Spontaneous action by local prominent people may be considered
a dormant capability in a village community setting obviating the need
for 'organisation'.   However, in the urban areas, which by virtue of
population form the prime volunteer recruiting ground, there are
problems in identifying affinities let alone local prominent people.
The 'muddle through syndrome', which in the past has generated some
false national pride, should be firmly laid to rest.    If volunteers are
to play an effective part in response to the broad spectrum of emergency
situations there must be evaluation of capabilities, identification of
roles and responsibilities, and integration in training and the
production of emergency plans.    This degree of co-ordinated emergency
response should be held to apply to individuals, volunteering their
services or skills, as well as to uniformed voluntary organisations.




                                      1
PEACETIME EMERGENCIES

4.   Scenarios.  There Is a broad spectrum of peacetime emergency
situations, thus the established procedures of the Emergency Services
accommodate the need for an Immediate, on-slte appreciation of the
nature and severity of the Incident.   Experience has shown that:

        a. At the lower end of the spectrum the Emergency Services
        efficiently cope with all on-slte requirements, with appropriate
        activation of off-slte support by established alerting
        procedures.    It Is pertinent to record that It Is Increasingly
        becoming the norm that, by virtue of the advanced training of
        ambulance personnel, there Is a specific request for medical
        team(s) rather than automatic deployment from alerted hospitals.
        Appropriately trained members of the public, or the voluntary
        organisations, at the scene at the time of any Incident may have
        a role to play In rendering Immediate, short term assistance but *
        Invariably there Is no call on voluntary organisation response
        for any Incident at the lower end of the spectrum.

        b. With all developments In the Integration of emergency plans
        particular attention Is paid to communications and the mechanism
        for alerting relevant authorities and organisations.   It Is
        generally accepted that for the large scale or potentially
        prolonged Incident there must be staged growth In the activation
        of resources.   In NHS terms, an Incident at the upper end of
        the peacetime spectrum leads to the deployment of a co­
        ordinator ('Medical Incident Officer') and medical/nursing teams
        to render immediate treatment ('Mobile Medical Team(s)).    Local
        arrangements will always determine the method to be used in such
        deployment.   In some areas the availability of BASICS or
        equivalent groupings of General Practitioners may meet 'NHS'
        response requirements; elsewhere various combinations and
        permutations may be employed for the deployment of personnel
        from hospitals.   The British Red Cross Society and St John
        Ambulance may be considered to be a further resource to be
        activated in such a major incident and in this event it is both
        proper and logical that they should work under the direction of
        the deployed medical personnel.

THE EMERGENCY MEDICAL CENTRE CONCEPT

5.   Reason for Change.   With the detailed NHS Civil Defence planning
conducted since 1982, it became apparent that the immediate care system
advocated in HDC(77)1 was unrealistic.    In summary it was identified
that:

       a. The demands placed on the voluntary aid societies in respect
       of 'First Aid Posts' (FAPs) in the numerous, designated, local
       authority communities were totally unrealistic.   Whilst it
       could be argued that, from a central viewpoint, simultaneous
       activation of all designated FAPs was not a scenario envisaged,




                                       2
        it should be conceded that the perception and expectations of
        'Communities' were that they would receive first-aid support
        from the outset of any hostilities.

        b. There was growing concern within the voluntary organisations
        about the role they would be expected to play in FAPs.    Triage,
        however rudimentary, was considered to be beyond the
        capabilities of the majority of volunteers, regardless of the
        written guidance and basic training that may be provided.

        c. At the second tier, General Practitioners were critical of
        the fact that 'Casualty Collecting Centres' were no more than a
        renaming of group practices, with no additional resources
        provided, particularly in terms of trained personnel.

6.   Consolidation of Resources.   The revision of the DHSS Circular
HDC(77)1 provided the opportunity for a zero-base appraisal of immediate
care. The outcome, presented in the consultation document HN(85)16 of
June 1985, was the 'Emergency Medical Centre' based on the premise that
"a single tier of care with some professional supervision is preferable
to a complex organisation which poses problems of logistics and
staffing".   The concept embodied the recognition that a "small cadre <Jf
trained staff would be most effective if used to advise and direct
voluntary help in tending the sick and injured".   This consolidation of
resources was seen as possessing an inherent flexibility: "EMCs will
vary in size, levels of staff and equipment, and potential for care
depending on geographical factors and local requirements" .     However
there was identification of commonality in role for EMCs defined as:
"triage, resuscitation, simple surgery (e.g. wound toilet and splintage)
and dressings", with uniform staffing: "wherever possible by general
practitioners and qualified nurses drawn from various sources together
with members of the VAS and public volunteers".

7.   Facility v Grouping.    Whilst there was some inference in the DHSS
consultation document of the EMC concept being viewed as a grouping,
"Wherever possible small domiciliary teams should be nominated for
attachment to particular centres", there has been more prominent
facility based thinking associated with EMCs by virtue of the guidance
that suitable buildings should be identified in the process of civil
defence planning.    It is suggested that this dominant association of
the EMC concept with designated premises has led to unnecessary
restrictions in the development of NHS emergency planning.     In
particular a blinkered approach may be viewed as detrimental to the
development of an 'all hazards', single framework for response for the
VAS.    If the EMC concept can be accepted as more broadly based, in
terms of a grouping of resources rather than a fixed facility, the
defined role can be seen to cover:

       a. On-site immediate care in the event of any major peacetime
       emergency, with the NHS cadre provided by a hospital Mobile
       Medical Team or doctors participating in BASICS or similar
       immediate care schemes.




                                   3
        b. The reception of military casualties at ports/air­
        fields/railheads in the conventional warfare scenario, the
        requirement for a reinforced NHS presence for such a reception
        task having been identified already.

        c. The established immediate care requirement for community
        support in the nuclear hostilities scenario.

It is suggested that the basic EMC task is no different in any of the
above and the designated location planning, which is required for the
role at sub paragraph c., may be viewed as an advantage in determination
of the most appropriate selection of an EMC team to be deployed for the
tasks at sub paragraphs a. and b.

8.   Community First-Aid.   There has been some criticism that the EMC
concept effectively eliminates the first-aid support to communities in
the nuclear hostilities scenario.   With the undeniable fact that total
VAS and emergency reservist strength has .never been sufficient to meet
all individual community expectations of first-aid support from the
outset of hostilities, the original two-tier concept of immediate care
was fictional.   Thus there can be no argument of deprivation based on
the false assumption that widespread support capabilities existed.    The
'Save a Life Campaign' was based on recognition of the true value of on-
the-spot first-aid by virtue of wide capability rather than any
dependence on first-aid facilities.   It is suggested that this approach
should be pursued as the most realistic, with instruction provided as a
basic part of local authority community training programmes.    With
recognition of the fact that it is the wont of some communities to adopt
a facility based approach in their organisation, it may be unrealistic
to assume that the term 'First Aid Post' will ever disappear from the
emergency planning scene.   However, it is suggested that there should
be universal adoption and promotion of the use of the term 'Community
First Aid Post' (CFAP) to provide necessary differentiation in community
and NHS roles and responsibilities in emergency planning, thereby
eliminating any possible confusion of reversion to a formal two-tier
immediate care system.

PREVAILING UNCERTAINTIES

9.   Organisations.    There has been a recent attempt (NJEEC letter H2
dated 15 May 1987) to clarify terminology. Two different organisations
have been defined for the VAS emergency response ('First Aid Posts' and
'Emergency Medical Centres'), with the inference of a further
organisation for the 'Priority One Role', assistance to the Medical
Services of the Armed Forces in time of war.    Without the simplicity
of a single framework for response, it is suggested that the VAS will be
faced with ever increasing uncertainties in respect of capabilities to
accommodate and effect a transition from one organisational state to
another.   Furthermore, it is suggested that no clear approach and
direction may be adopted in terms of training personnel for emergency
roles.   The elimination of such grey areas in emergency planning formed




                                      4
 the prime reasons for the development and adoption of the 'all hazards'
 concept.

10.    Capability to Achieve Integration.   The current differences in
perception of roles and responsibilities will prove a stumbling block to
capabilities to achieve integration in emergency planning.    It is noted
that there is recognition of a procedure to call for the services of the
VAS (NJEEC letter H2 dated 15 May 1987 Annex A a.(ii)) but thereafter a
unilateral stance is adopted "it is at the discretion of the VAS to form
First Aid Posts at a location selected by themselves which is suitable
to deal with the casualties".     This suggestion of independent activity
is contrary to recognised needs, incorporated in emergency plans, for
the Ambulance Service and Police to liaise closely on ambulance loading
points, traffic circuits etc and hence the location of a 'Casualty
Clearing Station' (yet another term in need of rationalisation).

11.   Welfare Services.   An important contribution of the VAS appears
to have been neglected in consideration of emergency roles.   The
welfare members of the organisations can play a vital role, additional
to that of first-aiders, in the provision of support at hospitals, rest
centres and Armed Services rehabilitation centres.   There is current
uncertainty in this 'all hazards' VAS emergency role, with a need to
evaluate capabilities and consider organisation, team composition and
training for such tasks.

SUBMISSION

12.   There should be a fundamental reappraisal of the VAS emergency
role with due consideration of:

        a. The adoption of the Emergency Medical Centre, which already
        features in DHSS civil defence guidance, as the 'all hazards'
        single framework organisation for immediatecare of casualties.

        b. The possible refinements in emergency planning which would
        assist the promotion of the EMC concept, in terms of a team
        rather than a fixed facility, within theNHS and the Societies.

        c. The organisation, team composition and training of welfare
        members for an 'all hazards' role embracing the provision of
        support in hospitals, local authority rest centres or Armed
        Services rehabilitation centres.

13.   The Health Emergency Planning Conference should determine a policy
in respect of an 'all hazards' approach to immediate care as a matter of
urgency so that:

        a. Given the publication of the DHSS Circular, there can be
        further progress and consistency in planning based on the EMC
        concept.

        b. A base-line may be established for the discussion of
        appropriate training with the NJEEC.




SETRHA
June 1987                          5
    THE BRITISH RED CROSS SOCIETY
                            CHESHIRE C O U N T Y BRANCH

President:                                                  RED CROSS HOUSE,




                                    +
Mrs. J. Bromley Davenport
                                                              20 BEXTON ROAD,
County Director:
E. A. Trew, Esq.                                                     KNUTSFORD,
County Secretary:
Mrs. K. D. Ferguson                                        CHESHIRE WA16 0DS.
Hon. County Treasurer:
J. H. Leslie, Esq.                                         Tel. Knutsford (0565) 5Q201



EAT/AF                           22nd June 1987

TO: Members of the C.J.E.E.C.

Dear Member,

In consultation with Dr. Kader we would propose to
cancel the C.J.E.E.C. meeting which was to take place
on Tuesday the 7th July at; 2.30 p.m. A meeting will
now take place on 24th November at Red.Cross House
at 2.30 p.m.

Yours sincerely,
                                                          MRHA-Mfs

County Co-Ordjjaa-fetTr
BJM/MT
                                                                B .J . Morgan
                                                                    Bxt 2161
25 June 1987

E.A. Trew Esq
County Director
The British Red Cross Society
Bed Croat Bouse
20 Bexton Road
Knutsford
Cheshire
VAI6 ODS


Dear Mr Trew

Cheshire County Joint JBsergency Executive Co— ittee

X write to acknowledge and to thank you for your letter addressed
to Dr D. Robinson concerning the postponement of the next Cheshire
CJEBC Resting* until 24th November 198?.

Dr Robinson has now left us and x should be grateful If correspondence and
agenda could now be sent to ae at this address.


Yours sincerely




(lb*) B.J. Morgan
                N A TIO N A L JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
                              C hairm an: Major-General P. R. Leuchars, C.B.E.
                                 Vice-Chairman: The Countess of Limerick
  T elephone                                                                          C hairman's Office
 01-235 545-4                                                                              9 G rosv eno r C rescent
     Telex                                                                                      London, S W IX 7EJ
     918657


H2


                                                                                 15th May,       19 87




TO:      CHAIRMAN COUNTY JEECs

Copies to:          CO-ORDINATORS COUNTY JEECs




      TERMINOLOGY.        EMERGENCY MEDICAL CENTRES/FIRST AID POSTS



Ref:          Chairman, N J E E C 's letter of 27th January,                        1987

1.  Since the Chairman's letter of 27th January, 1987 there
has been further discussion concerning the Terminology
connected with Emergency Medical Centres and First Aid Posts,
which were referred to under Po' .ts from Exercises,
paragraph 13a of the letter.

2. As a result of these discussions, the existing paragraph
13a should be deleted and the new one, shown at Annex A to
this letter, which has been agreed with the DHSS, should be
inserted and implemented in all current and future planning.

3. All reference to Emergency Aid Centres throughout the
original letter should also be amended to Emergency Medical
Centres (EMC).




                            Brigadier R C Middleton
                         General Secretary (Logistics)
                                                        ANNEX A




a.  Terminology  There is still confusion with regard to
terminology used in establishment of Medical organisations
connected with the evacuation and treatment of casualties as
a result of a disaster.  As far as the VAS are concerned,
there are two organisations in which they become involved,
and to which all the training is directed.

       (i)  Emergency Medical Centres (EMC)  These are a
National Health Service responsibility, with a likely place
of use identified in advance.     They would also be set up in
time of war when the National Health Service resources were
considered to be overwhelmed, either regionally or nationally,
or Central Government was no longer able to function.     In
these circumstances, the assistance of the VAS in manning
E M C 1s would be essential, and would take priority over all
other tasks except our Priority One Role;     Assistance to the
Medical Services of the Armed Forces in time of war.

    (ii)  First Aid Posts  In peace time, or up to the
situation mentioned above, in a disaster there is no recognised
National Health Service organisation outside the Health Service.
If called upon, it is at the discretion of the VAS to form
First Aid Posts at a location selected by themselves which
is suitable to deal with the casualties.  In a major disaster
the National Health Service Ambulance Service will provide
Triage, Medical First Aid and undertake the evacuation of
casualties to hospitals.  It is likely that National Health
Service Surgical Teams would only be deployed if it was
essential for surgery to be undertaken at the actual scene,
eg. an amputation for a trapped victim.  It is more efficient
and manpower effective to retain these teams in hospitals.
Whatever National Health Service facilities are involved in
peace time, the VAS involvement will be referred to as a
First Aid P o s t .
              CHESHIRE COUNTY JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

          Thirteenth Meeting of the Cheshire J.E.E.C. to be held on Tuesday,
          3rd March 1987 at 2.30 p.m. at B.R.C.S. Headquarters,Knutsford.




                            A   G   E    N   D   A


1.   Apologies


2.   Minutes of the meeting of          the 15th April 1986.


3-   Matters Arising.


4.   N.J.E.E.C. Circulars

               1/ 2 / 8 6
               1/2/87


5.    Role of Voluntary Aid Societies (paper enclosed).


6.   County Planning Officer


7.   Any Other Business.


8.   Date & Place of next meeting.




                                                                    y

EAT/AF                                                         .
16.2.87
h                   N A T IO N A L JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

                                         C h a irm a n : Major-General P. R. Leuchars, C.B.E.
                                            Vice-C hairm an : The C ountess of Limerick
    T elephone                                                                                   Chairman's Office
   0 1-235 5454                                                                                      9 G ro sv en o r C rescent
      Telex                                                                                               London. S W IX 7EJ
      918657




                                                                                          27 January,     1987


TO:        CHAIRMEN COUNTY JEECs
C o p i e s to: C O - O R D I N A T O R S C O U N T Y J E E C s



1.      I fel t t h a t the s t a r t of 1 9 8 7 w o u l d be a goo d t ime to b r i n g
you up to d a t e w i t h the a c t i v i t i e s of the NJEEC.                  It m a y a p p e a r
that t h i n g s h a v e b e e n r a t h e r s t a t i c o v e r the p a s t n i n e months,
but this in fact h a s no t b e e n the case; it is s i m p l y that we
h a v e b e e n w a i t i n g for a n u m b e r of i m p o r t a n t d e c i s i o n s f r o m o t h e r
a g e n c i e s w h i c h u n f o r t u n a t e l y h ave not b e e n f o r t hcoming.

Role     of the V o l u n t a r y A i d S o c i e t i e s                (VAS)

2.     P e r h a p s I c o u l d s t a r t by r e m i n d i n g y o u of the two r o l e s of
the V A S - s t i l l I m i g h t a d d a w a i t i n g t h e o f f i c i a l a p p r o v a l of the
H o m e Office.

    a.   S u p p o r t of the A r m e d F o r c e s in tim e of w a r or p e a c e t i m e
crisis.    T h i s r o l e is c o n f i n e d to s e r v i c e w i t h i n the U n i t e d
Kingdom.

      b.    S u p p o r t of t h e N a t i o n a l H e a l t h S e r v i c e (NHS) in t im e of
w a r a n d in a m a j o r p e a c e t i m e c a t a s t r o p h e by th e p r o v i s i o n of
both personnel and ambulances.

    c.            In b o t h t h e s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s         the V A S w o u l d com e u n d e r the
control           of the NHS.

Support           of the A r m e d      Services

3.      The t e r m s of S e r v i c e for the V A S hav e b e e n a g r e e d a n d a r e at
A n n e x A.

4.    The M i n i s t r y of D e f e n c e (MOD) p r o p o s e d o r i g i n a l l y that the
V A S s h o u l d p r o v i d e d o c t o r s , S R N s , F i r s t Ai d t r a i n e d p e r s o n n e l
an d a m b u l a n c e s for the m a n n i n g a n d m o v e m e n t of p e r s o n n e l for:-

                                              Medical Reception Stations
                                              Port Medical Squadrons
                                              A m b u l a n c e T r a i n Staff                                      * ‘
                                            -   2 -




                                       Railhead Detachments
                                       Rehabilitation Units

in c o n n e c t i o n w i t h the e v a c u a t i o n of c a s u a l t i e s fro m the
C o n t i n e n t a n d w i t h i n the U n i t e d Kingdom.

5.      It w a s o b v i o u s that the m a n p o w e r bill for all t hese w o u l d be
b e y o n d the r e s o u r c e s of the VAS, a n y w a y at present.                    Furthermore
w e b e l i e v e tha t in the e v e n t the m a j o r i t y of our d o c t o r s a n d S RNs
w o u l d be r e q u i r e d by the N H S an d w o u l d not t h e r e f o r e be a v a i l a b l e
to the VAS.             A f t e r d i s c u s s i o n w i t h the M O D it h a s b e e n a g r e e d
that we w i l l o n l y be r e s p o n s i b l e for the p r o v i s i o n of F irst Aid
trained personnel and ambulances connected with Military
R e c e p t i o n S t a t i o n s a n d R e h a b i l i t a t i o n Centres, a l t h o u g h d o c t o r s
a n d S R N s s h o u l d be earmarked.

6.      We a r e c u r r e n t l y w a i t i n g for c o n f i r m a t i o n of the numbers,
l o c a t i o n s a n d e x a c t V A S r e q u i r e m e n t s for t h e s e e s t a b l i s h m e n t s .
We w i l l f o r w a r d y o u this i n f o r m a t i o n a s s o o n as it is a v a i l a b l e
a n d a s k y o u to let u s k n o w h o w m a n y p e o p l e y o u can e a r m a r k for the
p a r t i c u l a r e s t a b l i s h m e n t s in y o u r area.     The C hief M e d i c a l O f f i c e r
in A r m y D i s t r i c t s w i l l be a b l e to a s s i s t in the c o m p l e t i o n of
t h e s e figu res.             V A S on the R e s e r v e L i s t ma y of c o u r s e be
earmarked.

Peacetime

7.     I a m m o s t a n x i o u s that we p u r s u e o u r t r a i n i n g t o w a r d s the
all h a z a r d s a p p r o a c h . As m a n y of yo u k n o w w e hav e a l r e a d y
b e e n u s e d in a n u m b e r of d i s a s t e r s - a n d p r o v e d to be ver y
successful.

8 . It is of c o u r s e p o s s i b l e that we c o u l d a l r e a d y be i n v o l v e d in
m a n n i n g a n u m b e r of F i r s t A i d P o s t s (FAP) or E m e r g e n c y Aid
C e n t r e s (EAC) (as p a r a 13 a. below) p r i o r to b e i n g r e q u i r e d for
ou r r o l e abov e.           If t his is the c ase I u n d e r s t a n d that c l e a r
i n s t r u c t i o n s w i l l be g i v e n in p l e n t y of time to t r a n s f e r from
on e r o l e to t h e other. I h a v e to a d m i t t h o u g h that the c h a i n of
c o m m a n d for t h i s d e c i s i o n is s till to be decided!

VAS Ambulances

9.      The N H S h a v e d e f i n e d a r o l e for V A S A m b u l a n c e s in s u p p o r t of
the N a t i o n a l A m b u l a n c e Services, b o t h in p e a c e a n d war.            In
d i s c u s s i o n we h a v e sai d that it w i l l be d i f f i c u l t to e n s u r e t heir
a v a i l a b i l i t y u n t i l w e h ave the i n f o r m a t i o n a b o u t the exact VAS
p e r s o n n e l r q u i r e m e n t in s u p p o r t of the A r m e d Services.        A l s o that
a p r o p e r c o m m a n d a n d c o n t r o l o r g a n i s a t i o n m u s t be established.
T h e r e w o u l d a l s o be p r o b l e m s due to not all V A S a m b u l a n c e s
h a v i n g r a d i o s a n d som e that do, not b e i n g c o m p a t i b l e w i t h their
C o u n t y A m b u l a n c e Services.

10. T h e NHS, in c o n j u n c t i o n w i t h the MOD, a r e at p r e s e n t t r y i n g
to r e s o l v e a c o m m a n d s t r u c t u r e for the u s e of t h e i r  ambulances
in t i m e of war.         T h e r e is li t t l e p l a n n i n g that we ca n do until
t h i s h a s b e e n resolved.
                                           - 3 -

11. M e a n w h i l e a s far a s p e a c e t i m e goes, it is s u g g e s t e d that               if
y o u h a v e n o t a l r e a d y d o n e so, y o u li a i s e w i t h y o u r C o u n t y
A m b u l a n c e S e r v i c e a n d f o r m u l a t e som e for m of c o - o p e r a t i o n .

Points From Exercises

12. M e m b e r s of the N J E E C h ave a t t e n d e d s e v e r a l C o u n t y J E E C
E x e r c i s e s d u r i n g 1986.    As a r e s u l t of t h e s e v i s i t s a n u m b e r of
p o i n t s h a v e b e e n n o t e d that n e e d resolving.        S o m e hav e b e e n n o t e d
by the N J E E C for s o m e time, but it is r e g r e t t e d lit t l e p r o g r e s s
made.

13. I felt it w o u l d be of i n t e r e s t for y o u to k n o w the m a t t e r s
tha t w e a r e at p r e s e n t p u r s u i n g e i t h e r w i t h the D H S S an d Hom e
O f f i c e a n d / o r w i t h i n the NJEEC.

    a.      Terminology             T h e r e is still c o n s i d e r a b l e c o n f u s i o n o v er
t e r m i n o l o g y w i t h r e g a r d to F i r s t Aid Posts, E m e r g e n c y Aid C e n t r e s
etc.          S o m e o r g a n i s a t i o n s a r e s till u s i n g the term, C a s u a l t y
C o l l e c t i n g Post.           As far a s the V A S ar e c o ncerned, t here a r e two
" P o s t s " in w h i c h they b e c o m e involved, a n d to w h i c h all their
t r a i n i n g is d i r e c t e d : -

        (i)     A "Post" set u p an d m a n n e d s o l e l y by the VAS, p r o v i d i n g
Tria g e , F i r s t A i d a n d the E v a c u a t i o n of c a s u a l t i e s to h o s p i t a l s
a n d t h e i r h o m e s or r est centres.

        (ii)              A "Post" set u p a n d m a n n e d by the NHS, but
i n c o r p o r a t i n g VAS, p r o v i d i n g m i n o r s u r g e r y in a d d i t i o n to the
f a c i l i t i e s p r o v i d e d by the "Post" above.

It h a s b e e n p r o p o s e d that the "Post in (i) s h o u l d be k n o w n as a
F i r s t A i d P o s t (FAP), a n d that in (ii) an E m e r g e n c y Aid C e n t r e
(EAC).        It is of c o u r s e p e r f e c t l y p o s s i b l e for a First A i d Pos t
to be a b s o r b e d in a n E m e r g e n c y Aid Centre.                T h i s T e r m i n o l o g y is
s t i l l a w a i t i n g D H S S app r o v a l , but m e a n w h i l e s h o u l d be u s e d by
a l l CJEECs.

    b . S t o c k s of F i r s t Aid E q u i p m e n t for use in E m e r g e n c y A i d P o s t s in
Disasters           T h e r e is a n e e d for b o t h the B R C S a n d St J o h n A m b u l a n c e to
h o l d D i s a s t e r F i r s t Aid P a c k s t h r o u g h o u t the counties, to be r e a d i l y
a v a i l a b l e in the c a s e of a Dis a s t e r .             Th e N J E E C w i l l p r o v i d e a
s u g g e s t e d list of i t e m s to be held.                 The p r o v i s i o n of t hese
Packs, a n d P a c k s fo r t r aining, is u n d e r d i s c u s s i o n w i t h the NHS.
T h e r e is a r e q u i r e m e n t for a s y s t e m of r e p l e n i s h m e n t o nce an F A P
or E A C h a s s t a r t e d opera t i n g .

   c.      WRVS      The a c t u a l   r o l e of   the W R V S   in a D i s a s t e r n e e d s to be
cl a r i f i e d .

    d • C o m m a n d C o n t r o l of a F irst Ai d P o s t / E m e r g e n c y Aid C e n t r e
T h e L e a d e r of a F i r s t A i d P o s t / E m e r g e n c y Ai d S t a t i o n m u s t be
c l e a r l y i d e n t i f i a b l e to all a n d sundry. H e m u s t not a l l o w
h i m s e l f to b e c o m e i n v o l v e d in the d e t a i l e d o peration.               It is
the L e a d e r ' s tas k to c o - o r d i n a t e a n d c o n t r o l the w o r k of the
o t h e r m e m b e r s , r e i n f o r c i n g a r e a s of p r e s s u r e as q u i c k l y as
p o ssible.           T h o s e c a r r y i n g out the d u t i e s of Triage, T r e a t m e n t
L e a d e r e t c s h o u l d a l s o be e a s i l y identi f i a b l e .           The N J E E C are
c o n s i d e r i n g a c o m m o n s y s t e m of l a b e l l i n g a n d the w r i t i n g of a
s p e c i m e n i n s t r u c t i o n r e g a r d i n g the C o m m a n d a n d C o n t r o l and
o p e r a t i o n of an E m e r g e n c y Aid Station.

    e * Training           It is e s s e n t i a l that a n u m b e r of p e o p l e are
t r a i n e d as L e a d e r s of T e a m s for F A P s / E A C s w h o w o u l d at least be
a v a i l a b l e to o r g a n i s e a S t a t i o n e v e n if those w h o w e r e a v a i l a b l e
at the time had not b e e n trained.

    f.      Documentation           T h e r e is still a nee d for a n a t i o n a l l y ag r e e d
C a s u a l t y C ard w h i c h a l l o w s the f o l l o w i n g d e t a i l s to be r e c o r d e d
for e a c h cas u a l t y :       T i m e in FAP/EAC, T i m e Out, D i s p o s a l Destination.
W h e n e v e r p o s s i b l e the f o l l o w i n g a d d i t i o n a l i n f o r m a t i o n sh o u l d a l s o be
rec o r d e d :     N e x t of Kin, address, m a r i t a l status.                        It is d e b a t a b l e
w h e n or w h e r e t h i s i n f o r m a t i o n s h o u l d a c t u a l l y be transferred,
bu t a p a t i e n t m u s t n e v e r be lost t h r o u g h the i n a b i l i t y to
k e e p some f orm of c e n t r a l i n f o r m a t i o n system.

    g-      P r e s e n c e of non M e d i c a l l y T r a i n e d P e r s o n n e l    T h e r e is a
r e q u i r e m e n t for a n u m b e r of n o n m e d i c a l p e r s o n n e l       to be i n c l u d e d   in
a n F A P / E A C to c a r r y out d o c u m e n t a t i o n etc.

    h.      Welfare Personnel            T h e r e is a d e f i n i t e r e q u i r e m e n t for W e l f a r e
P e r s o n n e l in a FAP/EAC.            N J E E C h a v e w r i t t e n a d r a f t c i r c u l a r on their
r o l e w h i c h it is h o p e d to issue shortly.                      The a p p l i c a t i o n of "Ten d e r
L o v i n g C are" a n d d e a l i n g w i t h d i s t r e s s e d r e l a t i v e s w i l l be be all
i m p o r t a n t in an e m e r g e n c y situation.

    j.      T r e a t m e n t of C a s u a l t i e s C a t e g o r i s a t i o n u n d e r the T R I A G E s y s t e m
s h o u l d be c h a n g e d a s n e c e s s a r y w h i l s t a c a s u a l t y is in a FAP/EAC.
It is i m p o r t a n t t hat the s t a t e of a c a s u a l t y is m o n i t o r e d and
a m e n d e d on the c a s u a l t y car d w h e r e ap p l i c a b l e .

    k.      Accommodation          T h e i m p o r t a n c e of s u i t a b l e a c c e s s for
a m b u l a n c e s to a n F A P / E A C an d a g o o d a c c e s s w i t h a s e p a r a t e e n try
a n d e x i t d o o r to th e a c t u a l P o s t / C e n t r e c a n n o t be s t r e s s e d too highly.

    1.         Communications               (i)     L i a i s o n s h o u l d take p l a c e ove r the u s e of
a m b u l a n c e s a n d t h e i r c o m m a n d a n d c o n t r o l w i t h the C o u n t y A m b u l a n c e
Service.              (ii)      Th e p o s s i b l e i n v o l v e m e n t of a c i v i l i a n r a d i o
c o m m u n i c a t i o n s n e t w o r k , ie RAYNET.

    m.      O p e r a t i o n Orde r s , O r g a n i s a t i o n of F irst Ai d P o s t s       The
N J E E C is c u r r e n t l y w r i t i n g a s p e c i m e n O p e r a t i o n O r d e r s an d
P a m p h l e t on the O r g a n i s a t i o n of a F irst Aid P o s t for i ssue to all
CJEECs.             It is h o p e d a l s o to m a k e a V i d e o on the o r g a n i s a t i o n of
a n F A P a v a i l a b l e l ate 1 9 8 7 / e a r l y 1988.

Dates

14.        It w o u l d be g r e a t l y a p p r e c i a t e d if y o u w o u l d f o r w a r d the
d a t e a n d l o c a t i o n of a n y s t u d y days, e x e r c i s e s etc, that y o u a r e
holding.           It is of g r e a t b e n e f i t to the N J E E C if one of its
M e m b e r s could, w h e n e v e r possible, a t t e n d t h e s e events.
                                            - 5


Circulars

15.       C i r c u l a r s , e x p a n d i n g on the r o l e of the V A S in supp o r t of
the A r m e d F o r c e s in tim e of war, a n d the p r o g r e s s w i t h r e g a r d to
d e c i s i o n s on the s u b j e c t s m e n t i o n e d in p a r a g r a p h 13 a - m, will
be i s s u e d as s o o n as possible.




                                      (Major-General        P.R.Leuchars)
Mr4 B J Morgan/Dr D Robinson
Copies of this
letter were
promised at the
Easingwold
Conference.    VV/th the Compliments o f
           Department o f Health and Social Security

                    DR L J MARTIN
Hannibal House
Elephant and Castle
London, SE1 6TE                                13.3.87
Tel. No. 01-703 6380 Ext.
                                                 MED MPO Division
                                                DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                                                EUSTON TOWER       Room 1838
                                                286 EUSTON ROAD
                                                LONDON NW1 3DN

                                                TELEPHONE01-388 1188 EXT   3 74 7

    Your reference                                               13 February 1987
    Our referenceRLQ 31
      Brigadier R C Middleton OBE
      Chief Secretary
      HQ St John Ambulance
      1 Grosvenor Crescent
      LONDON SW1X 7EF




      Thank you for your letter of 11 February which arrived hard on the heels of another
      from one of our Regions, drawing my attention to Major General Leuchars' letter to
      Chairmen CJEEC dated 27 January.

      I am sorry to say that the position on VAS support for the NHS far from being
      clarified seems to have become totally confused.

      The principles behind our revision of casualty policy were as follows:-

               (a)   that the two tier system of FAPs and CCCs was too complex and likely
                     to be unworkable;

               (b)   that VAS support was a precious resource and would work best in a
                     single all-purpose setting with the advantages of professional
                     supervision and support.

      As you know, the consultation draft which we sent out in June 1985 was prepared,
      so far as relevant paragraphs were concerned, on the basis of advice from
      Maj Gen John Gray and the late Brig Peter Body representing the VAS; copies are
/    attached for ease of reference to the sections dealing with VAS, individual
      volunteers and EMCs.

     After consultation some modifications were made in the light of comments received
      from the NHS and through Home Office from County Emergency Planning Officers.
/    A copy of the final post-consultation draft of the VAS paragraphs is attached;
      these were agreed with you.

      VAS support to the NHS in a peacetime catastrophe is presently outwith my remit
      but so far as support in wartime is concerned our circular leaves no doubt that
      the FAP concept of the earlier guidance {HDC{77)1) has disappeared; so has the
      CCC. What replaces both and is more like the latter than the former is the
      Emergency Medical Centre or EMC. We have never proposed or used the term
      Emergency Aid Centre.

     You will have realised from our consultation draft that we see the concept of
     a supporting tier of care as possibly necessary in conventional war, if the work­
     load became too great. But it would certainly be essential in the nuclear scenario
     when the number of casualties would overwhelm surviving NHS facilities. Although
     this is clearly stated in the final draft we have never pressed the matter in the
     field or on VAS courses at Easingwold, because of the sensitivity of the issue.
     This is something which will need to be considered cautiously and in longer time;
     you and I might talk about this informally on 23 April.

                                                                                    /It may
4




                                    - 2 -


It may be that we shall need to act jointly and quickly to prevent the spread
of confusion which I believe will unfortunately be engendered by Maj Gen Leuchars'
letter. If it would help I am more than willing to meet with yourself and
representatives of BRCS and the NJEEC to clarify the position.




                                                       L ^-Martin
                                                      'Senior Medical Officer




 PS   I will respond separately to the other points you raise     (equipment,
      WRVS and documentation).



                                              -tU o *      ^       ^ kJuAzj

                                                           /    y J *



                                                      A.                   >*h
                                             initial
                              REFER t O        as            R etu rn to
                                              seen




                                                                 on



                                          r> f.   n .   i   JtiRS&m

                                                  1st. 215%

                                          10th September 1986

..Mr.' Martyn Howell,
 Medical Department,
 West Midlands Regional
        Health Authority,
 Arthur Thomson House,
 146, Hagley Road,
 BIRMINGHAM,
 B16 9PA.


Dear Mr. Howell,

          Thank you for informing me shout
the proposed seminar on county JGCs and the
NHS, to be held on November 6.    I would like
to attend.

                       Yours sincerely,




                       Dr. D. Robinson
               Health Emergency Planning Officer
                                                  i "*■


                                                                 inicial
                                               REFER T O           as        R eturn to
                                                                  seen




                                                                                 on



                                                                           R etu rn to File




                                                           Dr. T. L. Hobday

                                                           21st January 1983




Major General R. J. Gray, C.B.,
national Joint Emergency Earnoutive Committee,
Chairman's Office,
9, Grosvenor Crescent,
LONDON,
SW1X 7SJ.

Dear General Gray,
          Thank you very much for your booklet on the
management of mass casualties, which I am sure will be of
considerable guidance to the Voluntary Aid Societies.
          I would greatly appreciate a set of your Committee's
circulars which cover organisational and training matters.
          We have quite a lively J.E.E.C. on Merseyside and
I am making contact with the corresponding organisation in
Cheshire.   I hope to have the pleasure of meeting you soon.
                            Yours sincerely,



                              T. L. Hobday
                          BSCM (Hone Defence)
                                                                                                                                               Wilbertorce House,
                                                                                                                                               The Strand,
                                                                          <sS»'                                                                Liverpool L2 7RW .
                                       Kg £*       15 p» gs
                                                                                                                                               0 5 1 -2 3 6 8 4 6 4




                                                                                                                                      When telephoning or calling please ask fc^
             Our Ref.     J D E /F H       ‘


             Y our Ref.
                                                                                                                                       Dr, J,D,Egaell



                                                                                                  4th September 1979*




                 Dear


                                               Injuries, from “ballet wounds and bomb blast


                         I attach a copy of a paper from the Royal Army Medical College on the
                 above subject which has been sent to me from the Department of Health and
                 Social Security with the suggestion that I should draw it to the attention of
                 surgeons in the region*     I think we might interpret n surgeons** as meaning
                 those consultants who are likely to be concerned with the treatment of
                 injuries*

                         I          think its distribution is best carried out within each Area and
                 accordingly I am forwarding a copy to each AMO*     In circulating it as
                 requested by the Department of Health* I do not intend any implication that
                 the paper will necessarily tell the recipients anything that they do not
                 already know*


                                                                                  Yours ftijacerely,




                                                                                  (Duncan Egdell
                                                                                  Regional Medical Officer




                                                        Chairman: E.W . D river, B.Sc., F .I.C .E .
Regional M edical O fficer: Dr. J.D . Egdell, M .B ., Ch.B., Dip.Soc.M ed., M .F .C .M . Regional A d m in istrato r: J.W . Pearson, F.C .I.S ., F .H .A ., F.C .C .A ., I.P .F .A ,
Regions! Treasurer: M .H . C ollier,-I.P .F .A .                                         Regional Nursing O fficer: Miss M .R . VVorster, S .R .N .
Regional Works O fficer: Gordon Brooke, M .S c.iEn g.i, C.Eng,, F .I.C .E ., M .B .I.M .
                                                            BULLET   V.r0UHD3


     mien the body, is stack- by a bullet, damage is inflicted which defends unor the
     "i- I sha^ e > -stability and velocity'-of the missile and on the structures* v- ih
                       into^contact. Bullets are divided into rifle or high velocity and
     .y o ^  ox lo* velocx.,. Hand guns are revolvers or automatics which all tkrow a
     faxr.iy heavy bullet at relatively low velocities of the order of 1^0-250 rap+i-?^
                  (5             i'!et per second) ‘ A typical military rifj.e such as the a i l r d e r d .
      r. fcish ^ ?7 « e a p o n r Aires a bullet of just under 10 g ’-ams at a volocitv of o v —
                   ? s ) * ~hiS velocity is very much greater than that of band ,„vr.s but
    rilleo of this t,ype are not new, they have been in r.xistonce for c^er 80 ye-r--^
    iuture developments m military rifl'is are towards s e l l e r bullets fired a* n v n n
    ve?vei V S ' ° h 1 iii5+ 105 ?Xtmple’ the Colt torialite rifle of calibre 5.56 mas fir os a
    tery lignx bullet of 3 .5 grains at a velocity of a 1000 mps (3000 fp3).
                                   .i                                           ‘

 The notion of the bullet in flight, and within -.he tissues after impact, dspond i^-r-
.xta s ia e ^ s h a p e , stability, composition and, above all, cn its v^ooi-;y : in t h e "
   ,-v>sues ^aensj.xy and^ elasticity are the most important factors which influence the
        ^    T \ ° \        missile. Unlike arrows, bullets are aerodynarnically ansi,able and
 f « 1                          t=o oscillate around its long a^ic. This important deviation
 is xtncT/n as           and l a the extremes of mo tier, the bullet Bay tumble end over end.
 Spinning y,ne bullet b y means of rifling the barrel of t.ne gun gives it stability
    f ! ^ J f ' S , X r i 0 r £ a '3 e f   h o t h range and -ccraracy, rifle bullets are used for accurate'
      t                                    x a T i€ ^ a of over 1000 metres and have K e n known' to kill at ransr-s
           .vJ mayres and more. Any irregular movements are rapidly damped by the r«TO"
   scopic action of spir^ but although the spin imnarted' to a rifle b u l e i n^v b^'as
   mucn as^:>C 0 revolutions per secorxi, its effect is not adequate to maintain the'
                  oi vne missile i n any media that are censor z h r n air.      The soft tissues
   o.t tne boay arc very similar to water in that they are approximately s’00~ 50 '- t^rr-s
   ac cense -as air and 7,henever a bullet hits tissue it becomes more unstable. An-
             01       tnat x s present will be greatly increased, sometimes to the poif.t of
   tum.xxng. ^Tissues oi increasing density cause greater retardation of the missile
   ana, therefore, greater energy is released to cause damage. Retardation is not
   O l / directly proporx-ional to the presenting area of the bullet but it is also
  proportional to the cube of the velocity. A wound in the oody occurs from the
  tra.ns-.er 01 energy from the bullet to the tissue penetrated, fiie kinetic e-ier^v c-C
\ a x t y /rassiie i n motion is g i v e n by the formula   _     v h o r e M i s mass and T l h e " '
                                                               2
  velocity.       The overwhelming importance of velocity is shewn by the eouaticn and V-
          effecxs ci Increasing velocity whilst keeping mass constant.

+ h \ W °2 nJ r nS ?°"®r of the bullet depends not only on its kinetic energy as it fli-s
through t..e air bu„ cn the proportion of its energy that it will give up when it
 tribes tissue and on the rate at which it transfers such energy. - Uften a bullet
is svoppeu Dy .he tissue it penetrates, the energy liberated to cause dama — s & s i
be equal vo the total kinetic energy of the bullet. If it passes through the
tissue, u ,*cis a remaining velocity fron which. can bo calculated the ensr„r.- exr.ar.i?*
during wounding. A stable, perforating bullet nay use up only 10-2054 of its actual
        ..®ne 7 ®y i n creating a wound, whereas an unstable bullet of the same kiss ana
velocity \.i*A always give up much more of its energy thereby creating a mere severe
*V v? J lJ U 9



A bullet causes injury in the following three ways depending upon its velocity.


1-                                                     Vnen the bullet penetrates, the tissue is
c-m
 , lo r c e.u ^ p-a r x . . ’^ s.              is
                                                — .the
                                                   —   principal C.J-WI.
                                                                 effect uof  low velocity bullets
                                                                          j. avvv                  travelling
                                                                                          puij-ets crav
0       V '^     0                            fps).   The crush!n^ and laceration which is caused by the
'passage of the bullet is not usually serious unless vital organs or major blood
 vessels are directly injured. The bullet only damages tissues with which it comes
 into direct contact and the wound is comparable to those that are caused by hand
 held weapons such as knives.' There is no energy transmitted to the tissues surroundi
 the wound track and the damage that can ae seen at operation is all the damage that
 has actually t a k e n place and nothing is hidden.

 The other two phenomena occur so quickly that they can only be demonstrated using
 very high speed photography or radiography. They only occur at velocities exceeding
 the speed of sound in air which is approximately 350     ("5100 fps) and this figure
 conveniently divides bullets into low or high velocity.

           Shock W a v e s . When the bullet penetrates, the tissues are compressed and this
   zone of compression moves away as a shock wave of spherical form. The velocity of
  this shock wave is about 1500 raps (48OO fps) and this is almost the same as in
  w a t e r . These shock wave pressure changes only last for about a millionth of a
 ’second but very high pressures, in excess of 1500 pourds per square inch may be
4 ft'tained and thus they can cause damage at a considerable distance frcm the pernaner.t
             track.   Solid tissues are very susceptible to their transmission and they are
  also transmitted extremely well along fluid-filled tubes like arteries and veins to
   cause damage at a distance.

  3*    Temporary Cavitation. This phenomenon only occurs with high velocity bullets
  and. is the m a i n reason for their immensely destructive effect. As the rifle bullet
  releases its energy rapidly, it is absorbed by the local tissues which are accelera­
  ted very violently forwards and outwards, thus a large cavity is created v;hich is
  approximately 3-0 —  40 times the diameter of the missile* 'vhe maximum sise of the
  cavity is only reached after the bullet has passed through the tissues, thin
  cavity has a sub-atmospheric pressure and debris is actively sucked into the
  cavity through, the entrance and exit holes created by the bullet. The temporary ca'rS
  collapses d o wn i n a pulsatile fashion sucking air, debris and bacteria into the
  wound. The temporary cavity can be demonstrated using very high speed cine phot-
  graphy or high, speed x-ray exposures,     20£> gelatin gel simulates human soft t i s s u e
  fairly accurately, in addition it is trrnsparent and cine pictures can e,        V D£?
  taken of a bullet passing through it. Another media that closely resembles human
  tissue is soap,      In this case the maximum size of the temporary cavity is permanent.:
 ^left in the blo c k as an irregularly shaped cavity. In addition, high speed frlr: or
  high speed cine x-ray can demonstrate cavitation in the thigh of the anaesthetised
  experimental a n i m a l .

 Additional evidence that there has been a temporary cavity is demonstrated by the
 zone of bruising which occurs around the permanent track of the experimental wouna.
 This is due to the stretching and consequent rupture of small blood vessels by th«
 pressure from the rapidly expanding temporary cavity. This zone of damaged auscis
 has an abnormal colour, it does not contract when pinched and does not bleed when
 cut. These appearances arc quite characteristic, can be readily demonstrated to
 the uninitiated and are a fairly accurate estimate of the death of muscle.

 Some tissues a r e much more sensitive to the cavitational changes than others.   In
 general the damage is directly proportional to i‘ r.e density of the tissue, thus hexo­
 genous tissues like muscle, liver, spleen and brain are very sensitive whereas tne
 light tissues such as lung, which is mainly filled with air, are resistant. Tne
 damage is also inversely proportional to the amount of elastic fibres that are
 present in the tissue, for example, skin and lung are remarkably resistant to such
 damage whereas bone is very sensitive.

 Pistol bullets have a relatively low amount of energy available to cause damage, in
 general this o n l y occurs at fairly close ranges and the damaging effects are very
limited at ranges of more than 50-100 metres. All rifle bullets have an incredible .
amount of available energy and although this energy decreases with increasing range,
nevertheless they have great wounding power even at distances of many hundreds of
metres. If a rifle bullet is stable on impact it might go right through the body
giving up only 10 -or 20/t of its energy', if however, it becomes unstable it may
give up 60 cr 70/o of its energy with a consequently much more severe wound. If the
bullet fragments on impact, as happens quite often with small calibre bullets at
close ranges of less tJian 100 metres, then all the energy will be used up in
creating horrendous wounds.    The external appearance of a bullet wound can be
deceptive, if the bullet enters or leaves skin end on, then it will commonly leave
a small hole irrespective of the severe damage it may have caused during its passage
through the tissues.   If the bullet enters, or more commonly leave?;, the skin side­
ways on to some degree, then the hole ^n the skin will be large and ragged.

For the same amount of total energy expended, the design of the bullet can make
profound differences in its effect on tissues.

-If the bullet is soft it will flatten on impact, producing a much greater surface
area and, therefore, greater retardation. This design will produce a very early
release of energy.

If it is an unstable jacketed bullet, then the energy would be more rapidly released
as the bullet starts to yaw and tumble.

If it is a stable, jacketed bullet then the energy would tend to be released rather
late as the bullet traverses a greater length of tissue and it only becomes unstable
with the longer wound track.

In an experimental rifle bullet wound there is a volume of tissue approximately
500 mis, one pint, the size of your fist, that is damaged. This large amount of
dead tissue, uniformly and grossly contaminated with bacteria and debris from the
surface, is the pathological entity of the high velocity missile wound.
                          MEKHftMS&I AI'ID EFFECTS OF BOMB BLAST


    Explosives are substances •which when detonated are very rapidly converted into large-
    volumes of gases. W h e n the explosion is confined •by some form cf bomb or shell casin.
    whether conventional o r home-made, then the pressure will rupture the casing- impart! r;
    high velocity to the resulting -fregnents.- The remainder of the energy then produces
    the blast shock wave. *?here are three components of the shock wave — the positive
    phase, the negative phase and the mass movement of air. The blast wave moves away
    from the source in the Corni of a sphere of e x p r es s e d gas which is expanding rapidly.
    The velocity of the blast shock wave in air is as high as 10,000 feet per second but
    it soon falls to the speed of sound within a variable distance depending or. the a~cxr
    and composition of the explosives. The maximum pressures of the blast wave immediate
    adjacent to the explosive charge is extremely high, of the order of thousands of pcur.
    per square inch, thereafter the pressure falls off as the wave moves away from the
    source of the explosion, for example with a 125. lb charge of T.N.T. at 13 feet the
    pressure is 200 psi at 50 feet the pressure is 10 psi. The incident pressure is the
    pressure level at 90° to the direction of travel of the blast shock front. Like
    waves, the blast pressure waves will flow over and around an obstruction like a wall


•
     and affect someone sheltering behind it. The reflected pressure is the rapid hid Id v.
    of pressure which occurs when a shock front strikes a flat surface in its line of
    travel. The negative pressure, or suction component of the blast wave, is much lec:
    that the positive pressure phase.    It follows immediately after the positive wave b
    lasts about ten times as long, that is 30 milliseconds. The rapidly expanding gas
    from an explosion displaces an equal volume of air. This mass movement cf air "crave1,
    immediately behind the shock front of !:he blast wave and is called the dynamic press­
    or wind pressure.  This ipjss movement of air is capable of causing injuries of all
    degrees of severity and in the immediate vicinity of the c:cp?.osion it may eatise total
    disintegration of the body and lesser levels are the actual cause 01 disruption ox
    tissues, traumatic amputations and evisceration. That is to say, it is the mass
    movement of air that causes parts of the body to be actually blown off.

    The blast wave travels much more rapidly, and much further in vjater due to the. gr«.atc
    density of the medium ar.d that is why blast injuries in water are more severe at a
    greater distance than they are in air.

    As the blast wave travelj tiu’ougn the body i                    damage particularly
 _ the interface •between tissues and air. Thus damage occurs in the wall of the alvecil
0 o f the lung causing a marked haemorrhagic effect together with oedena. Similar char j
    take place, at much higher pressures, when the Dlast pressure wave travels throu~.: \h
    abdomen causing damage i n the wa'.ls of gas containing viscera and if the pressure it
    high enough causing actual disruption of tine viscus involved. The most sensitive ci-.
    is the ear and eardrums start to rupture at about 7 lbs per square inch (psi) and eve
    children's eardrums are ruptured at 30 psi. Apart from the damage t o 'the ear -hick i
    common, the pure blast changes ox the lung and the abdomen are fairly rare i n .explosi
    in the open except when very close to the explosion.

    The primary missiles that are sent off from the bomb casing or from the missiles su.ck
    as nuts and bolts, screws and ball bearings that are packed around home-made tc.~b.v- :
    act as high velocity missiles and should be treated as such. That is, all high velo­
    city penetrating wounds must be treated by thorough wound excision, leaving the wound
    open with the exception of wounds of the iace, closing the dura, the pleura and the
    peritoneum, and then closing them by delayed primary closure on the fourth c x fi: o',
    day. Traumatic amputation-3hou.ld be treated by thorcujh wound excision, by retain!::-j
    as much viable tissue as possible and by closure by delayed primary closure four tc
    days later.  If the voxcid is relatively clean, then formal flaps may be cut but sh o.:
    not be closed till the fourth or fifth day. The problem cf the long or shorT. or
    damaged amputation mjut’p must be given to the limb fitting surgeon and the pros chcT::.:
    In the rare event of closed abdominal injuries, they should be treated according to
their symptoms and signs, they may have visceral rupture, they may have haemorrhage
into the wall of the bov/ej and they must be explored accordingly.

Explosions in confined spaces cause far worse effects than those occurring in the
open. This is particularly true with explosions in tanks, helicopters and fixed *7ir.g
aircraft* In confined spaces there is the added effect, apart from explosive blast
and primary missiles, of the inhalation of toxic gases and smoke. A11 these have an
accumulative effect on tha lungs in particular. The end results of all different
types of trauma whether they be explosives, toxic gases or smoke are the cause of post
traumatic pulmonary insufficiency. This characteristically comes on after a delay of
twelve hours or more arid the patient'may have mild haemoptysis or cyanosis or just
behave in a rather peculiar fashion. Blood gases will show a low arterial p02 and a
raised pC02. They may have to be treated by endotracheal intubation, pcsitira pressure
ventilation with P.E.E.P intensive physiotherapy and steroids.

Most explosions from conventional weapons, whother they are in the open or in confined
 ©paces, may create burn*; by the fireball effect cf the burning explosive or frost the
 secondary effects of setting fire to clothing or the environment. These burns are
|l;reated in the normal way.




                         PRII-ICIPLES OF SURGERY 0? WAR (HVM) I70UKP3


                    1.   Wound Sccision

                         Excision of all dead and contaminated tissues

                    2.    Leave '.Yound Open

                         Except face, dura, pleura and peritoneum

                    3•   Belayed Primary Closure

                         Closure by suture or skin graft 4~5 days after
                         wound excision
                M IS S IL E WOUNDS OP LIMBS


CONTROL HAEMORRHAGE        —   Exposure, Easciotomy
ARTERY, VEIN               ~   Repair or vein graft soonest

EXCISION of all dead tissue, remove F B, irrigate
BONE ERAGMEN                    Remove, small loose fragments
                                clean with curstte and irrigation
                                all attached fragments and replace
                                clean and replace large sections of
                                long bones to maintain length
NERVES                          Note and mark clearly
TENDONS                         Note and mark clearly
EXTERNAL RIGID FIXATION is permitted, not plates or nails
DRESSINGS                  -   Loose, bulky, no circumferential     •
                                strapping
PLASTER SLABS              -   Well padded POP MUST be split down
                                to skin
DELAYED PRIMARY CLOSURE by suture, graft, flaps
DELAYED REPAIR OP NERVES, TENDONS AND SONS at about 3-6 reeks
                   ■M IS S IL E 770UNDS OP ABDOMEN

Pass catheter, examine rectum if indicated
EXPOSURE
SECURE BLEEDING         - major vessels, mesentery, liver, spleen
EIND PERFORATIONS
   Small Bowel          -.suture, resect, and anastomose
   Large Bowel          - mobilise freely
   LEFT SICE                small hole, repair       * colostomy
                            large hole or suspect - exteriorise
                            .Major disruption;
                              a.    resect, anastomose, proximal colostomy
                              b.    resect, colostomy + mucous fistula
   RIGHT Sill.tH            small hole, repair + caooostoray catheter
                                                      ileostomy catheter
                            BO NOT EXTERIORISE
                            Major disruption:
                              a.    resect, vented ileocolostomy
                              b.    resect, colostomy + mucous fistula
   Rectum               - resect +' colostomy
                            resect, anastomose + colostomy
                            wash out segment
PERITONEAL TOILET
CIIECL EEEROPERITOIJEAI TISSUES
DRAIN                   -    Posterior, dependant, multiple and generous
                        - Drain presacral space for rectal injuries
CLOSURE - TENSION SUTURES TO LAPAROTOMY
           - MISSILE WOUNDS - excise, close peritoneum, leave rest
                                   for delayed closure
                     M IS S IL E V70UHDS OP THE CHEST


SUCKING Y/OUKD .        -    Airtight seal "by First Aid
EAEMOTHORAX             -    Emergency chest drain connect to
                         •   Heimlich valve, underwater suction
                             Measure blood and fluid loss
THORACOTOMY             ~    For blood loss via drain       1 litre
                        ~    Abdomino-Thoracic injury
                        -    Massive air leak
                        -    Mediastinal damage
                        -    Cardiac wounds or tamponade.
                        -    Large wounds
         Procedure           Heart, great vessels and pericardium
                             Oversew lurig
                             Rarely lobectomy
                             Secure bleeding vessels
                               - Internal Mammary
                               - Intercostal
                             Repair mediastinal structures
                             Drain
                             Primary closure of pleura and muscle
WOUNDS                   -   Excise, close pleura, leave rest open
                             Delayed Primary Closure
DEFECTS                  -- Flap
                             Prosthetic mesh
                    M IS S IL E       VOUKDS   OP   THE   HEAD

AIRWAY                  - Unconscious patient care
                       -    Intubate and hyperventilate -
RESUSCITATE            -   May lose a lot of blood
                       -   Transfuse .
EXCISIOH               -    Special neurosurgical techniqu
                       -    Close dura
                       -    Close skin
FACIAL WOUKDS           — Excision
                       ~   Primary suture
ACCESS FOR FACIO-IvIAXILLARY)           assessment
           OPHTHALMIC             j     and
           EOT                    )     treatment
TRACHEOSTOMY DECISION
INTENSIVE CARE UBIT


                    MISSILE           VffiUHDS OF THE     KECK

AIRWAY                 - 'Transport semi-sitting
                       -    Intubation
                       -   Tracheostomy
BLEEDING               -    Stop by preesuffQ-..
                       -   Urgent operation
ACCESS                 -   Control bleeding
                      ~ Decompress deep space
                       - Repair vessels
                      ~    Anterior Thoracotomy
                      -    Median Sternotomy
                      -    Repair pharynx, trachea
CERVICAL CORD         -    Traction
DRAINAGE                                                   •
BIBLIOGRAPHY



Ferguson, D.G. and Stevenson, H.M. (1978) A review of 158 gunshot wounds to the
  chest. British Journal of Surgery 6 5 , 845 -8 4 ?.

Field Surgery Pocket Book (1 9 6 2 ) HMSO London.

Hopkinson, D.A.W. and Marshall T.K. (196?) Firearm Injuries, British Journal of
  Surgery 54, 344-353.

North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (1975) Emergency War Surgery, 1st United
  States revision, Washington DC. Government Printing Office.

O'Reilly, M.J.G. et al (1979) Penetrating vascular injuries.     Journal of the "
  Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh, 24, 213-220

Owen-Sar th, M.S. (1978) High Velocity Missile Injuries. In: Current Surgical
  Practice Volume 2 - 12 pp 204-228. Ed by John Eadfield and Michael Boosley,
  London, Edward Arnold.

Surgery of Violence (1975) British Medical Journal

Thoresby, F.P. (1966) Cavitation.     Journal of the Royal Army Medical Corps 112,
  89- 100.

War Surgery Supplements (1947 &. 1952) British Journal of Surgery
                          ^      '•        t"        j,           t     f• c



                      HOT        FOB        P U B I I C A S I O B




                                                                                                   i~ ~ ‘
                                                                               w -« -^ -   / (r<


                                                                      y.

                                                                                                            /V



                                                                                                            • <.O-—C>M




                                HOME            D E F E N C E




               G U I D A N C E         N O T E S          F O E       D O C T O R S

              T E A C H I N G         M A S S      C A S U A L T Y             C A R E




DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                       C O N T E N T S




Chapter                    Subject              Paragraphs


                           PABT 1
                           General

   1       Background to the Care of Mass
              Casualties                          1 to    15

  11       Principles and Practice of Sorting
              of Casualties                      14 to 26

 111       The Casualty Collecting Centre        27 to 32



                           PART 11
          Some Special Medical Considerations

  IT       Trauma                                3 3 to   42
   V       Burns                                 4 3 to 87

  VI       Radiation                             8 8 to 138

 Vll       Psychological First Aid              139 to 146

Ylll       Public Health                        147 to 158
                           P A R T   1         G E N E R A L



                                  C H A P T E R     1

                      Background to the Care of Hass Casualties


Introduction

1.   A Mass Casualty situation is one in which the total medical resources of an
area are already overwhelmed or are about to be overwhelmed, with no prospect of
early outside assistance. This condition would undoubtedly obtain following1 a
thermo-nuclear attack.  It must be remembered that these notes are written against
this background and that as a result the procedures suggested are very different


t•   x u jlo blljl iiuu uuujuiuujljt buuught that a thermo—nuclear attack would be so
devastating in its extent that planning to deal with it is a waste of time. This
is not so. Prom reasoned assessments of likely scales of attack it is clear that
even in a very heavy attack considerable areas would be undamaged, and could be
potential centres for national regeneration.           It follows that surviving national
resources should be so employed as best to ensure such regeneration.           It is
therefore worth-while to plan for survival of the nation rather than to do
nothing and thereby to achieve nothing.

3.   Prom the medical viewpoint it is necessary to consider the worst possible
situation, i.e. one in which the numbers of casualties considerably exceed the
available facilities. Many hospitals would be destroyed in the attack or rendered
unusable by radioactive fall-out.  In such circumstances uninjured medical,
nursing and first aid staff would be national assets of the highest priority.

4.   It is essential to design a system for the medical care and treatment in
local communities with priority allocations for the movement of casualties where
possible. Plans will necessarily be flexible.   If the damage is light, practice
would approach the normal.  If the damage is so serious that control breaks down,
trained personnel may have to turn their hands to the nearest task unaided by central
direction, and areas may have to be self supporting, using what local resources are
still available. This possibility emphasises the importance of training as many
people as possible so that they could be efficient even without guidance.



Organisation and Casualty Evacuation Chain

5.   Figure 1 shows in simple form the organisational requirements for dealing
with mass casualty situations.




First Aid Personnel

6.   These will come principally from the Voluntary Aid Societies assisted        by
members of the public with first aid knowledge.  In home defence planning         two
phases of operations are defined, the Life Saving Phase covering the first        few
days after the attack and the Survival Phase which follows it. The duties         of the
first aid personnel would probably be different during these phases.




                                          -   1 -
                    C A S U A L T Y       P O L I C Y




             Self Help




      First Aid Posts (FAPs)




Casualty Collecting Centres (CCCs)                      Ambulances




            Hospital                                    Amhu] ances




                               Figure 1
Life-Saving Phase

7.   The main tasks of first aiders in this phase would be;-

     (a)   Giving life-saving first aid to seriously injured casualties.

     (b)   Sorting the injured into categories according to the treatment
           required and available. This will include the allocation of
           priorities for evacuation to the C.C.C.

     (c)   Direction of the lightly injured        to other facilities locally,
           e.g. home or rest centre.

In this phase first aiders may have to work without any supervision from a doctor
or a qualified nurse.

8 . In the forward damaged areas, sorting is carried out by first aiders - mainly
membersof the Y.A.Ss.    Because of inevitable shortage of transport anddoctors,
these people are likely to have the task of deciding which casualties must first
be evacuated to the C.C.C. The first aider must also be able to give, or supervise,
treatment to those casualties remaining in the damaged areas. It is to enable him
to carry out these duties that he will require instruction in the principles of
sorting and additional training in life-saving techniques; this training to be
called Mass Casualty Care.



Survival Phase

9.   During this phase there would be an enormous task in caring for those
injured and sick who have not been sent to hospital, including those suffering
from radiation sickness. These patients would have to be nursed in their own
homes or in some form of communal rest centres or shelters; help would be needed
from first aiders and anyone with home nursing knowledge. At this stage they
may expect some supervision or direoiion from doctors or nurses.



Casualty Collecting Centre

10. The C.C.C. is the key unit in the casualty treatment chain; it is the first
unit at which the casualty can    expect to receive care fromdoctors and nurses.

11. C.C.Cs are staffed by the Primary Health Care Teams. In brief, they are
static units consisting of 4 -6 G.Ps,    qualified nurses, nursing auxiliaries
and other support and administrative staff. Stretcher bearers are not included
in the establishment of the units; they will have to be recruited locally from
members of the general public.

The functions of C.C.Cs are:-

     (a)   Sorting all casualties arriving at the unit and determining
           priorities!




                                       -   3   -
                /
       (b)    evacuating suitable cases to hospital without delay other than
              that needed for essential first aid where this is possible?          j
                                                                                   I
       (c)    providing emergency and supportive treatment for the seriously       j
              injured when transport to hospital is delayed;

       (d)    holding (with resuscitative or palliative treatment) those unfit to
              be moved;

       (e)    treating the lightly injured, followed by discharge to the care of
              the welfare services.

12.   Figure 11 shows the basic requirements of a C.C.C.                           ,

Layout of    c(c.c.   complex




                                     Reception and
                                       Sorting




               Home or                 Treatment                     Holding
             Rest Centre                 Areas                         TJnit




                                     Evacuation




                                   Figure 11
13. The C.C.C. itself would rapidly become .choked with casualties and would
cease to be able to function unless a system of priorities is operated as an
integral part of the evacuation plan. The classification of casualties and
their assignment to priority groups is the key to the management of Mass
^Casualties; it reduces delay between injury and therapy and allows understaffed
medical units to treat first those casualties who will most benefit. Sorting
must be a continuous process, starting with the first aider at the area of
damage.                                 _
                         C H A P T E R      I I


           Principles and Practice of Sorting of Casualties                        *


ll+. Priorities would vary at different places and different times after the attack"
In the immediate post-attack period (otherwise referred to as the life-saving
phase) the emphasis would be on "the greatest good for the greatest number” and for
this task the work of first aiders, C.C.Cs and the ambulance services    is of
the first importance; later the emphasis would move to more definitive care of
the individual and the hospital and domiciliary services would assume growing
importance. Which predominates at any particular time would vary with altering
conditions. Priorities in the sorting of casualties must never be regarded as
rigid - they would vary according to circumstances and must be continuously
reviewed against changes in the casualty's condition and in the facilities
available.

15. The practice of preventive medicine and hygiene would be absolutely vital
throughout.

16. Sorting should be done by a doctor if one is available, ideally by an
experienced clinician. It is of such importance that it should be the duty of
the most experienced man available. In the event that no doctor is present the
sorting must be done by whoever has been trained in the principles. Training
in Mass Casualty care will prepare first aiders to approach these problems with
a measure of confidence, and to give local leadership. A person with training
would be prepared to take this responsibility when he found that he had more
knowledge than anyone else available, and he would be more than willing to
relinquish it when somebody better qualified arrived. It is clear that as many
people as possible should learn as much as possible about sorting.
                                                                                   *
17. The object of sorting is to ensure that the time of the overworked rescue
and medical services is used to care for those casualties who will most benefit
and is not expended on those who are so lightly injured that they are likely to
recover without skilled help, nor on those so severely injured that their
prospects of survival would be negligible even if facilities for full intensive
care were available. Flexibility in sorting is again emphasised.

Types of Casualties that may be expected

1 8 . Enough is known about thermo-nuclear weapons for some assessment of the
types of casualty to be made. With the weapons at present in existence it has
been estimated that major casualties might occur in the following proportions:-

          Major lacerations                       about one-third
          Uncomplicated burns                     about one-third
          Injuries of extremities                 about one-sixth
          Other injuries                          about one-sixth

19. Additionally one-third of all the traumatic cases would probably be
complicated by thermal burns of varying degrees of severity; many others would
have received radiation injury,

20. To give some general idea of priorities, we might say that contusions, minor   ^
lacerations, undisplaced fractures of upper limbs and burns causing only redness
or small areas of blistering of the skin should not be evacuated to the C.C.C.



                                    - 6 -
Small clean cute can "be bandaged (with torn strips of clean clothing if
necessary), or the edges drawn together with adhesive strapping. Minor h u m s
can be left exposed or protected from further injury with simple dressings
and bandages, preferably improvised so that medical supplies axe preserved for
the more serious cases. At the other end of the scale immediate evacuation to
hospital of patients with burns of over 40 per cent of the body surface is
contra-indicated; the elaborate treatment needed to save these would not be
available and they would be uselessly subjected to the danger and pain of
travelling. Patients with penetrating wounds of the chest and abdomen, once
provided with shelter and care, would also be better left undisturbed;
combinations of injuries might contra-indicate movement where any one of the
injuries alone might be a reason for evacuation. It is in these serious cases
that re-sorting after an interval of some hours is important. For example, a
wound of the abdomen may or may not involve internal damage. If after some
hours the general condition has improved or has not deteriorated it is probable
that vital organs have not been injured, and it may then be decided that
evacuation to hospital is indicated.

21. A good working basis for sorting casualties which a doctor might apply is
that treatment should be concentrated on those who, after a limited surgical
procedure, are likely to be alive in seven days time with a fair chance of
eventual recovery. The more complete the recovery that can be expected, the
higher would be the priority.

22. It has already been stated that the difficult decisions referred to above
and the prescription of the treatment which would follow such decisions,
should be undertaken by doctors; but this ideal may not be attainable,
especially in damaged areas forward of C.C.Cs from which casualties would be
collected. Sorting would be necessary on arrival at the C.C.C. because of the
limited resources available there. It might also be necessary to undertake
within the C.C.C. the periodical re-sorting, as their condition changes, of the
casualties awaiting evacuation, or being held. Not only must sorting be repeated
and continuous, it must be ruthless if it is to be effective: it would often be
necessary to give priority to the less severely injured casualties and have regard
to the nation’s need in the phase of recovery.

23. Among the many problems in the damaged area would be the care of those not
selected for evacuation. This and similar problems are not created by the
process of sorting; in the mass casualty situation there would always be
casualties who cannot be evacuated.   They would naturally all be made as
comfortable as possible while waiting; the point is that sorting, far from
creating additional problems, would be the best way of dealing with the problems
created by the overwhelming numbers.

 24. It is therefore clearly essential that as many people as possible should
understand the rudiments of first aid and home nursing (i.e. self help), that
 the trained first aiders in every organisation should be able to give clear
 and confident leadership in major emergencies to all available helpers, and
that they should be skilled in the difficult tasks which they will have to face.

25. Individuals trained in Mass Casualty Care (see paragraph 8 ) should
realise that, although the object of such training is to produce especially
skilled and self-reliant first aiders, they may have to undertake additional




                                         7
              /
             I
responsibilities in war which they axe not expected to undertake in peacetime.
As a mass casualty situation is brought under control however, and conditions
approach more closely to normal, so would first aiders be able to revert      j
progressively to standard practice, obtaining medical advice and assistance when
doctors axe once again available.

26. It is not intended to imply that training in Mass Casualty Care should be
regarded purely as preparation for wax. It is obviously of great value in peace­
time, not only for major disasters but for everyday emergencies; this is
perhaps particularly true of the nursing skills learnt.




                                         -   8 -
                                    A.
                               C H A P T E R     111


                          The Casualty Collecting Centre


27. A community based unit staffed by local medical, nursing and supporting
personnel catering for some 10,000 or so population.   Sorting is a prise
function of the C.C.C. The process of sorting would inevitably result in
the retention at C.C.Cs of casualties so seriously injured that expenditure
upon them of the limited resources must be postponed, efforts being concentrated
upon the treatment of those with better.prospects of restoration to adequate
function. The priorities of sorting and disposal of casualties must be adapted
to circumstances.   A higher proportion of the casualties than is anticipated
might be too seriously injured to be moved (even if this were possible) to hospital or
on the other hand, there might be an unexpectedly high proportion of lightly
injured. An understanding of the Home Defence problems together with informed
clinical judgement will be necessary if the C.C.C. is to reduce the loss of
life and limb to the minimum.

28.   In the circumstances of overwhelming numbers, there would rarely be time
for significant operative surgery at a C.C.C.More good    would comefrom
effective first aid and minor surgical measures. Where surgery is considered
immediately necessary to save life and where there are no other casualties for
whom medical attention would be more rewarding, surgical procedures should be
limited to about 20 minutes. The amount of surgery that should be done at a
C.C.C. would depend o m -

     (a)   Length of journey to hospital if feasible;

     (b)   availability of ambulance transport;

     (c)   availability of hospital facilities;

     (d)   the pressure of the number of casualties at the C.C.C. at the
           particular time.

29. All casualties fit to travel stand being transported pre-operatively better
than post-operatively. If the C.C.C. is tunable to clear casualties to hospitals,
more surgery might of course have to be undertaken. Tracheostomy should only be
carried out if no other means of maintaining a clear air-way, e.g. by posture,
are possible. Intravenous infusion of fluids would rarely be practicable at
a C.C.C. (see Chapter V paragraph 58). The following are some examples of
surgery that might be undertaken at a C.C.C.

     (a)   Control of accessible haemorrhage;

     (b)   completion of amputation;

     (c)   reduction of some simple fractures;

     (d)   suturing of suitable wounds (see Chapter 1Y paragraph 41 );

     (e)   relief of tissue tensions from haematomata and abscesses.




                                       - 9
Categorisation of Casualties

50.   The following are examples of categories which might be applicable in a
C.C.C.•“

      (a)   Irnnodlcutz Tsiejcutmznt [ H o s p i t a l ].

                 Only those fit to travel to hospital and to stand emergency
            surgery of short duration (up to 30 minutes) with a good chance of
            post-operative survival are included. (Surgeons in hospital would
            not attempt to shorten normally lengthy procedures; they would
            concentrate on those procedures which take up to 30 minutes under
            normal peacetime conditions.) Of these some might require life-
            saving treatment, examples being:-

               (i)    Severe haemorrhage from open wounds;

             (ii)     Incomplete amputations and severe crush wounds of the
                      extremities;

            (iii)     Most fractures of long bones;

             (iv)     Sucking chest wounds;

               (v)    Extensive wounds involving muscle;

             (vi)     Burns of between 15 and 25 per cent of the body surface
                      (see Chapter V);

            (vii)     Unconscious patients.

                 Cases of head injury without localising symptoms or other
            definite indications for surgery, provided a free air-way can be
            maintained, should recover with general nursing care but without
            specialised treatment.

      (b)   PcrfZiaMve. Tfiejx£me.n£.

            This category includes three sub groups;-

               (i)   The first group includes some deep wounds of the trunk, burns
                     between 25 and 1*0 per cent, compound fractures of skull,
                     severe multiple injuries. Minimal evacuation is the key here;
                     these cases should be held at the nearest place where they can
                     be made comfortable^ After surgical dressing and adequate
                     splinting, together with pain relieving drugs, they might in
                     time become fit to be transferred to hospital.

             (ii)    The second group comprises casualties with injuries more
                     severe than group (i). They should be cared for locally until
                     the medical services have brought the general situation under
                     control and elaborate surgical procedures can again be under­
                     taken. Examples from this group include gross facial injuries,
                     wounds of the trunk with obvious injury of internal organs,
                     extensive multiple injuries and severe burns.




                                                       - 10 -
            • (iii)   The third group consists of those very severely injured i
                      casualties who would be unlikely to survive even if unlimited
                      facilities were available. For these, only pain relieving drugs
                      and nursing care could be provided.                      ;

                          •     Even in this group it has been the experience in every war
                      that some patients will improve and from this follow two
                      important consequences.

                      First,there is no room for a hopeless attitude becausethere
                      would be some hope for all casualties who havesurvived long
                      enough to be rescued.

        I             Second, there would be need for repeated re-sorting as
        |             opportunity occurs.

                   It would be important to the morale of all concerned that it
             should be clearly understood that these patients too would receive
             hospital treatment as soon as possible, i.e. when road transport was
             easier and pressure on the hospitals was less severe. Any tendency to
             refer to such cases as are admitted to the Holding Unit of a C.C.C.
             as ’’moribund" etc. is to be deplored. They are sometimes called the
             "expectant" category and must be dealt with as though expected to live
             for it is no part of the function of the members of the casualty
             services to extinguish hopes of survival. All casualties in the Holding
             Unit should be re-examined by a doctor as regularly as possible to
             re-assess their condition and ensure that those whose condition
             justifies it may have the opportunity of evacuation to hospital.

      (c)    L ig h t Tiexvtmznt.

                  These would be mostly walking and sitting cases; many would have
             upper limb injuries. They should be treated once and once only and then
             transferred from the C.C.C. to the welfare services or to their own homes;
             rest centres until the situation comes under control. Some examples of   '
             injuries in this category are:-

                (i)   Contusions, abrasions and minor lacerations;

              (ii) Simple fractures not interfering with walking;

             (iii) Superficial burns (see Chapter V);

              (iv) Psychiatric disturbances•

51. It is probable that, owing to inevitable delay in the collecting and evacuation of
casualties (e.g. fall out conditions, road blockage), many surviving seriously injured cases
would not be seen by surgpons until many days after injury. The fact that such casualties
have survived in fair condition may well indicate that they have a fair prospect
of recovery. They should be held at the C.C.C. with treatment of infection
and prevention of further infection. The -crush syndrome would occur in some of
these cases.



 52. WHATEVER MAy BE THE DIFFICULTIES OF MASS CASUALTY SITUATIONS THEY WILL BE
RELIEVED, TO SOME EXTENT, IF APPROACHED WITH A MEASURE OF CONFIDENCE ENGENDERED
BY PREVIOUS TRAINING AW A STUDY OF THE PROBLEMS, AMD WITH A HUMANE ANV
ENCOURAGING ATTITUDE TOWARDS THE SUFFERERS.
        PA R T    n   - SOME SPECIAL MEDICAL CONSIDERATIONS


                               C H A P T E R      IV


                                     Trauma


33* Although sorting is of first importance, its purpose is, after all, to
lead to treatment. If more space has been given to sorting than will be given
to treatment, this is because the art of sorting is more difficult than the
application of such treatment as is likely to be available.

34. Since the exact situation cannot be anticipated it is intended only that
these notes should assist the doctor to establish clear general principles in
his mind. There are no rules which can be followed slavishly. With an under­
standing of the principles the doctor will be able to teach first aiders in
simple terms and to give rational answers to their questions.

35» Treatment commences at the site of rescue (first aid); if not completed it
is carried a stage further, either at .C.C.C. or hospital, according to
circumstances (Operative Procedures), and continues for a very long period as the
casualty situation is stabilised (Late Procedures).

36. V-Out Aid .
     (a)   Control of accessible haemorrhage by local pressure.

     (b)   Maintenance of a clear airway by positioning.

     (c)   Application of sterile or clean dressings.

     (d)   Splinting of fractures.

     (e)   Closure of minor clean lacerations by strapping orbandaging.

The first aider must "Stopthem bleeding; keep them breathing11, he must
remember his 'A.B.C.1 - Asphyxia, Bleeding, Control of fractures.

37* OpzAotLvo. Psioc.eduA&6:   (C.C.Cs    and Acute. H o 6 p ita t &).

     (a)   Control of haemorrhage.

     (b)   Reduction of simple fractures.

     (c) Establishing drainage of wounds where necessary.                   -------

     (d)   Cleaning and suturing of suitable lacerations.          (See paragraph^).

     (e)   Positioning and splinting of compound fractures with cleaning of the
           wound and closure or dressing as indicated.

     (f)   Amputation.

     (g)   Giving of pain relieving drugs and possibly other drugs and
           antibiotics.




                                         - 12 -
                                     \
      (h)   Administration of intravenous fluids (if available) for shock and
            fluid loss.

      (i)   Delayed primary suture.

58.   Late PAoceduneA    {H o&pitaZ oa G.G.C. a&teA ab ou t 6 even day& ok when
                          the. s i t u a t i o n aj> undeji c o n tA o l ) .

      (a)   Surgery of severe injuries in patients not at first expected to
            survive.

      (b)   Secondary suture.

      (c)   Re-reduction of fractures wherenecessary.

      (d)   Drainage of abscesses and         infectedwounds.

      (e)   Late treatment of burns.

      (f)   Skin grafting, etc.

 39. These procedures would sometimes present great technical difficulties as
a result of the unavoidably incomplete treatment of the early days. It is to
be hoped that expert surgical advice will by then be available for these
patients, who will usually have been evacuated to hospital.

40. There are some conditions which need special consideration:-

      (a)     UilC/3YU>CA,ouAn.<L&&. If this is due to simple concussion rapid and
            complete recovery with a minimum of medical attention is likely.
            These casualties are therefore of great importance to the first aid
            personnel. When death occurs it is usually the result of asphyxia
            due to inhalation of vomit or to the tongue dropping back. Stertorous
            breathing should not be allowed to continue in a concussed casualty;
            it is a sign of obstruction of the airway - usually by the tongue.
            Nursing in the semi-prone position is required and if restlessness
            occurs repeated repositioning is needed. When unconsciousness is
            prolonged for more than an hour and the casualty is not restless he
            should be turned regularly to prevent pressure sores. A lightly
            injured casualty, after instruction, could provide this single but
            essential care. The presence of paralysis indicates severe brain
            damage and a worse outlook with a corresponding change in priorities.
            Tracheostomy will not often be indicated or practicable.

      (b)   Sacking Ch&6t Wound. The theoretical consideration of this injury
            usually receives disproportionate attention beeause of its dramatic----
            nature but it is a rare occurrence. Early application of a large,
            firm airtight dressing can nevertheless be lifesaving.

      (c)   Bl a & t 7 n j u / U e 6 . The nature of megaton weapons is such that there will
            be no survivors near the point of explosion. By the time the blast
            wave has reached a distance where survival is possible it has changed
            its shape, so that it resembles less a sudden blow and more an immensely
            powerful push. People would certainly be injured by the blast causing
            masonry to fall on them etc., but the "pure" blast injury will probably




                                              - 13 -
      be uncommon. When it does occur it will present as ruptured ear
      drums, pulmonary symptoms and haemoptysis without visible damage to
      to the chest wall, or bursting wounds of the trunk, especially round
      the abdomen. Blast injury is mainly of academic interest. The mild
      cases would recover without treatment whereas the severe cases would
      need such treatment as the visible nature of their injuries and the
      facilities available determine.

(d)   TouJiYllqa<Lti>.
                    It is now generally considered that the application of
      a tourniquet has no place in the treatment of casualties except as a
      prelude to the planned amputation of a damaged limb. In a mass
      casualty situation the use of a tourniquet will usually mean the loss
      of a limb. Local manual pressure on a pressure point followed by
      bandaging over a firm narrow pad on the wound is much safer. The
      bandage must not be tight enough to obstruct the circulation, either
      venous or arterial. Elevation of the bleeding part is simple and can
      in many cases be completely effective. Where a tourniquet has been
      applied and is removed some bleeding from hyperaemia should be expected;
      its absence may, indeed, mean that the limb has been destroyed by the
      tourniquet. Unless the bleeding is very severe the tourniquet should
      not be re-applied. The bleeding can usually be controlled at this stage
      by firm though not tight bandaging if surgery is not available. It is
      probable that sometimes people will use tourniquets in spite of the
      above considerations. For this reason the symbol "Tm for tourniquet is
      being retained in the documentation of casualties.

(e)   Shock. The first priority in the treatment of shock is the relief of
      pain and fear. Immediate splinting of fractures, bandaging of wounds
      and elevation of limb will give considerable relief. Gentle and secure
      handling is essential. Pain-relieving drugs are indicated if available.
      Reassurance, when it can honestly be given, is of real value. Warming
      by application of heat is contra-indicated, but further heat loss
      should be prevented by putting the casualty under shelter and giving
      extra clothing or blankets to retain body heat. In shock the circulation
      of the skin and surface tissues is almost at a standstill and drugs
      injected subcutaneously may not be absorbed. Vomiting, which is common,
      would contra-indicate oral administration. Intravenous injection is
      ideal but deep intramuscular injection somewhere on the trunk is the
      next best route. A tablet of morphine held under the tongue provides
      a third alternative, which is effective. The danger of repeated doses
      must be remembered.

(f)   I n f e c t io n . There will be an extreme shortage of antibiotics, so that
      the main efforts against infection will have to be put into prevention.
      This includes early and strict attention to hygiene where casualties
      are collected together. Later, patients with wounds showing signs of
      infection or patients with other infections should as far as possible
      "be segregated from those remaining uninfected. The old established
      surgical principles of general and local rest, obliteration or drainage
      of dead space, drainage of abscesses and removal of foreign bodies will
      go a long way to mitigate the shortage of drugs.

(g)   K z itx & c lta tio n . Artificial respiration or any of the forms of cardiac
      massage are not likely to be indicated very often except when breathing
      or the heart action stops during an operative procedure. Time used in
      this way on casualties who have been so severely injured as to have
      stopped breathing will usually be more usefully spent on treating less
      severe injuries.


                                    -   Ik   -
Treatment o f C ertain Types o f Wound

41.   (a)    l n c l * e d u)ouncU . These are produced by flying glass or a blow by a
             blunt object splitting skin against underlying subcutaneous bone.
             They are usually longer than they are deep and are gaping, so that
             the depth of the wound can easily be seen. If they are clean the
             edges may be drawn together by loose stitching or strapping and
             healing will be hastened by this treatment. The patient should be
             warned to have the stitches or strapping removed if increasing pain,
             redness or swelling develops after the first day. This would
             indicate that the wound was infected and that discharges should be
             allowed to escape. If infection does not occur, the stitches or
             strapping can be removed after a week in the case of small wounds
             or ten days in larger wounds.

      (b)    Stab wound*. Here a small opening overlies a larger wound in the
             tissues underneath. It is impossible to see whether dirt has been
             driven in or what deep damage has been done. If time and facilities
             allow, the wound should be opened, explored, cleaned and then left
             open or sutured. In a mass casualty situation most of these wounds
             should just be dressed in the hope that they are clean. Patients
             should be warned that the onset of symptoms indicating infection (see
             (a) above) indicated that the wound needed medical attention to
             establish drainage.

      (c)     LaaeAated uiound*. These are irregular wounds with bruising and
              abrasion of the surrounding skin produced by blunt objects or by
              tearing or crushing. Even if no dirt is introduced, much damage of
              underlying tissue would probably be present and this devitalised
              tissue would very likely become infected. Suturing would therefore
              be dangerous and only protective dry dressings should be applied, the
              wounded part of the body being kept at rest and elevated if possible.
              The appearance of signs of infection would be an indication for expert
              medical care. If infection has not occurred by the fifth day delayed
              primary suture could be performed. This consists of drawing the edges
              together loosely with drainage without any buried stitches or ligatures
              to hasten healing and produce a better scar. Although the fifth to
            • seventh days are ideal for this type of suture it can be performed even
              many days later (as long, in fact, as the skin edges are still
              moveable by undercutting) if circumstances prevent earlier treatment.

      (d)     PenztnatLng wound* ofa the. tAunk. These wounds may have caused serious
              damage to internal organs. In peacetime treatment would consist of
              exploration of the wound at leisure under general anaesthetic in a
              properly equipped theatre. Such an operation may take two hours or
              more. Since four to six properly selected casualties could be treated
              in that time, those patients with penetrating wounds would have to
            . wait until the first rush was over. If no serious internal damage had
              been sustained, recovery would proceed with perhaps nothing more
              severe than a wound infection. When internal organs have been injured
              this will be shown by a steady deterioration in the general condition
              of the casualty, as shown by thirst, restlessness and rising pulse rate
              This diagnosis would then be taken into account in re-assessing the
              priority of the case.




                                             - 15 -
       (e)     Coirpound ^ m c t u A Z . Where there is a fractured bone exposed to
               contamination in a wound the treatment should be immediate full"surgical
               cleansing of the wound and suture of the skin to prevent entry of
               bacteria. This should be done within twelve hours of the injury and
               certainly before the elapse of 2b hours, by which time bacterial
               infection would be established. In a mass casualty situation this
               would scarcely be possible and treatment by first aiders must be limited
               to splinting and dressing to prevent increased displacement and
               additional contamination. At C.C.C. it might be possible in some
               cases to reduce the fracture by simple manipulation followed by the
               re-application of splints and dressings. By this time many hours would
               probably have elapsed; at this relatively late stage such patients
               would not travel well and should generally be held at the C.C.C. complex. The
               outcome would depend very much on what type of bacteria developed in
               the wound and recovery might take place in some cases. In others
               overwhelming infection would occur so that amputation might become
               necessary as a life saving measure. Although good results are nearly
               always obtained with the aid of modern peacetime surgery, these cases
               would present a grave problem as they did before modern surgical
               techniques were developed.

        (f)    I l u k cifi i.n o ta tio n i.n 60tm s p e c ia l wound*. Wounds of the face and
               scalp have a low incidence of infection and primary suture can be -used
               with more safety here than elsewhere. The same principles apply to a
               less extent in the case of superficial wounds of the head.

                    Wounds near the anus involving muscle of buttock or thigh on the
               other hand frequently develop serious infections so that primary suture
               should not be used in these sites if the wound goes deeper than the
               skin and fat.

                    No buried sutures or ligatures should be inserted in any wounds in
               the early stages because such foreign material increases the risk of
               infection. This means that tendon or nerve suture would have to be
               left until later and that care should be taken not to re-start bleeding
               during cleansing before suture.

A n tib io tic s .                                     *

42. The probable shortage of these drugs would m ean that they should be reserved
for treatment of established infection and not used prophylactically.




                                         - 16 -
                                 CI A P TE E        V

                                       Bums                               |

45. B u m s would present one of the most difficult clinical problems after nuclear
attack but in the majority of situations F.A.Ps and C.C.Cs would be dealing with
the late rather than the early effects of bums. The importance of first aid and
self help is therefore of vital significance if many lives are to be saved.

E ffects o f Thermal Radiation from Nuclear Bombs

44* Thermal radiation (heat flash) from nuclear devices consists of visible
light rays and the invisible ultra-violet and infra-red radiations. These
radiations represent about 35 per cent of the energy output from the bomb and
result jin temperatures of a solar order. Burns would be caused in several ways:-

      (a)   Flash burns from the fire-ball radiation itself.

      (b)   Flame burns from primary fires kindled by the initial radiation and
            secondary fires springing up in devastated areas.

      (c)   Retinal burns from the initial flash. These would be rare:   the final
            visual disability is said to be small.

’’Flash dazzle" is not a burn but is an interference with vision due to the
exhaustion of visual purple. This lasts from a few minutes to several hours,
and could cause much personal anxiety. Short lived complete blindness can occur.

     If the atmosphere were free from dust, the intensity of the radiations would
decrease by a factor proportional to the square of the distance from the fire­
ball, but in fact the dispersed dust particles bring about a greater diminution.
This particularly applies to the more injurious ultra-violet radiations.
Nevertheless a person exposed in the open to the whole duration of an air burst
from a 20-kiloton (Hiroshima bomb) at li miles would receive third degree burns,
while similar effects would be observed at 8 miles from a 2 Megaton bomb.

4 6 . The fire-ball from a 20 kiloton bomb lasts for about 1\ seconds whereas
that from a 2 Megaton bomb lasts for 6 seconds. This relatively long duration
lends emphasis to the need for all persons caught in the open to take such
immediate cover as they can. They should "dive for the shadow" of any solid
object between them and the explosion. If no cover is available, they should
lie face down with the hands under the body, using any available material to
cover the head. In this respect woollen clothing is a better protection than
cotton and light coloured material better than dark. Goggles and gloves would
also provide some protection.

C la s s ific a tio n o f Bum Wounds

47. The simplest classification is that into superficial and deep, although
an intermediate second degree is often described -

     SupeAfccUaZ
     The epidermis only is involved and regeneration of skin from the underlying
dermis can proceed satisfactorily. It appears as an erythema. An intermediate
stage shows blister formation, which can vary between the superficial and deep
varieties. • If this type of burn becomes infected, areas of superficial degree
may become converted to the deep degree.


                                           - 17 -
                                       A
       Peep, on f u l l ThLcknPAA Bam

     The dermis is destroyed. Satisfactory skin regeneration will not take
place from areas of destruction larger than a sixpence. The appearance
varies from a pallid greyish white surface to an adherent dark dry coagulum.
It is often difficult to distinguish between the degrees, especially-in the
early stages. A large burn will almost certainly contain areas of all three.
The superficial b u m is likely to be very painful, but the deep b u m can be
quite painless because of destruction of the pain nerve endings.

The C lin ic a l Problem

48*    There are three main hazards with burn wounds

        (a)   Shock.

              Infection.

        (c)   Scarring.

Shock

49.     (a)   Neurogenic shock is immediate and can be severe. Recovery is usually
              spontaneous if adequate first aid is given, and the patient handled
              gently and with minimal interference.

   .    00    Oligaemic shock developing within seven hours or less is the great
              danger. It is due to the continuing loss of body fluids containing
              proteins-, from the burnt surface and into the tissue spaces. This
              may be rapid for 1+8 hours but continues till the burn is dry. In a
              50 per cent body surface b u m (B.S.B.) about half the circulating
              body fluid can be lost within three hours and 13 litres of fluid may
              be needed in the first forty-eight hours. If intravenous therapy is
              not available, about 70 per cent of the fatal cases would die within
              three days of the injury.

50. The degree of shock to be anticipated in any given case can to a certain
extent be foretold from the area of the b u m (see Figure III). In peace-time
it is usually accepted that burns exceeding 18 per cent of the body surface in
adults or 12 per cent in children, will need intravenous treatment.
                              •
51. Unless neurogenic shock is marked, the patient may initially appear
remarkably well. After a period of several hours however, rapid deterioration
may set in with an alarming drop in blood pressure. This is especially so if
the patient is not kept at complete rest.

52. Inthe mass casualty situation a burn of more than   20 per cent of the
body area carries some danger to life and burns of over 30 per cent are likely
to be fatal.

Assessment o f Body Areas

53* The area covered by the outstretched fingers and palm of the casualty •
represents one per cent of the body surface.




                                        - 18 -
54* The Rule of Nine is used in estimating area of burn (see Figure III).    The
assessment of fluid needs is given in paragraph 78.




                                                                   Intravenous
                                                                      Litres

  Whole Head




                          L Front    18%                                2\
                          '* Back    18JS                               2    i


  Back and Front n




  Back and Front                                                        2s




                           Figure I I I




                               - 19 -
In fe c tio n

 55. The serum oozing from the burnt surface is the perfect culture medium for
organisms and severe infection with toxaemia easily occurs. The newly burnt
surface is probably sterile, but contamination is inevitable under disaster
conditions. Infection can easily convert any burn into one of deeper degree.
The commonest serious infection of a burn is due to Staphylococcus aureus.
Pseudomonas pyocyanea is also frequently found and is relatively resistant to
antibiotics. The haemolytic streptococcus, in the absence of an effective
antibiotic, could easily bring about an uncontrollable spread of infection
in a C.G.C.

Scarring

 56. This late result of a burn occurs where the growing layer of the skin has
been destroyed and where repair has taken place by granulation and fibrosis.
This tissue ultimately contracts, causing deformity which may lead to severe
disablement. Skin grafting can be done to avoid this state of affairs and to
provide a new skin surface. It is usually performed when the dead tissue has
separated or been removed about a fortnight after the burn has occurred, and
is a full hospital operating theatre procedure.

Other Consequences

57. Anaemia and loss of body protein are inevitable in any significant burn
and both militate against healing processes and predispose to complications
such as bedsores.  Oliguria can also occur, especially if intravenous therapy
is not used or is inadequate, and, if persistent, may lead to renal failure
and death.

The Treatment o f Bum Wounds

F lu id Loss

 58 . Vast numbers of burn cases with an injury exceeding 18 per cent of the
body surface would be found, and all would really need intravenous therapy if
they were to have a      reasonable chance of   recovery. It is doubtfulif    this
method of resuscitation would        in fact be practicable other than inan   acute
hospital and in any case the quantities of fluid required would be enormous.
Furthermore the time element would be extremely significant. Few cases would
reach a C.C.C.    within six hours, and by this time oligaemic shock would be
well established. Once this has occurred the patient would probably not be
fit for transport back to an acute hospital.

Local Treatment

59.    There are two methods available

       (a)      The, a p p lic a tio n   occJtu&lve. dbi2A&*Mg&.

             This method is prodigal of dressings, which would probably be in
             short supply.   It permits the transport of patients with relative
             ease, but once such a dressing becomes soaked with serum it is no
             longer an occlusive dressing and invites infection. Oedema
           . developing under bandages may lead to vascular occlusion.




                                                - 20 -
     (b)   The. zxpo&u/ie. method.            .

           This method, whereby a natural coagulum is allowed to form over the
           burnt surface, is a very economical       method of treatment. The coagulum
           takes about three days to form. It is ideally suited to burns of the
           trunk and limbs confined to one     surface, which can be treatedunder
           clean and warm surroundings, and    in    circumstances in which thesurface
           can be kept clean. Hone of these conditions is likely to be found in
           a   C.C.C., but the exigencies of the numbers to be treated and of the
           supply situation might demand the use of this method.

60.There is   an urgent need for a universal primary burn dressing, which can be
applied early in the treatment, and of a nature that will permit it to be left
in situ for a week or more: various special dressings are under investigation.

First Aid Treatment by First Aid Personnel

61. TAan&pOAt. Severely burnt cases should be treated as stretcher cases.
Sudden death has been known to occur following exertion.

62. L ocal TJiexLtment. Normally no local treatment should be attempted other than
to cover the area, if exposed, with a clean dressing well beyond the limits of
the lesion. An initial wet compress may in fact be the most soothing procedure,
but clean water might not be available under disaster conditions. Clothing
should not be removed nor blisters broken. Constricting articles, i.e. wrist-
watches, belts, shoes or rings, should however be removed or cut off if necessary.
Burnt limbs should be elevated.

 65. Facial and perineal burns are best treated by exposure. Flash burns of the
face are associated with much oedema, and temporary blindness may follow the gross
eyelid swelling. 'The blink reflex is so swift that the eye itself is unlikely
to have been damaged, so that the patient can be relieved of this anxiety. Facial
burns can also be associated with burns of the mouth and trachea, especially
where the burn has been received in a closed space such as a burning building,
and these cases might need an urgent tracheostomy at the C.C.C.

 64* The danger of oedema is particularly significant in burns of the fingers
and hand. The whole hand and fingers should be lightly bandaged as a "boxing
glove", and the hand elevated.

 65* Apply burn dressings dry. They will become moist spontaneously all too
quickly, and a wet dressing is no longer a protective dressing.

 66. VZuAjd Re.pJtcLCQjme.nt. Thirst is an early symptom, and fluids should be given
by mouth, unless vomiting or a suspected intra-abdominal injury is present. The
fluid should contain half a teaspoonful (2.5 g*) of salt to the pint. The drinks
should be small and frequent, and in the case of a child limited to 2-3 ounces
every twenty minutes to half hour. It is unlikely that anaesthetics would be
administered in these early stages. The total intake of fluid in the first
2k hours is of great importance, but it is not possible to expect that first aid
personnel could ever measure and record fluid intake "at the coal face". In
effect, ‘severely burnt casualties should be encouraged to drink as much as they
can, while all cases should drink as thirst dictates. Paragraph 87 refers in
more detail to fluid requirements in the first 1*8 hours.




                                     - 21 -
6?»   Wa/unth.   Merely conserve body heat;   Do not overheat,

68. S e d a tio n . Reassurance might be the only possible therapy at this stage,
but the simpler anodynes might be given if available. When morphia is available
it should be given by intra-mus cular injection on the trunk or as a sub-lingual
tablet I grain.

Treatment a t the Casualty Collecting Centre

69. It is at this point in the casualty evacuation that the greatest problems would
arise, since by new the establishment of shock in patients with severe burns
would be virtually inevitable.  If by chance the level of shock is not too great,
and the journey back to an acute hospital can be completed within two hours, then
a burn case of moderate severity would probably best be transferred to the
hospital straight away. Those who have to be kept in the unit would present-
serious problems of resuscitation and of local treatment;  it must be realised
that much of the treatment would have to be far from what is normally accepted as
good practice.

70. L o ca l T A & a tm nt. It is doubtful whether formal cleaning of a b u m should be
undertaken at a C.C.C.         Such a procedure must never be done before shock has
been controlled and in any case needs full sterile precautions.

71.   If the initialfirst aid dressing becomes soaked with exudate and if the
general state of the patient permits, then a new dressing should be applied,
making the best use of such "asepsis" as is available. The deepest layers of the
dressing should not be removed. Tulle gras if available is valuable next to the
burnt surface, covered by gauze and cotton wool. Limbs should be elevated, using
some form of splint to support them.

72.   F-ing eA BuAni . The use of tulle gras is particularly valuable, as it can be
applied as a dressing right .down to the web between the fingers. Ideally,
fingers should be mobilised at least once a day and left in the "position of
function" with the fingers in moderate flexion and the thumb in partial opposition
and lying in front of the palm - this position is achieved by the "boxing glove"
dressing, which also helps to control oedema. The hand should be elevated.

73 • Hon-CAACsm^QAzntial TAunk and Limb Busuu: Head and Week. If dressings are
in short supply it might be necessary to treat these cases by the exposure method
which in any case has definite advantages where patients are not being moved.
Exposure makes for difficulties in transport since the burnt area will have to
be protected from trauma and possible contamination.  It would,however, generally
be best to treat facial burns without dressings even when the patient is being
transported.

74.   The principle of the treatment is to expose the lesion to air under clean
conditions, when a coagulum will form over the wound in from a few hours to a
few days. Movement of the area is undesirable because it cracks the coagulum
but such cracking does not necessarily interfere with healing if infection can
be avoided.   Ideally these burns should be cleaned once the general condition
of the patient is satisfactozy and before any definite coagulum has formed. This
should be done under clean surroundings, when the wound is gently swabbed with
one per cent Cetrimide and the blisters opened. It can be done under sedation
provided by well diluted intravenous morphia given very slowly.   The surface can
be sprayed with penicillin and lactose powder several times a day while the
coagulum is forming.   In any case antibiotic cover is most desirable and local’
application is more economical than systemic treatment in small burns, because
high concentrations are attained with small dofees.


                                          - 22 -
75. The exposure method should not be used for burns of the hand and deep burns
of the eyelid.

76. E y e lid BuJini. Deep burns of the eyelid readily lead to contracture due to
fibrosis. This results in a permanent exposure of the cornea and b3.indness will
follow if the condition is not corrected quickly. Tarsorrhaphy is not an
effective protection as the stitches tend to be pulled out by the contracting lid.
The surface of the lid should be covered with tulle gras or kept moist with saline
solution. Hospital treatment is needed at the earliest possible moment. Cocaine
must never be instilled into an eye.

77* In h a la tio n BuAnb. These represent an immediate hazard to life as obstructive
oedema can arise very quickly. Laryngostomy or tracheostomy may be necessary,
but may be very difficult to perform if the neck tissues are also burnt. In the
presence of cervical swelling, the trachea is much further from the surface than
normally. These operations should be carried out by doctors because of the
technical difficulties. Because of the swelling the ordinary tracheostomy tube
may not be long enough, although a Durham's Lobster Tail tube may suffice. A
rubber tube, split longitudinally for an inch or so and with the flaps pierced
to take tapes might make a useful emergency tube.

78* Fl a i d Re.placeme.nt,  In the absence of intravenous fluids, reliance will have
to be on salt and water by mouth (or in part, rectaliy). This         should be given in
small and frequent amounts, often to the limits of tolerance, but it must be
remembered that gastric dilatation and vomiting often occur in burn cases. One aim
of this fluid intake is to achieve a urinary output of about two pint s in twenty-
four hours. A severely burnt patient may need to take up to fifteen per cent of
his own body weight per twenty-four hours, in the form of oral fluids. A commonly
accepted formula is to give two ounces of fluid for every nine per cent of the
body surfa,ce burnt, every twenty minutes for the first eight hours, and then half
this amount every twenty minutes for the next sixteen to forty-eight hours. (See
L itA e Index, paragraph 87.) A child of ten years may need up to four to five
pints in the day, while an infant of one year could take one pint at an ounce an
hour approximately. If many burnt patients have to be cared for, it follows that
fluid administration will have to be deputed to some helpers other than nursing
staff.

 79* Sedation. A patient in pain and distress needs morphia. It is best given
intravenously or intra-muscularly since absorption from a sub-cutaneous
injection in a shocked patient is usually very slow. Repeated injections of
morphia are rarely needed and over-sedation should be avoided.

 80. H u tA itio n . If a burnt patient had to be kept at a C.C.C. for any length
of time it would be necessary to provide as high protein a diet as possible.

The Problem of Priorities

81. Because of the variety of circumstances likely to occur in nuclear war, the
following remarks can only be used as a guide. The great difficulty would be the
time that elapses between the occurrence of the burn and effective treatment.
Once significant shock has developed the patient would probably not stand
transport back to a hospital over bad roads.




                                 - 23 -
82. The lightly injured case with a superficial b u m of less than ten per cent
surface area may have to be treated initially at a Welfare Centre or at home.
He could be seen later at hospital (or at a C.C.C. ) when circumstances permit.
The moderately burnt casualty in reasonable shape might be transferable
immediately to hospital if the journey is short and shock is not established.
The fifteen per cent to thirty per cent B.S.B. cases would be particularly
suitable, as with proper resuscitation practically all of these would be saved.
If this movement is not possible such cases will have to be treated at a
C.C.C. , using any intravenous therapy that is available.

83.- The more seriously burnt case with a poor prognosis should be retained in
the C.C.C.   In this context age worsens the outlook. The mortality in the
over sixties is ten times greater than in younger age groups, and burns of only
ten to twenty per cent carry mortality of sixty to seventy per cent. A certain
number of these patients might survive and might recover sufficiently to permit
Of their transport to hospital several days later.




Intravenous Therapy for B u m s

84* The problem of intravenous therapy for the case of b u m shock is a difficult
one. Complete control calls for a wide clinical experience and methods of
assessment which would not normally be available at a C.C.C. ; it is expensive
of staff time and supplies of fluid are unlikely to be sufficient. Infusions
should not be started unless they can lead up to complete treatment; this would
exclude casualties who are selected for early evacuation to hospital. These
notes have however been included for those interested.

85• There are several empirical formulae available, some of which include the
use of both colloids and electrolytes. The use of the more complicated formulae
would involve greater difficulties and possible complications than would be
warranted in a C.C.C.    There is a very real danger of over-loading the
circulation with water and electrolyte with the production of pulmonary oedema,
and other dangerous effects.

86, The essential need in the first twenty-four hours is to maintain the blood
volume and this is best done by the use of plasma or dextran. It is true that
there is a fall in serum sodium during the first day, but there are dangers in
giving too much normal saline intravenously. Dextran is available in two
distinct forms, i.e. in normal saline and in five per cent dextrose solution.
In both varieties it interferes with subsequent cross-matching of blood.

87. The L W ie Index. The numbers in the third column of Figure III give the
number of litres of dextran or plasma required in the first twenty-four hours
for a burn of the area depicted. If more than two litres of fluid are required,
it would be advisable not to give more than two litres made up in saline; the
rest could be given in five per cent dextrose solution. Half the quantity should
be given in the first eight hours, and the remainder spread over the next
sixteen hours. Metabolic requirements can be met by two litres of five per
cent dextrose given by mouth.     Even in very extensive bums the maximum quantity
of intravenous fluid should never exceed six and one half litres. For
the second twenty-four hours, half the above quantities should suffice in so




                                         -   2k   -
far as the intravenous component is concerned. Urine output is a useful guide in
the control of shock, in that a flow of between thirty to seventy millilitres per
hour (say one to two ounces) measured by an indwelling catheter is satisfactory.
There will always be a reduction of flow in the first twenty-four hours, as after
major surgical operations. The reduced requirements for children are as follows

            10-15   years need three-quarters of adult needs

             5-10     11   "   one-half of adult needs

            2-5            "   one-third of adult needs

            Under 2 "      "   one-fifth of adult needs



                                     NoteA
      (i)     The standard British bottle of intravenous fluid (blood) contains
     5 k 0 ml. i.e. virtually half a litre.

     (ii)    Drips per minute        T ..       ,   ,      . . n x
                  twelve         =   litres Per     (approximately).




                                     - 25 -
                              CHAPTER          71


                                   Radiation




General Considerations

88.  After a thermo-nuclear attack on a civilian population, before the mass
casualty situation has been restored to something approaching a conventional one,
it might be impossible to give hospital treatment to medical cases including
those suffering from the effect of ionising radiation. Radiation sickness will
however become a problem on a large scale about two or three weeks after the
attack because of the occurrence, in all but the most severe cases, of a latent
period between the preliminary symptoms of malaise, nausea and vomiting which
occur during the first day or two and the onset of true symptoms of the active
phase of the disease.

89. At this time it is probable that the hospital services would predominantly
be occupied with the care of cases of trauma and b u m s and it is unlikely that
acute or even support hospitals would be available for cases of radiation
sickness, except in damage free areas affected by fall-out only. The majority
of these patients would need to be held in improvised accommodation organised
by the local authority, looked after by relatives and volunteers working under
the general supervision and guidance of general practitioners and qualified
nurses - district nurses and health visitors.
t

90. In instructing Home Defence personnel who might have to deal with
radiation casualties it should be made clear that the human body can overcome
very considerable doses of radiation and return to a useful life, and because
of this trend to spontaneous recovery it is most important for them always to
adopt an optimistic and reassuring attitude. They should also understand that
in this situation although there is no specific treatment for radiation sickness,
the lives of many patients can be saved simply by assisting nature with the
basic methods of home nursing care, particularly rest, symptomatic care and
by preventing and treating infection.




                                     - 26 -
 Radiation Physics


91.   X-rays; alpha, beta and gamma radiations emitted by radioactive materials;
 and neutrons emitted in nuclear reactions all produce biological effects
 because they ionise (cause electrons to separate from their parent atoms) water
 and other more complex molecules in the cells through which they pass, with
 subsequent chemical action. All of these types of ionising radiation are, or
 have been, used in the treatment of disease with results which may be
 beneficial to the patient, though the effect on the individual treated cells
 is invariably destructive.

92.      Some characteristics of ionising radiation.



      Type        Nature              Typical source          Penetrability

 Alpha        Positively charged     Radium                Stopped by a layer of
             particles identical                           clothing or the horny
             with nuclei of                                layer of the skin.
             helium atoms.

 Beta        Negatively charged      Many radioisotopes:   100 times greater than
             particles idential      fission products      alpha particles: can
             with electrons          e.g. Strontium 90     penetrate a few milli­
                                                           metres of tissue.

 Gamma       Similar to very         Cobalt 60: may        Not strongly absorbed
  Rays       short X-ray             accompany             in air: capable of deep
                                     emission of beta      penetration into the
                                     rays                  body.

 X-rays      Electro-magnetic       Produced when          Capable of deep
             radiations analagous   electrons strike       penetration into the
             to light, but of       a suitable "target”    body.
             shorter wavelength     as in an X-ray tube

 Neutrons    Uncharged particles    Fission of             Will travel up to about
             found in the atomic    Uranium 235 or 233     700 yards in air; capable,
             nucleus                                       of reasonably deep
                                                           penetration into body.

93.   The technical language of radiation physics and biology tends to be
 confusing to the non-expert and in these notes the roentgen (r) is the only
 measure of radiation to which reference is made. Roentgen units measure the
 total radiation dose and are calculated from the number of ions produced per
 cubic centimetre of air irradiated. This can be measured fairly easily whilst




                                     - 27 -
 the number of ions produced in tissue cannot. In body tissue, which is about
 1.000 times denser than air, the same dose in roentgens will produce about
 1.000 times as many ions per c.c. of tissue. Dose rates are expressed in
 roentgens per hour, or other suitable unit of time. The roentgen applies most
 specifically to the measurement of X- or gamma radiation but with some
 limitations it can also be used as a measure of alpha and beta particle doses.

9 k.   The roentgen is of no use in measuring neutron dose, as the neutron,
 being uncharged, does not produce ions directly. Instead, ions are produced
, indirectly by processes which depend on the energy (speed) of the neutrons.
  Fast neutrons collide with the nuclei of atoms and produce ions by recoil.
  Slow neutrons react with hydrogen to form ’'heavy” hydrogen and a gamma ray,
 which causes ionisation.

 Radiation E ffects o f the Explosion

 In it ia l

95.   About 15 to 20 per cent of the aiergy released by the explosion of an
 atomic or thermo-nuclear weapon is in the form o f ionising radiation and all
 types defined in paragraph91 are involved. Alpha and beta particles have only
 a range of a few feet and can be discounted insofar as initial radiation is
 concerned. Neutrons with a maximum range of less than half a mile are not
 likely to be a serious hazard since anyone within +hat range is likely to be
 killed by heat or blast or by gamma rays. Beyond this distance gamma rays form
 the initial radiation hazard, but in- megaton explosions the risk of being
 killed by heat is much greater than that of initial gamma radiation, due to
 the wider range of total destruction by heat.

 Residual (F a ll-o u t)

96.   After a high air burst all danger from ionising radiation is over within
 a minute, but after a low air or ground burst the situation is more conqolex.
 In addition to the initial radiation there is the continuing danger of
 cumulative irradiation due to the contamination of the area round the crater
 and to the fall-out, downwind of the point of burst (ground zero), of debris
 and dust contaminated by radioactive fission products which emit beta as well
 as gamma radiation. The overall jpattern of fall-out distribution from the
 multiple bursts making up the total attack would be the major factor determining
 the conduct of home defence operations. Fall-out presents two separate
 hazards:

        (a)   Gamma radiation which can reach the body from fall-out deposited over
              a wide area.

        (b)   Contact hazard of radioactive dust etc. deposited on skin or hair,
              and clothing, or gaining access to the body through wounds or in
              contaminated food or water or by inhalation.

 Reduction o f In te n s ity o f Radiation

 Shielding

97.   Initial gamma rays are considerably more energetic and penetrating than
 residual radiation from fall-out. Both initial and residual radiation are
 reduced in intensity by passage through materials to an extent which depends


                                             - 28 -
 on the density of the material. The thickness of shield needed to reduce the
 gamma dose-rate by half is called the "half-value” thickness of the particular
 shielding material (see below).

       Shielding                 Half-value thickness in inches against gamma rays
       Material
                                          Initial               Fall-out

       Steel                               1.5                   0.7

       Concrete                            6.0                   2.2

       Earth                               7-5                    3.3

       N.B.    One thousand feet of air is approximately equivalent to six inches of
               concrete. Each additional "half value" thickness will again reduce
               the dose transmitted by half e.g. U . U inches of concrete will reduce
               the fall-out dose to one-quarter, 6.6'inches to one-eighth, and so on.

 Radioactive Decay

98.   Even a very small piece of radioactive matter contains many millions of
 atoms and it is entirely a matter of chance when any particular atom will
 disintegrate or decay into a stable non-radioactive form. This process of decay
 cannot be influenced by heat, pressure or chemical reaction, but the rate can be
 measured. A convenient method expressing this is the "half-life", that is, the
 time by which half of the atoms originally present will have decayed. The half-
 life is a constant for each isotope and offers a convenient means of identifying
 it. Half-lives vary from millionths of a second to millions of years.

99-   rhe. Se.veM-Te.ntfu RuZe. states that the intensity of radiation falls by a
 factor of ten as the time lengthens by a factor of seven, and enables quick
 calculations to be made based on a single measurement at a known time. This is
 of particular value in home defence operations in assessing the rate of decay
 of fall-out radiation. Its application is illustrated below for a dose rate
 of lOOr per hour measured at one hour after explosion.

       Time after burst     Time factor      Dose rate r.p.h.    Dose rate factor

        1 hour               1                      100                  1

        7 hours              7                      10                  0.1

       2 days (1*9 hours)    7x7                     1                  0.01

       2 weeks               7x7x7                   0.1                0.001 etc.

 Protection against Radiation

100. It is not considered relevant to deal with radiation protection in detail
in these notes. Nevertheless, instructors should never lose the opportunity of
emphasising that though the only protection against initial rartint.ion is to be
under adequate shielding when the flash occurs, radiation sickness from residual
fall-out is largely preventable. Even without the availability of shelters
prepared in advance, the simple policy of seeking the best available
protection and staying there until advised by a responsible authority to come
out, would greatly reduce the fall-out hazard.


                                    - 29 -
101,   Emphasis should be placed on the following points*

       (a)   In an area already covered by fall-out, the gamma radiation hazard
             would be far greater than any hazard from radioactive dust which in
             any case would be negligible indoors.
             The first essential would be to get inai.de a building as far below
             the roof as possible and behind the thickest available walls. A
             below ground basement can cut tho exposure by at least one-tenth
             of the outside level, the safest place would be the central part
             of the house on the ground floor. Shielding could be improved
             considerably by blocking windows with bricks, earth, books or
             other heavy material.

       (b)   Individuals caught in the open while fall-out is coming down, have a
             double reason for seeking shelter quickly so as to reduce 'the time of
             exposure both to the deposition of radioactive dust and to gamma
             radiation. However from the time of the explosion to the deposition
             of fall-out a period of 20 - J>0 minutes is available in which to peek
             shelter.
             If contamination with radioactive dust is suspected, as soon as
             possible after taking cover, all outer clothing should be removed
             and placed in a room or cupboard separate from the refuge room,
             and then the hands, head and neck should be thoroughly washed and
             scrubbed with soap and water, paying particular attention to the
             finger nails.




                                        - 30 -
102.            E ffects o f Whale-Body Penetrating Io nising Radiation

                   Body System
 Total Dose
                  Predominantly                      Effects
In Roentgens
                    Affected

Up to 200/                           75# - Little or no obvious symptoms.
      250
                                     25$ - Within
                                            2k hours - Nausea and vomiting.

                                         -    After 2
                                              days      - Mild symptoms as below.


250 - 350         Haemopoietic       Within U hours     - nausea and vomiting:
                                                           weakness and lassitude
                                     After 2 days    - Latent Period (symptom free)
                                     2 weeks onwards - possible loss of hair
                                     About 3 weeks   - temperature, followed by
                                                         purpuric symptoms, ulceration
                                                        of mouth and pharynx, etc.
                                     23% deaths in 3 - 5 weeks
                                     6 - 7 weeks     - convalescence begins in 75?


350 - 600 +       Gastro­            Within 2 - k
(li50r = Half      intestinal         hours               nausea and vomiting: profound
lethal dose*                                               lassitude
man)                                 After 2 days         Shorter Latent Period
                                     About 2 weeks
                                      or less             profuse intractable diarrhoea
                                                          followed by purpuric
                                                           symptoms as above if patient
                                                           survives.
                                     75# - deaths
                                      within 2 - U
                                      weeks               Convalescence very prolonged
                                                           in favourable cases.


Very high -       Brain and
2,000 + (these     C.N.S.            Almost immediate convulsions and coma;     100#
levels are                            deaths within 1 week.
used to treat
tumours, appli ed
only over a
smallpart of
the body)



                  The half lethal dose (LD50) is the quantity of radiation which
                  will kill half the number of a sample of animals exposed to it.



                                     - 31 -
                   I




                 I
      Incidence of Radiation Casualties          ,                               '

 103. It is absolutely impossible, in view of the many variables, to forecast
 the numbers of radiation casualties which might be expected from a nuclear
 incident, or indeed even to determine the relative importance as casualty
 producers of the three forms of energy - blast, heat and radiation.

           (The use, in a confined battle, of "tactical weapons" of only a
      few kiloton equivalents or less, might well lead to considerably greater
      relative significance of radiation as a casualty producer but such
      circumstances are of more concern to the Armed Services than to the
      training of >101116 defence volunteers to meet the consequences of total
      nuclear war).

 The Air-Burst Bomb as a casualty producer

 104. In the case of a high-level (air) burst, all potential casualties would
 have received within one minute the total radiation dose which will cause
 radiation sickness (200r and upwards). With the air-burst "nominal" bombs at
 Nagasaki and Hiroshima many more casualties resulted from the effects of
 blast on buildings and from fires than from radiation, and on the basis of
 tests and scaling laws, an even greater preponderance of heat effects would
 be anticipated with megaton weapons.

 105. Protective measures, however, are likely to be relatively more effective
 against heat and blast effects than against radiation, so that considerable
 numbers of radiation casualties, in many cases uncomplicated by other injuries,
 are to be anticipated.

 The Ground-Burst Bomb as a casualty producer

 106. In the case of a low-level (ground) burst, in addition to the hazard of
 initial radiation described above, there is the cumulative risk of exposure
 to radiation in the areas subsequently affected by fall-out so that it may
 take several days or even weeks to build up to the critical total radiation
 dose of 200r plus, which would cause clinical radiation sickness. The first
 aid and hospital services may therefore expect to encounter radiation
 casualties fcr several weeks after the attack.

 Recognition of Persons at Risk (Potential Radiation Casualties)

  107. Broad probabilities relating to exposure to radiation may be estimated
  from scientific data based on the size of the missile, the type of burst,
  calculation of fall-out intensity zones, and so on. This information, which
  is of immense value in the operational control of home defence, would be of
• little value in the individual case, in view of the wide variances in individual
  protection during the time at risk.  Ideally, each person should have two
  dosimeters, one "flash" and the other "cumulative", but clearly this is
  impracticable.  It is possible that a cheap simple personal dosimeter may be
  developed based on photographic emulsions which would register the total
  radiation in broad dosage bands which would correspond approximately to the
  various clinical types, e.g. less than 200r : 200 - l+00r : U00 - 650 r : more
  than 650 r.

  108. From the above, it will be appreciated that physical and scientific aid
 would be of little use and that the recognition of potential radiation
 casualties must be'based essentially on clinical diagnosis.




                                          - 32 -
                                           ^A.
 Clinical Diagnosis

109. Reference to the table in paragraph 102,which summarises the relationship
between the total dose and the effects of whole body irradiation, shows that
radiation sickness may present four main clinical syndromes according to
seriousness:

      (i) A non-appaAent iofrn without clinical symptoms, distinguished only by
           slight lymphopenia.     It results from doses of 150r (possibly 200r)
           or less.

     (ii) A bone.-maM.otv fioxm resulting from effective doses of between 150 -
           200 and 350 - liOOr.    It presents in four phases:

           (a)   PkettmiiVlAy pZAiod : nausea and vomiting lasting several hours,
                 becoming intermittent and often followed by general weakness and
                 lassitude. Duration : 2 - 3 days.

           (b)   Latent pe/viod:until the 19th or 20 th day after the start of
                 vomiting. Epilation may occur towards the end of the second
                 week. Normal work is possible.

           (c)   Active pQJbiodi sudden rise of temperature as in an infectious
                 fever, followed after two or three days by signs of agranulocytic
                 aplastic anaemia: petechiae, purpura, haemorrhages from
                 ulceration of the mouth and pharynx. The most critical period is
                 round about the 30 th day.

           (d)   Convalescence:  begins after about six weeks and is complete
                 about the end of the third month.

This bone-marrow form has a fairly favourable prognosis - even at       Hiroshima in
the appalling conditions at that time, when very little was known       of the disease,
about 50 per cent of cases recovered.  In more recent criticality       accidents
involving only a few people who were subsequently treated at well       equipped
hospitals, the mortality was about 12 per cent.

   (iii)   An E nteAic Foxm generally resulting from doses in excess of liOOr.

           (a)   Preliminary symptoms       similar to (ii) above.

           (b)   Short latent period, sometimes none.Appearance before   the
                 15th day of high temperature and profuse diarrhoea which does
                 not respond to treatment, accompanied, or if the patient survives,
                 followed by all the symptoms of the bone-marrow form.

           (c)   Shorter and very often fatal development.

    (iv)    A CeAebfuxl Torn resulting from a very high dose of 2000r and u w a r d s .
           Convulsions, coma and 100 per cent deaths within a few days.

Laboratory Examinations

110. The shortage of trained technicians and the amount of laboratory work which
would be required for the burnt and injured would make it impracticable even in
hospital to rely on blood tests as a routine. Nevertheless, at present the
white cell count is the most valuable and direct single index of radiation



                                   - 33 -
sickness both in establishing the diagnosis and in following the course of the
disease, and it should be remembered that these tests would be most valuable
at a time when the laboratory demands of other casualties will be diminishing.

Leucopenia

111. ijfce most constant and characteristic biological consequence of whole body
irradiation is a fall in the white blood cell count below the normal values of
between 5»000 and 10,000 per cubic mm. Lymphocytes are first affected, the
fall beginning within 2k hours and reaching a-minimum within about a week. A
lymphocytic count below 50 per cent, within 1|8 hours is a sign of radiation
exceeding 100 - 150r. Granulocytes show a transient rise in the first few
hours and then fall more slowly, reaching a minimum level after 10 - l*f days.
White cell counts maintained above 2,500 and starting to rise after two weeks
accompany the non-apparent form of the disease;     counts of between 1,0 0 0 and
2 ,0 0 0 maintained into the third week would suggest a guarded prognosis; whilst
counts of below 500 almost certainly would indicate a fatal result.

Facilities Available for Cases of Radiation Sickness

112. Once more the familiar picture of casualties in excess of the capacity of
organised medical and nursing care presents itself.

113. It is generally conceded that in emergency conditions the beds in acute
hospitals would be largely used for cases requiring life-saving surgery. There
would also be a heavy demand on places in C.C.Cs f o r t he ex p ec t a n t
care of injuries and b u m s where surgery would either not be indicated or would
not be immediately available, but it is reasonable to assume that a proportion
of h o l d i n g u n i t s  would be available for selected cases of radiation
sickness, at least from the third week after the attack when a high incidence
of the active period of the bone-marrow disease might be anticipated.




 114. Even more rudimentary would be the care of the large number of cases
 f o r 'srhom   accommodation was not available, and this might best be organised
on an ad hoc basis of small groups of cases being nursed by relatives and volunteers in
suitable houses, under the overall supervision of a general practitioner.
Management of the uncontrollable and often explosive vomiting and diarrhoea
would be difficult and would call for much improvisation, particularly in
matters of hygiene and sanitation.

Sorting of Radiation. Casualties

Relation of main Symptoms to Prognosis

115. Vomiting is important and suggests the threshold of 150-200r has been
exceeded. Unfortunately the detailed study of criticality accidents has
shown that neither the severity of the vomiting, nor the time it begins or lasts
are reliable pointers to the ultimate gravity of the disease.

116. L a ten t Vz?u.od. The length of the latent period between the vomiting and
the onset of fever is particularly valuable in prognosis. Latent periods of
19 or 20 days suggest a simple bone-marrow form with reasonably favourable
prognosis. The shorter the latent period the worse the prognosis.


                                         - 34 -
117* Lo-iA 0£ Haiti. (where there has been no direct contact with fall-out dust).
Epilation, occurring about the l^th day implies a dose of over 300r. The absence
of epilation or its delayed onset until after the third week is a good sign.

118. VtaM.hoea appearing briefly as a preliminary symptom has no particular
significance. Diarrhoea appearing during the latent period indicates a radiation
dose of over 350 - 1+OOr and a poor prognosis.

Injuries and B u m s   Complicated by Irradiation

119* The prognosis of injuries and burns is seriouslyaffected byradiation.
There is increased risk of haemorrhage and particularly ofinfection as a result
of leucopenia and reduction in the number of antibodies and in the production of
new ones. Under these conditions bacteria which are normally only'weakly
invasive or even non-pathogenic may cause septicaemia and death.  In patients who
survive the infection healing is defective and prolonged.

Selection of Cases

120. The theory governing the sorting of radiation casualties is broadly similar
to casualty sorting in general and "aims at concentrating limited medical and
nursing resources on those who would benefit most. An attempt should be made to
place cases in one of the following three broad groups

        (i)   ffiobabte doie le&i than 200a,.

              Unless injured in other ways these cases would not require treatment
              and they should continue to perform any duties required of them by
              the special circumstances of war.

      (ii)    ?A,obable dote, between 2 00 and 35On,.

              This is the group on which therapeutic resources should be
              concentrated, particularly on those in the middle of the range.

     (iii)    Vftobable do&e mone than 350a,.

              This group has a low priority and should be treated expectantly.

121. In practice, without the evidence of personal dosimetry,   only a very
arbitrary estimation of the dose received could be made. Reliance    would have
to be placed on clinical judgement and observations aided by white blood counts
if facilities were available. The background knowledge against which these
decisions should.be made has been given in detail in paragraphs 97 - 10 J.

Treatment

122. There is no specific treatment, for radiation sickness and from what has
been said it is clear tjiat under emergency conditions there would be little that
could be done to influence in any way the outcome of cases suffering from the
gastro-intestinal form of the disease. On the other hand, the lives of many
patients with the bone-marrow syndrome could be saved merely by assisting nature
by the single basic methods classically associated with home nursing care, viz:




                                       - 35 -
     Complete bed rest or as nearly approaching this as is practicable.

     Careful cleansing of the mouth and other orifices.

     Attention to pressure areas to prevent bed-sores.

     Easily digested, low residue diet with plenty of sugar if possible.

     Efforts to maintain the patient's morale.

All the above treatment could be carried out in an auxiliary hospital by
nursing auxiliaries or, even better, at home by the housewife with normal
experience of nursing family ailments, and would require the minimum of
supervision by a qualified nurse or doctor.

 123* The amount of symptomatic treatment which could be given would depend
largely on the local availability of trained nursing and medical time and of
the appropriate drugs, including blood. This should not conflict with the
heavy demands for blood following the life-saving phase, as the cases for whom
blood should be provided are those who have survived a reasonably long latent
period of 2-3 weeks. Sedation would be required in severe cases. Antibiotics
should not be given as a prophylactic, but should be kept for cases of bone-
marrow syndrome where there is evidence of infection. Whole blood transfusion
should be restricted to cases of severe anaemia due to bone-marrow depression.

124* Other special procedures such as the injection of platelets and allied
products affecting capillary permeability, the injection of bone-marrov and
the administration of Vitamins A and K have been used successfully in the
intensive medical care given, under peace-time conditions, to radiation
sickness cases arising from criticality accidents, but such techniques are not
appropriate to mass casualty care.

Other Radiation Hazards

External

 125. The foregoing paragraphs deal mainly with the effects of whole-body
'irradiation.by the highly penetrating gamma rays and neutrons.

 126. Alpha particles are not a significant external hazard. They have only a
range of a few centimetres in air; it is doubtful whether they can penetrate
the unbroken skin and they certainly will be stopped by ordinary clothing.

 127. Beta particles will not usually penetrate thick clothing and will only
produce superficial damage after prolonged contact with exposed parts of the
body. The lesions are slow to develop and resemble b u m s . There is initial
erythema lasting about 1+8 hours followed by a quiescent period of 5 - 10 days.
After this the erythema flares up again with severe local pain and sometimes
ulceration. Healing is slow with a tendency to relapses. Treatment is
symptomatic to relieve pain and to counter infection.

Internal

 128. j-t is generally assumed that the chances of radio-active material entering
the system following ingestion or inhalation, axe relatively small. The
radio-active materials must gain access to the circulating blood to constitute
an internal hazard whilst they remain in the alimentary tract or in the



                                      - 36 -
             I
    "bronchial/ tree they are still a source of external radiation. The extent to
    which these materials are absorbed depends largely on their solubility and it
    is fortunate that about 90 per cent of fission products are almost insoluble in
    body fluids. Radio-isotopes follow the same metabolic pattern in the body as
,   the naturally occurring inactive isotopes of the same elements, and an element
    not otherwise present in the body will behave like one with similar chemical
    properties. Thus barium, strontium and radium, all of which are analogous
    chemically to calcium, will be deposited in the bones. Research into methods
    of chemical protection and of "washing-out” the radio-isotopes from the body
    has not so far met with much success.

    129« Contaminated wounds should be treated by thorough irrigation whilst exerting
    moderate pressure on the area above the wound, followed by excision.

    Decontamination of Casualties

    130. qJxQ problem after contamination with radio-active materials is very
    different from that which arises where persistent (mustard) gas is concerned.
    Radio-activity is not affected by any chemical change and nothing short of the
    complete removal of the offending atoms will serve.

    131• Ideally, every casualty contaminated with radio-active fall-out should be
    decontaminated to minimise the risk to himself of beta burns and of ingesting
    radio-active material, as well as preventing the spread of radio-activity into
    uncontaminated areas with consequent risk to other people including the nursing
    staff. The risks of neglect of decontamination are not likely to be very serious,
    noris there any great risk to the staff from handling such cases if ordinary
    care is taken - washing after contact with contaminated material and proper
    disposal of contaminated clothing and materials used for cleansing. The basic
    sequence of a decontamination scheme in as follows:-

           (i)   Remove contaminated clothing (special precautions regarding disposal).

          (ii)   Wash thoroughly with soap or.detergent and water.

         (iii)   Test for residual activity with a suitable monitoring instrument and
                 if necessary repeat washing until an acceptable level is reached.

          (iv)   Put on clean clothing.

    132. To attempt to apply the above routine to every casualty before admission
    to hospital would cause unacceptable delay and congestion; in any case it is
    unlikely that sufficient stocks of clean clothing     and blankets would be
    available. The action to be taken must depend on      local circumstances atthe
    time, and in cases of obvious contamination, such simple procedures as brushing
    of the clothes and hair and damp wiping of the exposed skin would reduce the
    hazard.

    Contamination by Fall-out cf Food and Water

    133. It must be emphasised that gamma radiation has no harmful effects on either
    foodstuffs or water, and contamination of these substances, if it occurs, is
    due to the radioactive fission products contained in fall-out particles.




                                     - 37
                                               v
134* Canned foods and foods stored in tins, jars or other impervious containers
would be quite safe provided reasonable care were taken in washing the
contaminated containers before opening. Solid or semi-solid foods such as
meat, fats or cheese would be fairly safe especially if wrapped in greaseproof
paper, and all that would be necessary to make it quite safe would be to remove
a layer about a quarter of an inch thick around the outside.  On the other
hand, unprotected food of a porous or amorphous nature such as bread, biscuits,
flour or cereals should not be regarded as safe unless it has been thoroughly
monitored.

135* The main sources of drinking water in the United Kingdom are underground
wells, rivers and impounding reservoirs fed from catchment areas.

136. Underground sources of water would, in general, be free from contamination
due to the absorptive properties of the soil. In rivers, many of the fall-out
particles would sink to the bottom and be absorbed by mud and vegetation and the
rest would ultimately flow to the sea. It seems reasonable to assume that river
water would not be contaminated above emergency levels for long periods. The
large surface area of reservoirs would make them more liable to contamination.
Such water would not be made entirely safe by filtration alone since about
10 per cent of fission products are soluble. Fortunately, these soluble fission
products have short half-lives and the danger period for filtered water would
extend only over a few days.

137* It may be possible to cut off from the public, sources of water which
became contaminated with fall-out above the tolerance level, leaving house­
holders dependent on their own reserve supplies until such time as alternative
arrangements could be made.

Hurse Training in Radiation Sickness
138. The prospects of recovery for large numbers of cases of radiation sickness
would depend more upon the quality of nursing which could be provided than upon
any other factor. The type of nursing which would be required by the majority
of cases in which recovery can be expected is not complicated; and in wartime the
more advanced techniques would not usually be available. The following
considerations are therefore important for peacetime training:-
     (i) knowledge of simple home nursing, of the type described in the
         booklet Emergency Home Care, should be widespread amongst the general
         public;
    (ii) qualified nurses should acquire sufficient knowledge of radiation
         sickness to understand the pathological processes which condition the
         main requirements in the nursing of these cases i.e. the imperative
         need to avoid infection (loss of white blood corpuscles, and inter­
         ference with the immunity reaction); need for care of mouth and skin,
         avoidance of bed sores ("Purpuric" manifestations, and liability to
         infection); and simple dietary requirements (symptoms relative to
         damage to gastro-intestin&l tract);
   (iii) qualified nurses should thus be able to help in the training of V.A.Ss
         in peace or war, and in war to supervise the nursing of these cases by
         such people;
    (iv) a certain amount of this training should be extended to public
         health nurses, and to health visitors, home helps etc. as an
         important measure to increase the readiness of the medical services
         to deal with the effects of thermo-nuclear war;
     (v> in any such training the subsidiary aim should be to emphasise that
         far from being a mysterious and usually fatal condition, radiation
         sickness is well understood by the medical profession, that recovery
         would occur in the great majority of cases, and that possibly more
         could be done for these cases than for severe cases of blast injury or bums.

                                          38 -
                           CHAPTER          VII

                          Psychological First Aid


159* The term “psychiatric casualty’* should be avoided when giving instruction,
as it may give the impression to the lay audience that they can expect an influx
of casualties suffering from severe mental disturbance. This is not the case.
Following a major disaster, be it war or otherwise, a civilian population will be
faced with a situation with which temporarily it may be unable to cope. The
response will lie in the general fields of panic and collapse of morale rather
than overt mental disturbance. Guidance in psychological first aid may be
conveniently based on "the British Red Cross Society's "Mental Health
Manual". First aid and C.C.C. personnel should appreciate and
understand psychological reactions to a major disaster and the types of disorganised
behaviour which may occur.   It should be stressed that a first aid worker must be
as capable of dealing with the manifestations of emotional shock as he is with
those of surgical shock.

 140. The most effective way of dealing with this situation is by prevention'
rather than treatment. As Stafford Clark states (British Red Cross Society, 1958)
there are four main manifestations of emotional shock; these are:-

      (a)   acute psychiatric reactions;

      (b)   stupor;

      (c)   excitement and over-activity;

      (d)   physical symptoms.

All the above are varying types of reactions to the same situation and in the
main the basis is a severe stress to whi ch the patient has never previously been
submitted and to which he most often responds vith apathy.

141.  The handling of any of these situations requires calmness, realistic
reassurance, leadership and knowledge. The objectives are:-

      (a)   the preservation of family groups, and the fostering of any form of
            community grouping;

      (b)   a well organised information service. Regular dissemination of
            information and of reasonable reassurance and encouragement, avoiding
            any suspicion of facile optimism or of minimising obvious disasters
            and suffering;

      (c)   instruction that to feel fear, and to exhibit the symptoms and signs
            of fear, is perfectly normal; but.it would be sensible to take steps
            to counter "fear of the unknown", which is a serious threat to morale.
            Information especially about radiation, would help in this matter;

      (d)   encouragement for people to relate their experiences whilst
            unobtrusively correcting the tendency to assert that they alone   are
            suffering;                    '                             *




                                   - 39 -
      (e)   direction into useful channels of the efforts to help and to clear up
            the mess which will undoubtedly begin fairly soon at a low or "family”
            level. Useful work should be found for everybody - there will be
            plenty to do;

      (f)   leadership will be of prime importance. If it can be effected through
            the emerging natural leaders of the stricken community this might
            check possible resentment towards incoming relief forces.

 142 . it is anticipated that no expert psychiatric treatment would be available
in a disaster area and indeed it would be wrong to establish any psychiatric
treatment centres.

 143. In the management of these cases it is essential to adopt a confident
attitude. One should never use any phrase which could be interpreted as meaning
psychiatric illness.   Such terms as neurosis, nervous breakdown and mental shock
should be avoided.   If description is required these terms should .be replaced by
"fatigue or exhaustion" conveying the impression that it is nothing that a good
rest or sleep will not put right. -In dealing with relatives and friends, on whom
much of the burden of caring for these cases must fall, reference to temporary
reactions to stress or to fear, with the emphasis on the temporary, might be
appropriate.  Such optimism would sometimes be stultified by events, but would
do less harm than a pessimistic, or even unduly guarded, attitude.

 144. It must be expected that in such a situation as this, even trained and
responsible individuals might well develop physical symptoms attributable to the
scenes which they would have to witness and possibly work in for many hours and
days. For such people rest rooms may require to be established at such places
as G.C.Cs, rest centres and even at Control Headquarters.


145» Difficulty may occur in distinguishing between a psychosomatic symptom,
such as nausea, vomiting or diarrhoea occurring from stress and anxiety, and the
early symptoms of radiation sickness. All such cases should be treated as
ordinary exhaustion, unless there is positive evidence of radiation sickness.

1 4 6 . it should, in summary, be emphasised that in a situation of major disaster
the civilian population would be stunned and under very great stress. This
requires, above all, firm and sympathetic leadership. After people have overcome
the initial phase, they need outlets for their emotions in the way of useful work.




                                       40 -
                          C H A P T E R    V I I I


                               Public Health


Hygiene

147. The dramatic appeal of the problems of mass casualties overshadows the less
spectacular, but probably more important, field of public health, success in
which is even more essential to national survival. By judicious sorting of
casualties those who can do most for national survival would be given a high
priority when resources are limited, and it is obvious that measures to preserve
their health and that of uninjured survivors also deserve a high priority.

148. Disaster conditions call for the effective functioning of normal public
health activities in abnormal circumstances. The purpose of this chapter is not
to discuss public health problems in detail, but to draw attention to an
important aspect of the effects of nuclear attack which would demand the active
co-operation of every member of the home defence organisation, and of the
general public.  If steps are not taken from the outset to prevent it, a serious
decline in standards of hygiene and sanitation could develop very rapidly,
especially if morale was low, and insanitary conditions would still further lower
morale.

149. Factors which would contribute to the risk of epidemic disease would include
movements of the population with serious overcrowding in homes, rest centres, and
hospitals; the breakdown of water, gas, and electricity supplies, and of public
services such as the disposal of refuse and sewage; mass feeding in difficult
conditions; and the lowering by exposure to radiation of individuals* resistance
to disease by impairment of the immunity reaction.

150. It is not necessary here to enumerate the diseases which might become
epidemic. The two types of condition which would certainly occur are intestinal
infections including gastro-enteritis and dysentery and respiratory infections.
The risk of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers must also be remembered. It would
be necessary to have available emergency methods for the sterilisation of suspect
drinking water, and the increased danger of food infections under conditions in
which food handlers might- not be able to cleanse their hands owing to water
shortages is obvious. A most valuable service which everyone could render would
be the. control of flies, by such means as:

      (a) Burial, or burning, of all refuse, especially kitchen refuse;

      (b)   protection of food, especially of cooked food;

      (c)   proper disposal of sullage water, especially greasy water   from
             communal kitchens;

      (d)   attention to sanitation in general;

      (e)    destruction of flies by every available means - fly sprays and
            vigorous swatting campaigns ("useful work for as many as popsiblp"   -
            see Chapter VII paragraph 1 4 1 (e)).




                                  - 41 -
            r
151.   Home defence philosophy takes heed above all things of the future of
tne*nation and illnesses which may have persistent after-effects are therefore
particularly important. In war-time infections frequently alter their
characteristics;  thus in 1940 an extensive outbreak of rubella resulted in j
many severe cases in adolescents and young adults and a repetition of such an
outbreak among overcrowded civilians might result in many infections among
pregnant women.  Streptococcal infections may show an increase in severity
and crippling after-effects in children may be prevented if supplies of an
oral penicillin are available for prophylactic use.

152. Disposal of corpses is the responsibi1ity of local authorities, but
medical advisers to Home Defence Controllers are likely to be consulted about
this. Unburied corpses would have a more serious effect on morale than on
physical health.   They would attract blue-bottle flies, which are not potent
disease-carriers; and rats, which, without reservoirs of plague should not
contribute! to the causation of epidemic disease. Near ground zero corpses
would be incinerated and/or buried in debris.   Somewhat further afield
unburied corpses would have to be left until radio-activity had decayed. Vhere
unburied corpses could be seen by living survivors mass graves or temporary
mortuaries would have to be considered, but members of the Home Defence services
or volunteers should not lightly be ordered to expend "radiological life" out
of doors on duties connected with disposal of the dead.

153. The provision of an adequate supply of safe drinking water, and of water
for washing, for medical purposes and for flushing water carriage systems,
might be very difficult. The danger of radio-active contamination cannot
be overlooked, but freedom from pathogenic organisms would be a far more
important consideration.  Shortage of chemicals, e.g. chlorine compounds,
might occur. Normal methods of sedimentation and purification, and domestic
water softening devices, or filters of any sort, deal adequately with insoluble
radio-active contamination, and much soluble radio-active contamination is also
removed during slow sand filtration, coagulation and softening.

154*  If animals were subjected to radiation, even to a lethal dose level,
their meat would not be radio-active and would be safe to eat provided that
the animals were slaughtered before they fell sick, after which the meat would
be unpalatable and there would be a danger from secondary infections. All
the offal should be discarded. Milk would only be radio-active if the animals
had eaten food on which fall-out had settled.   Safe milk (including condensed,
evaporated and powder), would be reserved for babies and children. Other milk
might be manufactured into milk products in which the decay factor would be
significant through storage or in which most of the contaminant passes away
in by-products. Milk can be treated for the removal of radio-activity but
this might not be possible in a U areas on a commercial scale.




                                    - 42 -
155* Food is not affected by gamma radiation and is only dangerous if actually
contaminated by fall-out and it may be necessary to re-assure the public on this
point. Most food is likely to be under cover, especially if instructions in
Civil Defence Handbook No. 10 have been followed. Food in tins, packets or
other containers and any uncovered food in buildings left intact vould be
entirely safe. If food can be washed, scraped, etc., or has a skin which can be
removed, it can be made safe, progress in the development of chemical
protection and the elimination of radio-active matter from the body by chelating
agents is not at present rapid. The object of any advice would be to replace
undue alarm by an acceptance of the fact that it may be necessary to risk the
doubtful long-term effects rather than suffer starvation and thirst^

Sanitation                             ■

156. Knowledge and practice of field sanitation in all its aspects would become
essential in view of the overcrowding in houses; the setting-up of Rest Centres,
collecting centres for those awaiting billeting, camps, and improvised medical
centres, e.g. C.C.Cs, hospitals etc.; damage to water-borne sewage
systems; and suspension of refuse collection and disposal. Chemical
disinfectants etc., would be scarce and might have to be reserved for water ■
purification, and for use in medical centres where wound infection and cross­
infection would be serious risks. The general public would have to realise that
the scattering of strong-smelling chemicals is usually only a screen for defective
sanitation.

157. Some people may have seen demonstrations of methods    of field sanitation
practised in the Army, and been given copies of "Notes on   Field Sanitary
Appliances" supplied by the Conmandant of the Army School   of Health. These useful
notes describe and illustrate the following devices, all    of which might have
to be taken into use in some form:-

      (a)    Field latrines, including bore-hole latrines, which in certain
             localities would be excellent if the necessary equipment is available;

      (b)    Funnel urinals, and other types of field and portable urinals;

      (c)    improvised incinerators, disinfectors, and field heaters for water
             etc,;

      (d)    field ablution benches, improvised showers, washing-up benches,
             grease traps and soakage pits.

158* Members of a civilised community, accustomed to the automatic supply of
water, and the regular removal .of all waste products, would not quickly adapt
themselves to the sudden cessation of all such services. Leadership and
guidance would have to be given by all members of the Home. Defence organisation,
and by others who have been trained in these matters. Supervision and advice
can be expected from Proper Officers and the trained staiT of Environ­
mental Health Inspectors, Health Visitors and social workers.




                                 - 43 -
                                                                                                                               W ilberforce House,

                                 iiarsey Regional                                                                              The Strand,
                                                                                                                               Liverpool L 2 7R W .

                                 Health A uthority                                                                             0 5 1 -2 3 6 8 4 6 4



                 ▼      1                                                      —
                        rnT tt   /-tr n                                                            When telephoning or calling please ask fo r.
         O u r R ef.     illi/V o

                                                                                                                          Dr.      T.     L. H o b d a y
         Y ou r R ef,

                                                                                                                          3rd October                 1983




                                    A s y o u m a y know, British R e d C r o s s and St. John have
                f o r m e d a N a t i o n a l J o i n t E m e r g e n c y E x e c u t i v e C o m m i t t e e in London,
                and t h i s o r g a n i z a t i o n is r e p r e s e n t e d by its C o u n t y e q u i v a l e n t s
                in the provinces.                     T h e p u r p o s e of t h e s e o r g a n i z a t i o n s is to
                f a m i l i a r i z e v o l u n t e e r s w i t h the p r i n c i p l e s of h a n d l i n g m a s s
                casualties, s u c h as ma y o ccur in war.

                                   In o r d e r to p r o v i d e some u n i f o r m i t y in training, the
               N a t i o n a l C o m m i t t e e has d e v i s e d t hree p r a c t i c a l exercises, t e r m e d
               S P E A R P O I N T , C R A S H P O I N T a n d FLASHPOINT.         The c o l l e c t i v e t r a i n i n g
               to w h i c h t h e s e t hree e x e r c i s e s c o n t r i b u t e is d e s i g n e d t o e x t e n d
               over t hree years, S P E A R P O I N T b eing the s i m p l e s t of the three
               e x e r c i s e s an d F L A S H P O I N T t h e most advanced.               Different County
               o r g a n i z a t i o n s h ave r e a c h e d d i f f e r e n t points in the cycle.                  In
               o r d e r to as s i s t in the o r g a n i z a t i o n of these exercises, the
               N a t i o n a l C o m m i t t e e u s u a l l y a r r a n g e for a s e n i o r o f f i c e r f r o m
               t h e i r H e a d q u a r t e r s (Wing C o m m a n d e r D. C. Ch a r l i e r , M.C.) to a t t e n d
               a n d t o a l l o t the m a r k s w h e r e t h e r e is a c o m p e t i t i v e e l e m e n t in
               a p a r t i c u l a r serial.

                                  A s the C o u n t y Joint E m e r g e n c y E x e c u t i v e C o m m i t t e e for
               M e r s e y s i d e a n d C h e s h i r e will, no doubt, be a r r a n g i n g suc h e x e r c i s e s
               in the near future, a n d p e r h a p s a s k i n g for you r c o - o p e r a t i o n in
               v a r i o u s ways, I t h o u g h t y o u m i g h t w i s h to see a c o p y of the
               g e n e r a l s c h e m e a n d the d e t a i l e d pla n for F L A S H P O I N T .

                                B oth M e r s e y s i d e an d C h e s h i r e h ave c o m p l e t e d S P E A R P O I N T
               a n d are no w m a k i n g a r r a n g e m e n t s for C R A S H P O I N T .      No doubt your
               C o u n t y R e d C r o s s or St. J o h n o r g a n i z a t i o n w o u l d be p l e a s e d to
               give y o u any f u r t h e r details.

                                                                                Y o u r s sinc e r e l y ,




                                                                                  T. L. H o b d a y
                                                                         RSCM       (Home Defence)




Regional Medical Officer: D r. J .D . Egdell, M .B ., C h.B. D ip.Soc.M ed. F .F .C .M .            Regional Administrator: D .K . N ich ol, M .A ., A H A .
Regional Treasurer: M .H . C ollier, I.P .F .A .                                                  ' Regional Nursing Officer: Miss. M .R . W orster, S .R .N .
+   T elephone
                  NATIO NAL JOINT EMERGENCY EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
                                  C hairm an: D. V. Bendall, C.M.G., M.B.E.
                             V ice-Chairman: Major-General P. R. Leuchars, C.B.E.
                                                                                    C hairm an’s Office
    01-235 5454                                                                          9 G rosvenor C rescent
      Telex                                                                                   London, S W IX 7EJ
      918657



        R3G/PMZ/H14

        26th January 1983

        From:      Hajor-General R 3 Gray CB
                      Joint Secretary

        To:        Dr T L Hobday
                   RSCM (Home Defence)
                   Mersey Regional Health Authority
                   Uilberforce House
                   The Strand
                   Liverpool   L2 7RU




                  Many thanks for your letter dated 21st January 1983.

             Please find enclosed a set of N3EEC circulars as
        requested.

             I am glad to hear that your 3EEC remains lively
        despite Robert Cohen's departure.  Uould that you found
        the same situation in Cheshire.

             Unfortunately I am a bit dubious about the chances of
        our meeting again as I should finish uith the BRCS at the
        end of April unless, of course, you become involved uith
        the RAMC Association.
                       HOME DEFENCE AND EMERGENCY PLANNING

                               FIBST-AID POSTS
                   (Ref: DHSS Circular 1/1977, paragraph 59)

           APPENDIX V ' - Diagram of First-Aid Post
           APPENDIX "b" - List of Basic Equipment for a FAP.

BACKGROUND
The-prime task allocated to the British Red Cross Society is set out in
paragraph 59 of DHSS Circular 1/1977 u-hich states :               ’

"AHAs should pi rsi with the Voluntary Aid Sccieties in their ares for the
establishment and manning of FAPs as scon after an attack as possible. These
Posts shculd be set up to provide covcr' fcr the whole area end should fee
located ne>cl to Local Authority Rest Centres; in'Health Service property
(such as Health Centres and Clinics ar.d, vacated convalescent and nursing
homes) and in property earmarked in peace with the Controllers (designate)
for imraediate requisition in wsr. The purpose of FAPs would be to give
immediate treatment and to sort casual ties into those who cculd tere turned
bome or to a Rest Centre, and those requiring further treatment at a CCC.”

OBJECT OF NOTE
This Note therefore gives guidance to Branches on the establi shtneat, manning
End operation of First-Aid Posts in 6 war situation.

establish:
         -1
          --:nt p c l i c y
To.ena.tle. First-Aid-Pests to be canned and operated af ter ar. attack it is
essential that buildings designated for "Lais purpose sr.culd be ear» 3.rxed new.

First-Aid Fosts shculd be calculated on a basis of one Pest serving'2,CCO
population in rural areas, and 3,CCO in urban areas.

To deterxiine the nuafcer and location of First-Aid Posts will require
consultation wi th ’..the Area Medical Off icer &r.d the- County Council coerisr.cy
Planning Off icer.

It should also be rer.eafcered tiiat the Local Authority owns blost of the prcpei
that is available for designation as a First-Aid Post, the Heai tn Authcritiej
having cotsp&ratively few buildings oojt of which would be used as C a s u a l t y
Collecting Centres or as Hospitals. %lierever possible First-Aid Po^.ts shcul<
be located hear Rest Centres.        f
      DEFINITION OF A FIRST-AID POST
      The number of casualties arising from a conventional or a nuclear attack iu*t*
      bo based on the mass casualty syndrome end each First-Aid Post should be'able
      to meet the following criteria :-

           a.    20 casualties at any one time.
           b.    100 casualties over a period of 24 hours,
            c, 1,000 casualties over 10 days.

•     •ACCOMMODATION ^'D   f /c i l i t i e s    -
8.    Ideally the building designated as a First-Aid Post should provide

            a.   Ground floor accommodation only (movement of casualties is
                 difficult on stairs and through doors). '
            b,   A minimum floor area of 900 square feet,
            c*   Wide entrance doors where possible.

            d.   Male and female toilet facilities.
            e.   Basic cooking equipment and mains water (in the event of
                  interruptions to water supply, cater would have to be stored in
                  containers).
            f. Heating and lighting (alternative systems should be locked at
                against the possibility of a failure in the power, supply).

9.     A sketch of a possible layout is shown in Appendix "a " attached


       MAXKiNG
JO.    The St.Jchn Ambulance Brigade and the British Red Cross Scciety may veil
       in the manning of individuals Posts in a number of areas especially the
       ones, so even allowing for the fact that respcnsitility vill te shared c
       the 5RCS and the St.John Ambulance Brigade the .number of Posts in      irar.cr.
       area will be considerable.

11. Vith present membership returns it would not be possible |o provide a
     Detachment of fully trained members for each First-Aid Pc jk and the shcrrfall
     vill have to be made up from volunteers, either through, the British 3*d Cress
     Emergency Seserve or from members of the public.

12. . The ratio of YADs to untrained br partly trained volunteers could be as lew■as
     only 2 VADs at each Post, with the*balance being provided by volunteers.
     Branches are asked to determine Jhelf own ratios according to their saeabershi;
     resources and the number of First-Aid Posts to be manned.




                                                -2 -
               '         THE FIRST-AID I’CST TEAM                                                          -1
;?t i -    (                                             ■'
          ..'£&*         The establishment for a Team should be provided on a basis of j-              .
■&             ^P'
                             a.    Commandant/Leader.
                                                                                                                4
                             b.    Deputy (responsibilities for supply and equipment).
                             c.    Administrative     Officer (prime         task of registration, refreshments, j
                                   sanitation and hygiene).                                                      j
                            ■ d.   4 First-Aiders    (some of these         might be   untrained   volunteers   i
                                   under supervision),

                             e,    4 Kursing Aids (some of these       might be untrained volunteers
                                   under supervision),


                         EtyiPMBNT
                   14,   Apart from each Detachment's first-aid satchel, it is unlikely that additional
                         equipment will be able to be provided  by the Health Authorities, so much of     ;
                         the basic equipment required will have  to be improvised or obtained frc-m local
                         sources,                                                   ;                     «


                   15,   A, suggested basic list is shown in Appendix MBM attached.



                                                              ACTION LIST

                   16,   Although Branches may already have conraenced discussions to implement the
                         provisions, of this Note, the following summary of action may be of assistance
                         es a check list,'

                              a.   Initiate discussions with the Area Medical Officer and your
                                   Local Authority (if this has not already been done).
                              b.   Discuss with the Area Health Authority the number and location
                                   of First-Aid Pests in each District to be manned ty the-'
                                   British Red Cross Scciety or approach your County Emergency
                                   Planning Officer for a breakdown of their Local Authority
                                   Community Organisation in the County,                   j

                             c.    Obtain the addresses and locations of the buildings which have
                                   been designated as First-Aid Posts.                f
                             d•    Assess the number of First-Aid Posts that can be manned now
                                   according to your membership*loc^tions and determine the
                                   trained/untrained ratio for your area.
                                                                   i
                     17. Inform the membership on the lines suggested in the NHQ Circular 6 0 / K l ,




                                                        **3—
                                                      APPENDIX "A "




                  LAYOUT OF A FIRST-AID POST




                                               SUPPLIES

                       HOLDING
                       REST AREA




                                                                 HOSPITAL
                                                                 CCC

      TREATMENT                                DISPOSAL      a   Transport

                           COMMANDANT                        ■.REST CENTRE
                                                               HOME




                            RECEPTION

FEMALE                    Sorting t Arfea        MALE
CLOAKROOM                                        CLOAKROOM


                           CASUALTIES
  0 -*.,,                                         .       .    7,
                                                                    : , f '9

                                                                APPENDIX
                          FIRST-AID POSTS

             LIST OF SOME ESSENTIAL ITEMS OF BASIC EQUIPMENT
                FOK FIRST-AID POSTS IN A WAR EMERGENCY



Stretchers (some improvised)                  Scissors

Bandages                                      Thermometers

Varied dressings                              Blankets

Splints
                                              First-Aid Satchels

Bowls
                                              Tables/Chairs

Drugs (authorised)                            Crockery

Auxiiliary lamps and torches                  Casualty labels

Registration, forms




     Note^    This list is not comprehensive end is for exercise
              purposes only.
                     B R I T I S H       R E D      C R O S S        S O C I E T Y


                                    9 Grosvenor Crescent,
                                      Loridon, SU1X 7E3



                                                                             P3/80

                                                                               DG/D3P/3T

                                                                                4th Nov/ember 1980

                        THE S O C I E T Y 15 ROLE IN HOME DEFENCE

       1.   Since the issue of National Headquarters Circular Pl/80
     - dated 1st April 1980 a statement has been made on Civil Defence
       in the House of Commons by the Secretary of State for the Home
       Department and, in the light of this statement, discussions have
       taken place uith HQ St.John Ambulance (St.3. A.)., Ministry of
       Defence (MOD) and Department of Health and Social Security
      ■(DHSS) .

      2. The Ministerial statement was published in Hansard of
      7th August 1980. The salient points of interest ere:-

      a.      the assumption of a shorter period of warning
           .• measured in days rather than in ueeks,

      b.    more attention to be focussed on the risks of
             conventional warfare (i.e. non-nuclear but including
             gas and biological warfare),

     -c.    the need for more definitive Home Defence planning/I
                                .                                       '■           *
      d.    the greater involvement of volunteers.

                                                          *
      T HE ROLE OF ST. 3.-a . AND B . R . C . S .
                                                      *       *
      3.    In Support of the Armed Forces

          It can be confirmed that there will be a neu requirement to
      provide para-medical support to the Armed Forces of the Croun
      uithin the'United Kingdom in time of war in conjunction .uith St-r3.A.
      This is a primary commitment for the Voluntary Aid Societies (l/AS).
      The type of tasks envisaged are the manning of hospital trains
      and the staffing of a limited number of military medical
      installations.  The extent of this support is at present being
      studied in conjunction uith f*QD and DHSS. So far as the BRCS
      is concerned this is likely to be a nursing commitment involving
      both qualified and certificated nurses.

      4.    In Support of the Health Services

          This role ui-11 vary from phase to phase of hostilities.  It
      is important to realise that, in the process of international
      negotiation, the progression of events may be checked at any
      phase.  The anticipated phases and related roles are briefly
      as follous:-

             PHASE                                                ROLE OF THE VOLUNTARY AID
                                                                  SOCIETIES (l/AS)

      a. Period of Tension                                        i. Community Training in
                                                                  Emergency Aid, Home Nursing
                                                                  and Elementary Hygiene.
%'
C*
                                                               w ''


                                                                ..    ,-V -




                                        ii. Mobilisation of resources
                                        - membership and materials

                                        iii. Final planning.

b . Conventions! Warfare                i. Implementation of aid to
    (Air Raids etc.)                    Armed Services (continued
                                        through Phases c. and d.)

                                        ii. Support to Emergency
                                        Services in major accident
                                        procedu res .

c . Nuclear S t r i k e ( s )           All stay put in sheltered
                                        conditions.

     Post-nuclear Strike                Activate Community First Aid   |
                                        Posts (CFAP).  N.B. The mannin
                                        of Casualty Collecting Centres
                                        is NOT nou a UA5r commitment.


e. Survival Phase                       Preservation of health and
                                        morale of the Community.


5.     The Health Service (at present at Area Health Authority
level) is responsible for overall health planning in fch& event
of a National Emergency.   This would include decisions’ 6n the
number and location of CFAPs which-will' probably be co--located
uith Rest Centres in schools, where catering facilities.will
be provided under the auspices of the* local authority or
URl/S.                              *

6.      Co-operation uith St.3.A. •
                                  '

      Following discussions uith HQ St.3. A.it has been agreed that
both organisations will re-issue copies of Annexures A and B to
Circular 115/51, published as s result of agreements concluded ""
in 1951.  Copies are attached as an enclosure to this Circular.
These agreements remain binding.

7.      3oint   Action Required

     It is now proposed to set up 3oint Emergency Executive
Committees (3EEC) at National and also, at County level which will
meet periodically to'review Home Defence plans and issue 3oint
Directives to their respective membership.

8.   The National 3EEC will consist of theChairman     of the
Council BRCS, the Chief Commander St.3 . A. and three additional
members from each organisation.  The National 3EEC will liaise
uith Government Departments and communicate directly with
County 3EEC.

9.   County 3EEC should be formed forthwith.      It is proposed
that each consists of three members from St.3. A. and three
members from BRCS.  This membership would include the Commander
(or the Commissioner) of St.3. A. a n d the Branch President
(or Deputy President; BRCS who would each appoint two other
members at their discretion.   It is considered that the 1951
Agreements allow for the chairmanship of County 3EEC to alternate
between St.3 . A. and BRCS at agreed intervals. From time to time it
might be -necessary to convene National or Regional Conferences
uith County 3EEC members.

10.    Planning for Role

     County 3EEC will be responsible for initiating discussions
uith Area Health Authorities to determine the number and location
of CFAPs within their areas.     Uhen the commitment has been
determined, County 3EEC will airee the detailed manning,
administration and communications of these posts from within
the respective resources 'of 5,t..3.,A. and BRCS. County and/or
District Emergency Planning Officers (EPO) must be included
in such planning and the URVS may have a contribution to make.

VOLUNTEER MAN POUER RESOURCES

11.    It is obviously unreasonable to expect that the VAS would
nave recruited sufficient members (including reservists) resident
in the right areas against a commitment which so far has been
largely inderminate.  However it is assumed that Branches will,
by now, have completed their analysis of membership by categories
on the basis of their residential qualifications.  Thus areas
which are inadequately covered by the VAS.membership should be
identifiable and recruiting of members (including, if not
mainly, reservists) can be carried out on a planned basis.

TRAINING                                                    ;y

12.;    The need for keeping the whole of the membership in County
Branches     fully infar.med on Home Defence was stressed in Circular
Pl/80 para 14.     Guidance Notes on Home Defence Seminars were
distributed at the recent Branch Training Officers Conference
and further copies are available from the*NHQ Training
Department.     It.would be appreciated if Sjranches could send
copies of their own seminar programmes '^nd any relevant
comments to NHQ Training Department s6 that the guidance
notes, may be improved or up-dated from time to time.     It is
important that representatives of the Health Authorities, EPO,
St .3 .A. -and URVS are brought into such training.

 i'3.  It will have been noted that, during a period of CONVENTIONAL
 warfare, the main civilian task will be the provision of support
 to the Emergency Services in major accident procedures.    Training
 for this task is essentially of a practical nature though
 good planning is a very necessary ingredient. It is considered
 that such training, where noi already instituted, should first
 be carried out at detachment level and then built up into
 district exercises.    It is most important that representatives
 of the Emergency Services (Police, Fire, Ambulance and Health)
 should be involved in these exercises as their advice and
 example can prove invaluable.    Once an acceptable standard
 has been achieved then major exercise uith the St.3. A.
  should be organised through trie County 3EEC.

 14.  Training of the community will, for the purpose of this
 Circular, be treated as a separate exercise.  Suffice it to
 say that it is proposed to draft a joint St.3.A/BRCS programme
 in conjunction with the DHSS.

 CONCLUSION

 15.    Action by Branches is reauir.ed as indicated in paras 9, 10,
 11,   12 & 13.  A progress report will be called for in early 1981.
16.  It is possible that instructions further to DHSS Home Defence
Circular HDC (77) 1 dated 3anuary 1977, may be issued by the
appropriate Government Department in about  three months time.

17.  Any queries on the contents of this Circular should be
referred to National Headquarters and marked for the attention
of the Chief Medical Officer (Major-General 3ohn Gray).




                                        D. 3.PIGGOTT
                                        Director General




To:     BRANCH   PRESIDENTS (under separate cover)
        BRANCH   DIRECTORS
        BRANCH   MEDICAL OFFICERS
        BRANCH   NURSING OFFICERS
      •BRANCH    TRAINING OFFICERS
                           QZfje ?8dtte{j   &eb    C ross £s>oaetp.


KeBorandttD for the inf ormation of Members and Associate Member s of the
Society in England and, Wales on c o - o per at ion between the British Red
Cross Society and the Or der of St, John in the event of war


                       (Annexure A to Circular 115/51 of 1st November 1951)


          The Society and the Order have been discussing for some time the
fora of c o-operation b e t w e e n the two Bodies in the event of war. The
B rit is h Red Cross Society, as a member of the International Red Cross, has to
 conform wi th In ternational Red Cross decisions regarding co-operation with
 other bodies.      Since the last war, the International Red Cross movement
•has d ev eloped and, in order to keep the Red Cross movement free from
politic s and for other reasons, it has been laid down specifically that a
Na ti on al Society may not delegate executive authority over its work to .
 aJoint far O r g a n i sa ti on as was done in the last war.

         The Ord er of St. John appreciate the paramount importance in time of
war of the international status of the Red Cross and they have, therefore,
agre ed upon a fora of organisation, within the fi-aaework of the British Red
Cross Society, which ensures that the Society and the Order of St. Johrrj
including the Brigade, will be able to co-operate as effectively as they
d i d in the la.st war.

           The combined war w ork of the two Bodies will therefore be directed
by a Br itish Red Cross- Society National War Executive            consisting of Red,
Cross and St. John representatives, the Chairman being a Red Cross officer
and tbs 7 i c e - C h a i r m a n a St. Jo hn officer. In the Counties in England and
Tales there will be -British Red Cross Society County War, Executives
c o ns ti tu te d in a similar way to the National War Executive.             ’" ■ 1
                   * * *                                      5

        Apart from the co mb in ed war work, there will be the normal work of
the two Bodies which t he y will continue to conduct independently, as in the
la.st var.

          All R e d Cross and St. John war work and continuing peacetime work in
the Counties, whether c a r ri ed on independently by the Society...the,Order or
the A s soc ia ti on or. the Brigade, or combined under the County War Executives
will be financed by the Na tional War Executive, and there will be one
Na ti on al Appeal for funds, made in the name of H.R.H. The Duke of Gloucester.
All m on e y coll ec te d by the two Bodies will be credited to the National Fund,
f*ut of whic h their worlc will be financed. ,

          Joint Committee ac tivities at present a dministered under County
Ag en ci es will in the event of war be a dministered under the County War
txecut i v e s .

        The above is a brie f resumi of the detailed arrangements made
be tween the Sooiety and. the Order, full particulars of which are in the hands
of Branch officials.




 1 6 . 1 0 . i l
                       AKNEXURS B to Circular 115/5.1 of 1st November 1951.


                              TOje £s>t. 3Tofjn Smbulance                            JSrigabe
                                        8 Gr o sv e no r Cresccnt, L o n d o n , S . W . l




                   MEMORANDUM          FOR    CIRCULATION          TO D I V I S I O N S      OF

                              THE    ST.     JOHN AMBULANCE           BRIGADE

                       IN E N G L A N D ,    WALES     AND N O R T H E R N    IRELAND



          A t t a c h e d is a c o p y of a m e m o r a n d u m wh i c h , w i t h the
c o n c u r r e n c e of t h e O r d e r of St. John, w i l l be c i r c u l a t e d b y the
B r i t i s h R e d C r o s s S o c i e t y t o its m e m b e r s in E n g l a n d - a n d Wales,
s u m m a r i s i n g t h e a r r a n g e m e n t s which, h a v e b e e n a d o p t e d b y mutual,
a g r e e m e n t to g o v e r n c o - o p e r a t i o n b e t w e e n the O r d e r a n d t h e . S o c i e t y
in t h e e v e n t o f war.             T h e p u r p o s e of th'is m e m o r a n d u m is to giv e
s u p p l e m e n t a r y inf o r m a t i o n and ta remove misapprehensions which
h a v e a r i s e n i n c e r t a i n q u a r t e r s r e g a r d i n g the s t a t u e of th e O r d e r
a n d t h e Br?gp.r*e u n d e r the a g r e e m e n t .
1.       The O r d e r a n d th e S o c i e t y w i l l c o n t i n u e to m a i n t a i n t h e i r
full     i n d e p e n d e n t s t a t u s u n d e r their r e s p e c t i v e Royal Charters.

Z.        U n d e r a c c e p t e d i n t e r n a t i o n a l c o n v e n t i o n s there-;., can o n l y be
o n e n a t i o n a l R e d C r o s s S o c i e t y fo r e a c h c o u n t r y r e c o g n i s e d b y the
G-overnment of t h e c o u n t r y , b y the I n t e r n a t i o n a l Re&V C r o s s
C o m m i t t e e of G e n e v a , a n d b y the R e d C r o s s Societies* of a l l o t h e r
c o u n t r i e s which, h a v e a c c e p t e d t h e G e n e v a C o n v e n t i o n .        The O r d e r is
a - V o l u n t a r y A i d S o c i e t y r e c o g n i s e d u n d e r the G e n e v a C o n v e n t i o n a n d
as s u c h s h a r e s t h e p r i v i l e g e s w h i c h the C o n v e n t i o n accords,*               it is
n o t , h o w e v e r , th e n a t i o n a l R e d $ r o s s S o c i e t y of G r e a t B r i t a i n a n d
c o u l d n o t a c q u i r e t h a t status' w i t h o u t s u r r e n d e r i n g its o w n            \
identity.

3.          O n the o t h e r h a n d t h e O r d e r a n d the S o c i e t y a r e e q u a l l y
a n x i o u s t h a t . t h e t w o B o d i e s s h o u l d c o - o p e r a t e in w a r w o r k in tim e
 o f n a t i o n a l e m e r g e n c y as in the past, in al l m a t t e r s of s u b s t a n c e ,
 w h i l e c o n f o r m i n g as is n e o e s s a r y t o the I n t e r n a t i o n a l R e d C r o s s
 p a t t e r n as n o w •d e t e r m i n e d .      C o n s e q u e n t l y 4 t has b e e n a r r a n g e d that
 t h e O r d e r of St. J o h n in r e s p e c t of w a r w o r k s h a l l e n j o y f u l l a n d
 h o n o u r a b l e p a r t n e r s h i p w i t h t h e B r i t i s h R e d C r o s s S o c i e t y in a War
 E x e c u t i v e c o n s t i t u t e d w i t h i n th e f a b r i c o f t h e S o o i e t y , b y w h i c h
 n e w s the i n t e r n a t i o n a l s t a t u s a n d p o t e n c y of t h e B r i t i s h R e d
.C r o s s w i l l n o t be c o m p r o m i s e d .         T h i s is a p o s i t i o n w h i o h m i g h t be
  c o v e t e d b u t not' a t t a i n a b l e ■by o t h e r v o l u n t a r y o r g a n i s a t i o n s .
4.        T h e r e is n o q u e s t i o n of e x t i n g u i s h i n g the i d e n t i t y of the
O r d e r a n d t h e B r i g a d e o r of s u b o r d i n a t i n g t h e m to t h e B r i t i s h R e d
Cross Society.              W h i l e it is i n t e n d e d t hat p e r s o n n e l of the O r d e r
a n d the S o c i e t y s h a l l b e a v a i l a b l e at all l e v e l s f o r s p e c i f i c w a r
w ork, t h e a d m i n i s t r a t i o n a n d c o n t r o l , a n d n o r m a l a c t i v i t i e s of the
St. J o h n A m b u l a n c e A s s o c i a t i o n a n d B r i g a d e w i l l c o n t i n u e to be
c a r r i e d o u t i n d e p e n d e n t l y as at p r e s e n t .

 5.         T h e r e a r e .many a d v a n t a g e s in the p l a n n o w a d o p t e d w h i c h w e r e
i l a c k i n g in th e J o i n t W a r O r g a n i s a t i o n of the w a r of 1 9 3 9 / 4 5 ,               Both
 t h e o r e t i c a l l y a n d p r a c t i c a l l y it is m o r e c o n v e n i e n t a n d e f f e c t i v e
 t h a t the c o m b i n e d W a r E x e c u t i v e s h o u l d b e w i t h i n the f a b r i c of a
 p e r m a n e n t o r g a n i s a t i o n i n s t e a d of b e i n g a t h i r d c o n v e n t i o n a l
 e n t i t y , set u p as a n e w c r e a t i o n o n the o u t b r e a k of war.                         The
 p e r m a n e n t o r g a n i s a t i o n to be c h o s e n must, f o r i n t e r n a t i o n a l
 p u r p o s e s , b e th e B r i t i s h R e d C r o s s S o c i e t y as a l r e a d y e x p l a i n e d .
  In the f i n a n c i a l a r r a n g e m e n t s c o n t e m p l a t e d t h e r e w i l l be a
 d i s t i n c t a d v a n c e u p o n t h e iiiitial a r r a n g e m e n t s , in the s ame field,
 of the Joint War O r g a n i s a t i o n .                A l l t h e . h u m a n i t a r i a n w o r k of the
 O r d e r , t h e A s s o c i a t i o n a n d th e B r i g a d e , a s . o f th e B r i t i s h R e d "
  C r o s s S o c i e t y , w i l l be f i n a n c e d f r o m t h e p r o c e e d s of t h e j i n g l e
 nat'ional w a r ai*peal.*. T h e o b j e c t s o f the a p p e a l w i l l _be wide, tc
  cove* a l l ouii’fexit war, s e r v i c e s to t h e s i c k a n d woUnde-d a n d
 p r i s o n e r s of w a r o f -the A r m e d F o r c e s , a n d of t h # enemy;                      to c o v e r
 a l s o r e l i e f t o c i v i l i a n s in t h e U n i t e d K i n g d o m or e l s e w h e r e w h o
  m a y b e a f f e c t e d b y t o t a l war, to c o v e r p o s t w a r l i a b i l i t i e s fojr
  t h e r e l i e f o f s u f f e r i n g d i r e c t l y a r i s i n g ou t of the war, to c o y e r
  a l s o the a d m i n i s t r a t i v e e x p e n s e s , t r a i n i n g , a n d g e n e r a l w o r k a t
  t h e O r d e r a n d t h e S o c i e t y a n d t h e i r D i v i s i o n s a n d B r a n c h e d , a n d to
  p r o v i d e as w e l l f o r t h e s u b s e q u e n t r e h a b i l i t a t i o n a n d            '
  s t r e n g t h e n i n g o f t h e m a c h i n e r y of b o t h the O r d e r a n d the S o c i e t y
  s o t h a t t h e y m a y n o t e n d the w a r d e v o i d of f i n a n c i a l r e s o u r c e s f o r
  r e s u m i n g all t h e i r n o r m a l work.                  .           «
                                                                          *                    *
                                                                    *
             It is h o p e d t h a t a l l m e m b e r s o f the B r i g a d e w i l l a c c e p t
  srho-leheartedly t h e n e w a r r a n g e m e n t s fo r c o - o p e r a t i o n a n d w i l l givjs
  t h e i r s e r v i c e s a s r e q u i r e d to t h e W a r E x e c u t i v e .           In t his w a y th e
  tw o g r e a t v o l u n t a r y o r g a n i s a t i o n s , the O r d e r o f St. J o h n a n d the
  B r i t i s h R e d C r o s s S o c i e t y , ca n b e s t s e r v e the p u b l i c i n terest,
  s-hich is t h e u l t i m a t e t e s t , a n d c a n d i g n i f y a n d s t r e n g t h e n e a c h
   other.



  .6th O c t o b e r    1951.
