                                           10.   5.1990   15:47               P.   1
CUFF   ROBERTS




HILLSBOROUGH                        STEERING                      COMMITTEE

                    Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                     Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




Travor Hicks Esq.,                                                 5th Octob«r 1990
                                                                   EMS/DW


VIA FAX 0535-.&LQQ52




Dear Travor,

Further to our talophone conversation yesterday when I spoke to you I
had not read the letter which had just come in from Mike Humphreys in
which he pointed out that when he and I put together the figures
after the Conference on Wednesday we had not taken into account tho
need to go through the inquiry Transcript and select the evidence we
had wished to put in for the Inquest.  That does slightly alter the
figures which I gave you on the telephone.

Our estimated coBt would now be £50,000.

That is a figure which could vary upto 10% and does include all out
of pocket expenses and VAT.    It is put forward on the following
basis

1.      That the Inquest runs for 6 wee k s .

2.      That the involvement of Counsel is that Ben or Tim (dependent
        upon availability) attends the directions meeting.  That Ben
        addresses the Coroner in the absence of the Jury on the verdict
        which should be brought in on the evidence at the conclusion of
        the inquest.   That Ben or Tim attends for up to five individual
        days during the course of the Inquest to cross examine key
        witnesses.

3.     That the level of representation throughout the Inquest is by
        one or other of the Steering Committee (who are all relatively
        senior partners in their respective firms),

4.     That      that figure includes the cost of Wednesday's conference.

5.     That throughout the Inquest the Solicitors concerned would do
       a daily summary of important points both for Counsel’s use,
       the use of the other Solicitors on the Steering Committee and




            l
                                  10.   5.1990   15:47        P.       2
JUFF   ROBERTS




       a copy could bo held at the Law Library for clients information.

6.     The cost includes correspondence with clients (i.e. those who
       were part of this Group) limited to say three or four letters
       reporting important matters.

You did ask me whether - although in the Lawyers view this would be
"over kill” - Tim King was available to attend the Inquest throughout
and what the additional cost of that was likely to be.

I have made enquiries with his Clerk and he could be freed to attend
the Inquests throughout starting on the 19th November.   The
additional cost would £34,500 (including VAT)     Oyt'DO       SoO
The alternative method of ensuring continuity would be to have
representation at a much more junior level - an Assistant Solicitor
being there throughout (or alternatively a junior Barrister) - with
the Steering Committee Partners operating on a "partner on duty"
daily basis when the partner concerned would be either at tho hearing
or on call at the office dependent upon what evidence was being taken
on that particular day.

That would add to tho first figure quoted approximately £15,000.

I hope that this is of assistance to you.  As I mentioned in the
earlier letter which was sent by your own Solicitors we would want to
have that money "up front" and it would be invested on your behalf on
deposit or on money market where the interest earned is of course for
your benefit.

All these figures are on the ba3i3 that if there is a change in the
circusmtances and the costs come out at less than the figures
estimated then of course there would be a rebate.    If there are
changes the other way and the Inquest continues much longer than
expected or if there is some expense for which we have not budgeted
then we would have to ask for additional funds.

I look forward to hearing from you on Sunday after your meeting and
send every good wish to you all.

All good wishes.

Yours sincerely,

            Ja      —

MISS E M STES iT




                                                                   >
