                               OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR
                                                                      MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE.

                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                      WATERY STREET,
                                            (West D istrict)          SHEFFIELD
                                                                      S 3 7ET
        STEFAN L POPPER. LLB.,B.MeD.W.B.M..B.S..MR.CGP
                                               CORONER


                          Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0M2W38721               2.5.A p r i l . . . . . . 19 .. 8.9
SLP/JT.




•uear               Spearitt

Re:              Adam Spearitt                            deceased.

I am very sorry to have to trouble you at such a very sad time as
this but you may wish to know what is happening regarding
the Inquest.

The Inquest now stands adjourned and I will be in touch with you
or your representative when it is possible to proceed. You should
however be prepared for a lengthy delay. This is very much regretted,
but unavoidable under the circumstances.

As it is not possible for you to obtain a death certificate until
after the conclusion of the Inquest, I enclose an interim certificate
of the fact of death, which may be of some assistance to you.

I also enclose the attached statement form which sets out the information
which I have concerning the deceased. It is important that the facts
are correct, and I would be most grateful if you could carefully check
the details, paying particular attention to the spelling of the names
and date of birth. Please also check that we have all the names of the
deceased on the statement.

If there are any errors please correct them in ink. If there are any
blanks on the form, please complete them where applicable in ink.
Please initial alterations and insertions, sign and date the document
and return it to me.

If there are no errors or blanks to be completed, please simoly sign
and date the document and return it to me as an indication that you
agree that the 'information I have is correct.

I enclose a stamped addressed envelope to enable you to return the form.

I realise that this document may not be the most pressing thing on your
mind, but nevertheless I would be most grateful if you could please deal
with it as soon as possible.
            /I
If you have any problems with the document, please contact my officers
in writing or on the phone and they will do their best to assist you.
                                 om cEorH M conotiLtuort                    MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE.
                                                                            WATERY STREET,
                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE              Ti
                                                  (West D istrict)          SHEFFIELD
                                                                            S3 7ET
 S1ETAN L P O P P E n .U B . B M E D S c i . B M . B S . M R C G P
                                                      CORONER
                                                                              6th April 1990
                           T elephone   SHEFFIELD   (0 M 2 ) 7387 21                           19 . . . .

                                                                              Ref: h/list/1




Dear                 S p ^ A R R l T r

As you will no doubt be aware the interim inquests concerning the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster are being resumed on 18th April 1990.
The first two days will be held nt the Memorial Hall in the centre of
Sheffield and not at the Medico Legal Centre. On the first day we are
starting at 10.30 a.m.

It has also been possible to list the interim resumed inquest into the
death of /QD/^D^
for l"A. ITiF\.l/     A . 0 & April 1^90 at         / O 'O     am/cm
and this will take place at t ho M e d i c o Legal Cent re , Watery Street
Sheffield. Your legal representatives have also been written to. If
any change with regard to these arr an ge m en ts have to be made y o u will
be not i f j e d .

Attached to this letter is an informat i(in pack regarding location and
oilier matters which 1 hope you will find useful. If you have some
pressing query regarding the a r ra ng e m e n t s please contact the Listing
Officer at Furnival House, Sholiield. Tel. 0742 762342.

^on will appreciate that there are several inquests listed for each
day. To avoid inconvenience to others and to endeavour to complete
each day's work my aim is to start at or as near as possible to the
listing times stated. If yon wish t.o be present at the inquest it
is essential that you should be at the location on time.

Having just stated how important it is that. you should not be late
I also have to say that you must be prepared to find that the start
of the inquest could be delayed because for example another inquest
has over run. Obviously I do not want to inconvenience you but I am
sure that you will bear with me if you are in fact kept waiting.

As space is limited at the Medico Legal Centre should you become aware
that a largish number of relatives or friends may wish to attend the
inquest (say more than 12) please let mv Listing Officer know and give
him an estimate of the numbers involved, lie will then try to reserve
extra seats for you in the court room.

Both I and the officers involved in the preparation for these inquests
are conscious that returning to Sheffield for the inquest is likely to
be upsetting for you. I recognise that this is inevitable and am
sorry that it has to be so. You may like to know that a considerable
amount of effort has gone into the a r r a ng em e nt s for the inquest to
try to a   d unneccessary stress or pain to you.
                             O m C E O f H U CORONER FOR
                                                                  MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE.
                                                                  WATERY STREET,
                                    SO U TH YORKSHIRE
                                             (West OiStnctl       SHEFFIELD

                                                                  s 37et
   STEFAN   L   POPPER U.B ,BMED S c   .3 m .8 S . m r   C0   P
                                                CORONER


                T’plCDf'Of'eSHEFFIELD \Q1*7) ?3crJI                        16th. March. 1.990 —
  Our Ref: Hills/sol/1


  To solicitors on the record
  acting for Bereaved relatives,
  and to the Hillsborough S t ee ri n g Committee.


  Dear Sirs,

                        Limited Resumed Inquests - Hillsborough

  You will of course be aware that I have decided to resume the Inquests
  (on a limited basis) into the deaths of the persons who lost their
  lives on 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough.

 You will also be aware that the intention is to take the post mortem
 evidence together with a summary of the evidence as it relates to
 location of the deceased, the time of death as far as it can
 reasonably be established and to clear up any minor matters such as
 s pelling of names.

 The basic format for the inquests will be that the evidence will
 be presented either by w a y of d oc u mentary evidence eg. post mortem
 report or in the case of the summary by presentation by a West
 M id l a n d s Police officer.

 The evidence will be presented in a non adversarial fashion and is
 intended to give to you and in particular your client(s) non
 controversial evidence as it relates to each individual deceased
 which is available. I am sure that you will appreciate that the
 quality and quantity of evidence which it has been possible to obtain
 varies from person to person.

It must be clearly understood and it is the basis on which I have
decided to resume the inquests at this stage that no evidence will be
taken nor will questions or comments be permitted which could be
considered a-s attacking or c ri ti cising anybody or person incorporate
or otherwise or which could in any way be construed as obstruction or
c ompromising the investigation which is still being undertaken by the
DPP and on which to date no co n cl us i on has been reached.

In order to enable you and if you so wish your client(s) to be aware
of the scope of the evidence a copy of the summary will be sent to
you as soon as possible in order to enable you to consider it and in
p articu l ar to enable your client to be prepared for the evidence.

A lt h o u g h it will not be possible to recast the summaries into a
different format it may that in some case there may be a particular
point which is not clear tc you or there may be some question which
your client is particularly anx io u s about and which is not clearly
dealt with on the summary or the post mortem.

In such a case please let me k n o w the point or question that you wish
to have more information on. I cannot give any undertaking that
q u e s t i o n s submitted can or will be dealt with but provided that the
points or questions fall within the parameter of the resumed inquest
  then they will be sympat h et ic a ll y considered and if it is conveniently
  possible to riea] with them at the hearing it will be done.

  It may also be that either you or your clients may be aware of other
  w it n es se s who a r e not referred to in the s u m m a r i e s . The case files do
  not contain every w i t n e s s s t a t e m e n t which has been obtained.
  Stateme nt s which are thought not to advance the evidence have been
  excluded from the files prepared for me. However if you wish me to
  consider any par ti c ul ar statement which you are aware of and which
  is not mentioned in the summary please let me have deta il s so that' I
  may consider it.

 I think that in the m a jo r it y of the cases it will not be necessary to
 call the pathologist to the inquest but there may be a few cases where
 a client particularly wi s he s to hear the pathologist in person. If
 that applies to any of your clients please let me k n o w as soon as
 possible. I will then cons id e r the evidence in the light of this
 request.

 I have to make it clear that under no circumstances will any South
 Yorkshire Police o f f i c e r be called to give oral evidence at these
 resumed hearings. F r om my assessment of the files to date I think it
 is unlikely that I will be calling any witnesses other than WMP
 officers and possibly in a few cases the pathologists to give oral
 evidence.

 T he case files are in the course of being prepared and in order to
 give you as much time as possible and also to spread the load over
 a period it is proposed to start sending out the summar ie s towards
 the end of this w ee k or. th e beginning of the next. A consequence of
 this is that some f a mi l ie s will be aware cl the contents of the
 summaries before others.        I would be grateful if you would make it
 clear to your c l i en t( s ) particularly if they are the ones whose
 summary has not yet been sent out that there is nothing sinister in
 tins but that it is si m pl y a question of logistics.

I am not yet in a position to let you know when any particular inquest
will take place. I w i l l of course try to let you have as much notice
as possible but I am su r e that you will appreciate that this is quite
a complex operation and that you must be prepared for alterations in
lisf'r.g information even at the last moment. I ap p re ci a te the
inconvenience that this may cau s c and I will try to minim is e it but I
fear that it is inevitable.

In this     connection I w o u l d be grateful if you would please let my
listing     officer whose address appears on the attached sheet know
whe th er   you are p r e s e n t l y aware of any of your clients w h o do net
wish to     attend the inq ue st relating to their loved one.

P le as e also let my l i s t i n g officer know whether there are any major
committments of your c l i e n t s which might make it difficult for them
to attend cr. any par t ic ul a r dates. Whilst I will try to take such
information into a c c o u n t it may not be possible to meet all wishes
anc the final d e c is io n on timing and date will be taken by me and my
                                                                                                                  ID
    /                  H I L L S B O R O U G H          S T E E R I N G            C O M M I T T E E


                                   c/o C&stk CHaruScrs, Coo^Strcct, L ivcrp o o C L 2 9 S ? f
                                     TcC: 051 2 5 5 0G2S J ojxj 051 25 6 004 7 T>X 1 41 0 0




                                                                             Cur ref:           DRF/S3/INQUESI5

                                                                             Your ref:
        To All Solicitors Acting For
        Eereaved Fami 1ies
                                                                             Date:      9th March 1990


        Dear S i r s

        Hopefully you will by new seen Bulletin li issued on the 5th March, this is
        the letter to which Liz Steel refers at the beginning of the second
        paragraph cn page one.

        In response to his invitation to this Canmittes I appeared before H.M
        Coroner for South Yorkshire Dr. S. L. Popper at the M-odicc-Legal Centre,
        Watery Street, Sheffield civ Tuesday of tins week and having        heard
        representations from myself and Solicitor's representing various other
        interested bedie Dr. Fcpper confirmed that he will resume the 95 inquests
        cn a strictly limited basis on the 18th April 1990.

    H.M. Coroner has been under considerable pressure frca a variety of sources
    notably this Committee, the Hillsborough Family Support Group and Messrs
    Hammond Sucdard acting fcr South Yorkshire Police cn the instructions of the
    M.M.I.   to release certain information in advance of the resumption of the
    Inquests ... the majority of that pressure relates to the release of what
&
    Dr. Popper calls "non-ccntroversial information" which many of the families
    want and which, strictly speaking, hcs nothing to do with any potential
    criminal proceedings.

    As a result of their investigations into the Hillsborough Disaster for Lord
    Justice Taylor and then fcr the Director of Public Prcs-scuticns and also fcr
    H.M Coroner himself officers of West Midlands Police have amassed a great
    deal of information about the movements of most (but not all) of the 9o fans
    who died and that information is contained in the statements, still
    photographs,sections      ofvideo film etc held by West MidlandsFolice in
    Birmingham.    It is notpossible fcr either West       Midlands Police or H.M.
    Coroner to release all the information they haveat this stage because some
     :f it relates to the "criminal" as^ :t of the investigation but it is
    pcss ib 1e to summar ise frccn each cf the c0) s e p a r a t e f i l e s   detailed
    information accut the     movements  of  each dp^~-"-sed frcm  the  time  they l eft
    heme until the time deat                                                         the
    ground or in hospital      and  such summaries  are  currently   in   the course  of
    preparat ion.

    The summaries are being prepared by senior officers frca the V.est iMiulan^s
    Force ar.d are being scrutinized by other more senior officers and then by
    Dr.   Fopper himself before they are to be released to ensure tr.at they
    contain no controversial details and that they are accurate and as detailed
    as possible In the circumstances.
                                  I _   T X -r-
                                                  -nfions has ccnfirn>sd to a H.M.                Coroner that
  this non-controversial information may be released now to the families in
  accordance with a strictly laid down procedure and this procedure is as it
  follows.

  As soon as possible copies of the 95 summaries will be sent to this
  Committee and a copy of the summary relating to each individual deceased
  will be sent to the Solicitors cn record with H.M. Coroner as being the
  practice acting for the Immediate next of kin.

 No photographs cr video film extracts will be issued but references to these
 will almost certainly be included in the summary and if for any reason the
 family particularly wants to see the photograph or video film extract then
 the Coroner will consider each request for this information cn its merits.
 The Coroner does not feel that the supplyinyg of photographs etc is
 necessary at this stage, the pictures may cause further grief and many of
 the families have seen them anyway during discussions with West Midlands
 officers.   There is also the problem of logistics and the Coroner is trying
 to keep everything as simple as possible for the time being.

 A "flew chart" may also to be issued (although no firm decision has been
 made about this) and this chart will shew movement of each decreased within
 certain time bands and will indentify the individual (whether a relative, a
 member of the public cr police officer) who identifies the deceased at a
 particular spot cr time either prior to or following his or her death.

 It is for you to advise ycur client when you have received this suiaary; we
 strongly recommend that you do not simply send the summary to ycur client
 without prior warning as they are likely to contain information which may
 cause distress If seen without prior warning and although it is of course up
 to ycu to decide how you impart this information to ycur client we recommend
 that ycu tell ycur client that ycu have the summary available ar.d invite
 them to either request a copy cr preferably see them to go through it with
 them before deciding whether to release a full copy to them fcr their era
 use.

 The summary should be read in conjunction with the Fcst-Mcrtem Kepcrt which
 we anticipate ycu will have already obtained.

In cur view it is likely that seme families will not want to be mace aware
of the contents of the summary in detail but we feel that it is important
that they at least have the cpticn to chocse whether they avail themselves
of the opportunity to see it cr not, at present they co not have that
cpticn.

We believe that it; is likely that -any families having seen the su-uary will
be satisfied with the factual information it contains and will not want to
take any further action. Their summary will simply be presented in a forma!
way in open Court in Sheffield and thus taken into public record.

Fcr details of what we suggest ycu do in the event that ycur clients have
queries arising frees the summary cr they want to atter.d the Inquests
personally please see belcv,
                                                 >


Each summary will be presented personally by the officer who prepared it to
H.M. Coroner in accordance with a timetable which will be published as seen
as possible and it is hoped that eight summaries a day can be received by
H.M. Coroner sitting in Open Court with a Jury.

At the conclusion of the presentation of the 95 summaries the Ccrcner will
adjourn his Jury without asking them to return any verdict.

In the event that the Director of Fublic Prosecutions then subsequently
instigates criminal proceedings against any individual cr organisation in
'-^nortion with this disaster then it is likely (but not certain) that the
  Coroner will not resume the Inquests again following the decision of the
  Crown Court Jury. If on the other hand no criminal proceedings were brought
  then H.M. Coroner voild reconvene his Jury following the announceinent by
  the D.D.P.    of his Intention not to pursue the matter and decide what
  evidence he would then call to enable him to Invite the Jury to return
  whatever   verdict   seemed   most   appropriate  in the circumstances.
  The hearings at which these summaries will be presented will therefore be
  "low key" and not afford anyone the opportunityto cross examine police
  officers, club officials etc as they will not be giving evidence.

 These hearings are Intended to be an exercise In distributing Information to
 families abcut precisely how their loved cnes died and where and not an
 attempt to discover why or who was to blame.
 The hearings will take place during, the period ISth April to £th May-
 inclusive at the Medico-Legal Centre, Sheffield and as soon as the timetable
 for the hearings is known we will circulate it to all firms who receive this
 letter and it .will be up to ycu to notify your individual clients of the
 date and time upcn which their Inquest will be heard.

 There is no obligation on any family to attend the hearing but they are of
 course mere than welcome to be present when their summary is presented if
 they wish.

 In sore cases families will have queries either cn contents    of   Post-Mortem
 Reports cr cn the summary Itself

 As a result of our discussions with II.M.       Corcner we recccinxand that the
 following procedure be adopted in such cases.

. Families who have such queries should instruct ycu to set cut their
  questions in a short form and that form should be copied to H.M. Coroner
  and ourselves.

 We enclose such a form for ycur use.

 West Midlands Police to ascertain the information required (if it is
 available and felt to be appropriate) and have the details available at the
 Individual hearing.

Ln cases of particular queries concerning the contents of Fest-Morten
Reports if the information cannot be supplied by letter cr would be best
explained to the family by the pathologist concerned then he ray be asked to
attend fcr that particular inquest to deal with the question from the
witness box.

This Steering Conmittee will be represented throughout the entire p^icd cf
the hearings ar.d as your client's Inquest is reopened the question which ycu
have previously given notice of will be asked cn ycur client's behalf by the
Solicitor present ar.d if the information is available it will be given by
the su,TuT,ary presenting officer as part cf his evidence. We will report that
information to you and if ycu wish ycu can bespeak a copy cf the shorthand
transcript which will be available fcr each Inquest.

If fcr any reason ycur client is not willing to allowthe member of        this
Ccfranttee present in Court to put his cr her question fcr any reason     then
you may attend cn his cr her behalf and put the question yourself,        H.M.
Coroner anticipates that there will be scoe families who will wish to     have
their own Solicitors present to represent them.

We should however sound a note of caution abcut costs at this stage.

After great difficulty we have persuaded the Municipal Mutual Insurers to
                                      " — 1            i-haf p member of this
     /ocmrnittee will be present throughout the entire period the Inquests are
      running but if your client wants ycu to appear personally you must deal with
      the question of ycur costs for doing so directly with the H.M. I. They have
      not said that they would not meet any Individual Solicitors costs but they
      have Indicated that they would only be prepared to do so in exceptional
      circumstances and this is a matter which you must take up with the Insurers
      yourself before deciding to travel to Sheffield-to represent your client.


      The M.M.I have accepted the proposition that you will be entitled to recover
      ycur.reasonable costs for going through the summary with your client and
      corresponding with H.M.     Coroner and ourselves prior to the Inquests ...
      these costs can simply be included as part of ycur general profit charges in
      connection with the civil claim for damages.




     We must stress that as this is an information dissemination exercise by H.M.
     Coroner he is unlikely to accept any questions which might be regarded as
     being of a controversial nature and he will only accept questions which
     clear up any ambiguity in the summary.
                                                            v

     Eefore H.M. Coroner begins dealing with the 95 individual Inquests cn the
     19th April he will receive a generic evidence cn Wednesday the ISth April.

     This generic evidence is likely to   cccg   from a variety of witnesses.

     The first witness is likely to be Dr. Forest. He will formally present the
     94 blocd alcohol level Reports which were prepared (no sample was taken frcm
     cne very young fan) and he will explain the basis of the work he did. This
     will have the effect of formally bringing into public record his Reports, we
     hope to be able to obtain copies of the blood alcohol level Report fcr each
     fan in advance and we do not anticipate that there will be any real issue
     over the blood alcohol level present in any individual deceased.

     A senior police officer will then give evidence to explain certain terms and
     expressions used in the summaries and cn the "flew charts" and again ve do
     not anticipate that his evidence would be controversial in any way.
O
    It is then proposed to call Professor Usher to given an overview of the
    pathology of the types cf injuries which were sustained. This will again
    evidence of a general nature and is unlikely to make reference to any
    individual and will for example explain what happens to the human body when
    it is cotpressed due to pressure and unable to absorb oxygen ...          his
    evider.ee is likely‘to be distressing to families but will hopefully clear up
    much anxiety and shew that many fans simply "went to sleep" without any
    great discomfort because of lack of oxygen.

    Finally, H.M. Coroner may call such further evidence cf a generic nature as
    he feels appropriate as the 15th April approaches.

    As we have said wo will have a presence throughout^ the 95 Inquests and we
    are mere than happy to act as ycur "Agent" and put ycur client's questions
    to the summary presenting officer and report back appropriately to you,
    there will be no agr.ecy account rendered by us to ycu cr ycur client fcr
    this service.

    We stress again that the next of kin and wider family are welcome to attend
    if they wish to hear their particular summary being represented but they are
    unlikely to be able to put quesitens to the summary presenting officer
    unless those questions have previously been notified to H.M.     Corcr.sr and
    ourselves in writing, please bear in r.ina that the Coroner will be trying to
     get through 8 Inquests a day over a 3 week period and any timetable drawn In
     advance must be strictly adhered to if families are to have their particular
     Inquest heard at the time previously notified.

     Any family who indicates an Intention to attend and who are late for any
     reason will, not have their Inquest held up pending their arrival; H.M.
     Coroner is very sympathetic towards all the families involved but once these
     Inquests start to run the timetable must be strictly adhered to if everybody
     Is to be satisfied.

     We are not able to tell ycu when you will receive your client's summary or
     summaries at the moment, they are net all prepared but you may rest assured
     that they will be sent to ycu by H.M.       Coroner as scon as they are
     available.    If ycu have not already obtained a copy of the Post-Mcrten
     Report frcta the Ccrener's office In Sheffield we urge ycu to do so
     immediately.

     Please return a separate copy of the enclosed questionnaire in relation to
     each deceased for who ycu act to curselves and forward a ccpy to H.M.
     Cbrcner as seen as possible after ycu have seen the suincary and in any event
#
     no later than Tuesday the 10th April in any event ^as any questions notified
     after that date may not be capable of being investigated and dealt -with
     before the Inquests begin.

    For cur part we believe that this move by H.M.            Corcner to impart
    information to families is to be applauded and we have taken the liberty of
    making that point in cpen Court and through the press. The Corcner is under
    no obligation to act in the way that he is ar.d we believe that his stated
    intentions to assist families in any way he can by providing this
    Information are entirely genuine and we trust that those families vno ycu
    represent will accept this move cn his behalf in the way in which we believe
    that It is Intended.

    Although the prir^ary intention of Dr Pepper is to give families information
    abcut how their loved one died, cne of the beneficial side effects cf ycu
    receiving these summaries new will be that you will be in a better positicn
    to          the pre-death teri'cr/pre-death pain and suffering elenient in the
    damages clain ar.d you will in due cause receive cur further views cn this
    aspect in = future Eulietin, together with a repcrt cn cur continuing
    negotiations with the Insurers.

    At the meeting cn Tuesday H.M.Ccrcner was at pains to stress that he has no
    "inside information" abcut the intentions of the D.P.P. as regards criminal
    proceedings and he stressed that his rctlves in reopening the Inquests at
    this stage were directed cnly at supplying information to families.

    It is unlikely that we will issue a general Bulletin dealing solely with
    Inquests before they reopen but the writer will be ircre than happy to dea.
    with individual queries which arise either as a result cf the contents c:
    this letter cr as a result of problems raised by clients, cr letters should
    be directed to the Law Library quoting the reference shown in the heading c:
    this letter.

    If there are any significant changes to the information   set   cut   above   we
    will get back to ycu.

    Yours sincerelv




                                                                                       7
         H I L L S B O R O U G H         S T E E R I N G         C O M M I T T E E


                       c/o C&StCc Charters, Coo^Strcet, JLivcrpcof L2 SS^f
                         ‘I d : 051 255 062S Jo*: 051 2 5 6 0047 (DX 14100




 NAME OF DECEASED:


 NAME OF SOLICITORS:


 ACTING FCR;


 RELATICNSiil? TO DECEASED:


 QUESTIONS (please keep these
 brief and ccnfine them tc
 matters arising frora the
 Sunurary and Fest-Mcrteai
 Report cnly).




If ycu have queries to raise please ensure that this form Is returned to us
and copied to H.M. Ccrcr.er, Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield as
socn as possible and in any event no later than 10th April 1990.
