             MINUTES OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STEERING COMMITTEE
      CONFERENCE AT MOOT HALL, LIVERPOOL UNIVERSITY FACULTY OF LAW
       FOR SOLICITOR MEMBERS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH SOLICITORS» GROUP



Present

Miss. E.M. Steel, Miss. Nicola Harrison, Mr. David Harris, Mr. Neville
Whittle, Mr. Michael Humphreys and Mr. Douglas Fraser. Mr. Benet Hytner
Q.C. was present from the opening of the meeting, Mr. T.R.A. King
joined the meeting shortly after it began.

The Steering Committee and Counsel took up position at the front of
the Hall.

Approximately 47 Solicitors (or their representatives) were in attendance.

Miss. Steel opened the meeting by welcoming those present.

Mr. Ben Hytner then addressed the meeting, he brought members of the
Group up to date as regards the Public Enquiry (the evidence having
been completed approximately 10 days ago written submissions are now
being submitted to the Treasury by all interested parties and there
is to be a final address by Silk for each party to Lord Justice Taylor
on Friday the 14th July). The Committee have all seen copies of those
submissions which have been completed, copies of all submissions will
be available in the Law Library for examination by Solicitors on Friday
the 14th July.     Mr. Hytner explained that the crux of the problem
on the 15th April had been uncontrolled overcrowding of pens 3 and
4 and he commented that the contents of the present Guide are advisory
only but that they should in his view be mandatory and he has included
this recommendation in his written submission to Lord Justice Taylor.

Mike Humphreys then explained the position as regards the "main action"
and confirmed that a Writ had been served and that a Statement of
Claim was expected to be despatched during the course of the next
couple of days.    Mr. Hytner added that although the insurers of the
Club and Police had denied liability. He did not anticipate any real
difficulty in this respect with certain categories of Plaintiff but
he did anticipate some problems over "remote" claims and he took the
view that it was probable that more than one Plaintiff would be needed
in a "test action" to determine how far "remoteness" went and Mike
Humphries confirmed that this was something he had under active consideration
and once the main action was underway he would be addressing his mind
to the various categories of potential Plaintiff which should be investi­
gated   ... there is likely to be a more detailed note concerning this
problem in a subsequent Bulletin to Member Firms.

There were a number of questions from the floor concerning liability,
the general view expressed from the Committee was that liability was
not likely to be a problem in the fatal cases or in those cases where
people had received physical and/or mental injuries whilst in pens
3 and 4 ... the most likely problem areas were with those who had
not actually been at the match and who had stiffered psychological
trauma from learning that their loved ones had either been killed
or seriously injured.

Miss. Steel made the point that during the Committee’s discussion
with the insurers and their solicitors last week it had been agreed
■that any claim which was ultimately settled (by negotiation or judgment)
would attract interest at the appropriate rate from the 15th April
1989.   Miss. Steel also confirmed that all correspondence concerning
claims for damages should be directed to the Municipal Mutual Insurance,
Bradford.

Nicof^' Harrison then outlined the position concerning the team of
psychologists who will examine clients of members of the Group who
believe they are suffering from some form of emotional upset following
this disaster.   A Questionnaire will accompany the next Bulletin with
an explanatory paragraph as to the procedure to be adopted by those
solicitors who want their clients to be psychologically assessed with
the question of P.T.S.D. in mind.

Mr. Keith Levin raised the question of funding this litigation and
Miss. Steel replied by saying that the Insurers were considering whether
they would agree to meet interim disbursements, further information
to solicitors will follow concerning this question as soon as information
is available.

Doug Fraser then addressed the meeting concerning the adjourned inquests.
He has been elected by the Committee to instruct Counsel and deal
generally with this matter.       He pointed out that although no date
has been fixed H.M. Coroner for Sheffield anticipates beginning his
hearing on the 15th January 1990.      Again, although no format has been
decided upon the Coroner anticipates having a "generic" hearing to
deal with the events of       the 15th April in general terms and then,
having 95 short separate "inquests within an inquest" to deal with
each deceased. Mr. Fraser has been invited by H.M. Coroner to a meeting
in Sheffield on the 21st July 1989 to discuss detail and a further*
note will appear in a subsequent Bulletin.        It is anticipated that
Mr. Fraser will be writing on behalf of the Committee to each practice
who has indicatedthat it is instructed on behalf of           relatives of
  one   or more deceased fan for detailed information concerning that
individual in due course. "Block Representation" is anticipated subject
of course to the wishes of the bereaved families, their solicitors
and the Coroner.     The problems of funding this "Block Representation”
are currently under consideration by Mr. Fraser        and his colleagues
 ... further information will be made available in due course.

Mike Humphreys reported that at the initial meeting of the Committee
and the insurers of the Police and Club there had been a refusal by
the insurers to widen the category of people entitled to the "bereavemeni:
allowance" but he added that the insurers are considering their position.
Mr. Humphreys also reported that the initial reaction of the insurers
was that they were not prepared to increase the statutory figure of
£3,500 despite the tendancy of some defendants to increase this figure
to the sum of £10,000 but again the insurers seemed prepared to at
least consider their position on this aspect and anyfurther developments
in this regard will of course be reported.

Miss. Steel reported that many clients had commented through various
means upon the lack of information being provided by solicitors. It
seems that some solicitors are not supplying their clients with any
information at all, others are simply photocopying the Steering Committee
Bulletins and sending these to clients. There was a general discussion
about "client communication" and it was agreed that the Committee
would produce a "Newsletter" (or a draft of one) for inclusion with
the next Bulletin which Solicitors could copy and send to their clients.
(David Harris was appointed to deal with this).
Miss. Steel then made mention of the second part of the Public Enquiry.
This will deal largely with Engineering aspects and recommendations
for the future safety of football stadia. She said that it was unlikely
that Lord Justice Taylor would receive much verbal evidence, he had
indicated that he preferred evidence for this part to be in written
form.- She asked those present to explain this to their clients and
invite them (and anyone of whom they were aware who may have a useful
contribution to make) to commit their views to paper and forward copies
to the Steering Committee at the Library. Those written submissions
would then be collated to avoid duplication and thence forwarded to
the Treasury to be placed before Lord Justice Taylor. It is important
that any suggestions/information should be clearly set out (supported
by documents/photographs as necessary) and received by the Committee
as soon as possible. The "second stage" of the Enquiry will be co-ordinated
by Nicola Harris and she will decide whether a presence by Counsel
or Committee Members on a day by day basis will be appropriate. Miss
Harrison will act as appropriate      and report in due course to the
Committee who will report by way of Bulletin in the usual way.

The meeting was closed by Miss. Steel with a summary of matters discussed
at 7.10 p.m.


Time engaged 1 hour 10 minutes.
              MINUTES OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STEERING COMMITTEE
           MEETING FOR SOLICITORS AND THEIR CLIENTS AT MOOT HALL
           LIVERPOOL UNIVERSITY FACULTY OF LAW ON 11TH JULY 1989

   '• 'k
Present

Miss. E.M. Steel, Miss. Nicola Harrison, Mr. David Harris, Mr. Neville
Whittle, Mr. Michael Humphreys and Mr. Douglas Fraser.         Mr. Benet
Hytner Q.C. and Mr. T.R.A. King were also in attendance by invitation.


Approximately 145 people were in attendance.

After a short opening address by Miss.      E.M. Steel Mr.   Benet Hytner
addressed the meeting.

He explained that Lord Justice Taylor had finished hearing oral evidence
and that he had invited written submissions and offered the various
Silks the opportunity of a short address on Friday 14th July to pick
out any points that were felt to be particularly relevant and which
required, comment from any of the submissions made. Mr. Hytner explained
that although civil proceedings had been begun against the Club and
Police this did not mean that these were the only organisations legally
to blame but he said      he wanted to start off against them to begin
with because he felt the cases against them were strongest.

Miss. Steel took up the position of the civil claims, she said that
many people would have seen in the press that liability for the disaster
had been denied by the insurers of the Club and Police and she explained
that a "lead action" had been begun by service of Writ.        The lead
action related to a fan who had lost his life and she explained the
likely need to expand the classes of people claiming to include those
would had been injured and those who had only been shocked even though
not at the game.

Mr. Hytner was specifically asked a number of questions from the floor
about both civil and criminal liability, in the light of the recent
decision by the D.P.P. to bring prosecutions following Zebrugge Disaster
he was asked whether he thought it was possible/probable that manslaughter
charges could be brought in this case ( Mr. Duckenfield was particularly
referred to) Mr. Hytner defined the requirements which would need
to be fulfilled before charges of manslaughter could be substantiated
... the first relating to the Policing of the crowd on the day. This
would have to amount to reckless conduct by one or more persons leading
to death of one or more fans and the second element being the question
of Corporate manslaughter would have to establish that there had been
a pattern of behaviour over a period of time which could have lead
to deaths. Mr Hytner explained that the D.P.P. will examine all the
evidence very carefully if asked to do so but will have in mind the
requirement that there must be a "better than evens chance of conviction*1
before he agrees to bring prosection. This is a matter which is perhaps
better looked at following the conclusion of the Inquests.

There was a very strong feeling from lay clients present that criminal
proceedings should be brought and when asked by Miss. Steel for a
show of hands as to whether or not they wanted criminal charges (manslaughter
in particular) bringing against any individual if the evidence support of
this there was an overwhelming view that this should be the case.
Mr. Hytner then agreed to give a summary of evidence generally at
the Public Enquiry and he touched upon a number of problems including:-

1.    The build up of fans outside the turnstile area.
     "V
2.    The number of turnstiles available.

3.    The lack of thought by those responsible for what would happen
      if "the gate" was opened and pens 3 and 4 were full and the mouth
      of the tunnel was not closed off.

4.    The lack of monitoring of people entering pens 3 and 4 particularly
      from 2.45 p.m. onwards.

5.    The lack of information given to Mr. Marshall about what was going
      on "behind the gate" that he demanded be opened.

6.        The "dithering" by Mr. Duckenfield for five minutes or so after
          he received the initial request to open "the gate". It should have
          been obvious to him that if he was going to open agate there would
          be an influx of fans at a greater rate than the turnstiles would
          have permitted, surely it should have occurred to him that the
          mouth of the tunnel should be closed?


There was an interruption by Mr. Tyrell to the address by Mr. Hytner
concerning the opening of the gate.    He said that although he had
heard Mr. Hytner say in Sheffield that he (Mr. Hytner) did not blame
Mr. Marshall for opening the gate he (Mr. Tyrell) did. The question
of "blame" was then discussed at length and it seemed to be accepted
by the meeting generally that Mr. Marshall was left with no choice
other than to demand that "the gate" be opened, the problem was that
he did not know what was going on behind the gate at the time his
request was made, his request was based on information within his
knowledge that there would almost certainly have been severe injury
or death to fans caused outside the turnstiles if "the gate" had not
been opened.

Miss. Steel then reported to the meeting generally on           the outcome
of the meeting with insurers (see above).

Mr. Hytner referred to the forthcoming Inquests and the possibility
of seeking to persuade the jury to return an "unlawful killing" verdict
and the effect of that verdict upon the mind of the D.P.P. as regards
criminal proceedings.

Miss. Steel then reported the information which Doug Fraser had given
to the earlier Solicitors' meeting concerning the resumed inquests.

Mrs. Sefton (from the floor) raised the question of           "common   care"
Orders and there was a short discussion concerning this.

Mr. Devonside (from the floor)        raised the question of gate receipts
and a short discussion followed.

Mr. Humphreys reported the denial of liability by the insurers and
explained the position concerning the "lead action" ... see above.
Mr. Hytner explained to the meeting how the "bereavement allowance"
operated and its unfairness given the "18th Birthday deadline". He:
also^dealt     with   the   questions   of nervous shock and "remoteness" as
it affects these claims.


Mr.   Julian   Linskill     (who confirmed that he acted for the family of"
one fan who lost his life) offered a vote of thanks to the Committee
for its sterling work on behalf of members of the Group and their
clients and he supported the view that there should be block repres­
entation of the deceased at the forthcoming inquest and offered his
support for such representation.

Miss. Steel canvassed the views of those present (by a show of hands)
on the questions of criminal proceedings and in particular manslaughter
and there was an overwhelming view that if criminal proceedings could
be brought (particularly against Mr. Duckenfield) they should be.

The "open" meeting concluded.

Engaged 2 hours.
