\
 \
        HILLSBOROUGH                    STEERING                COMMITTEE
       '&
        W
                      c/o (*tCe Chambers, Coo/^Street, LivcrpooCLZ S S Ji
                                 TeC: 255-0628 Jo*: 236 0047
         *

                                                                    26TH JUNE 1989
                                                                     EMS/DW


F.A.O.




Dear

RE:          HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 4

There have been a number of developments and the present position
as far as the various aspects are concerned is as under

Judicial Inquiry

Lord Justice Taylor has indicated that he intends to complete oral
evidence this week. Counsel's Submissions will be taken later
next week and he intends to bring out his interim report as soon
as practicable.

All evidence which was submitted has been and will be taken into
consideration.   Some additional evidence may well be called from
our clients before the end of the week but only where that
evidence relates to an aspect which has not been previously fuLLy
covered. We have submitted to the Treasury Solicitors separate
from the general body of statements those from witnesses who in
our view fall into this category.  It is of course for the
Treasury Team and the Inquiry to determine who will be called to
give oral evidence.

Conferences with Counsel

A Conference with Counsel, Solicitors and clients was held in
London on the 16th June, for those members in the South of EngLand
together with their clients who were notified separately of the
Conference.
As agreed at the Conference held at the Faculty of Law, Liverpool,
we have made arrangements for a further conference with Counsel to
be attended by Solicitors and clients on the 11th July 1989 at the
Moot Hall, Faculty of Law, Liverpool University.
On this occasion Counsel can deal both with the Inquiry and the
evidence which came out of that Inquiry and also with the civil
liability aspects of the claims.

As certain matters will be more appropriately dealt with by
Solicitors only the Conference will be split into two parts

6.00pm - Conference with Counsel for Solicitor members of the
         group only.

7.30pm - Conference with Counsel for Solicitors and clients.

We have arranged for a cup of tea or coffee to be available at the
Faculty from approximately 7.00pm for all those attending. Mr
Hytner QC and Mr King will be at the Conference.

Civil Claims
The Insurance Companies and Solicitors acting for the Club and the
Police have agreed to meet on a without prejudice basis with
members of the Steering Committee.   We had asked for an early
meeting - within the first two or three weeks of the Inquiry - but
the first date when the Defendants' representatives were able
to/willing to meet is in July and an appointment has been arranged
for the 10th July.

Because of the delay in meeting they have been informed that
proceedings will be issued although we are of course continuing in
parallel the without prejudice discussions.

An application is being made to the Presiding Judge of the
Northern Circuit for directions.   It is common in "disaster"
cases for the Judge to give directions - frequently nominating a
particular Registrar or Judge to deal with interlocutory matters -
to ensure the speedy and co-ordinated disposal of cases. As soon
as we have anything further to report on this aspect we will of
course let you know.

As far as the parties to the action are concerned although Counsel
will deal with this in more detail at the conference on the 11-th
(and for those in the South of England who are not able to attend
the conference I will arrange to let you have a full note of that
conference) the evidence given to the Judicial Inquiry and the
documents produced there have revealed clear evidence of
negligence and breach of duty on the part of the Club and the
Police.j   Detailed allegations are available and again these can
be dealjt with at the Conference.

There has also been evidence indicating fault on the part of a
number of other potential parties namely the Sheffield City
Council (as Licensing Authority) their predecessors the South
Yorkshire County Council (on the same basis) the F.A. (for the
choice of that ground at all) and the Consultant Engineer engaged
by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Dr Eastwood.
     %
However, as there is clearly a good case against the two primary
Defendants the Club and the Police, it is proposed to limit the
actions to those two Defendants at this stage and to leave it -to
them to take Third Party proceedings against any of the other
potential Defendants if they are so advised.

Legal Aid
It is now appropriate to submit applications for legal aid - some
people have already done so.   Peter Crook, Area Secretary of "the
Legal Aid Board has indicated that - dependent of course on
financial circumstances as in any application for legal aid -
Legal Aid will be granted to cover all individual costs but not:
generic costs, which will be granted on one certificate only to
avoid duplication of costs.

I would suggest that if your client falls within the scope of -the
legal aid scheme that this is now the appropriate time to submit
the application.   The relevant Legal Aid Office is :-

             No: 15 (Merseyside) Area,
             Cavern Walks,
             8, Matthew Street,
             Liverpool
             MERSEYSIDE    L2 6RE
             TELE: 051-236-8371   (DX 14,208)

The Hillsborough Video

The Official Video which was produced for the Judicial Inquiry
lasts two hours has been compiled from many hours of video from
Police, Club, BBC and private video recordings. A number of
Solicitors have asked for the opportunity of seeing that video.
Copies are available at the Offices of Mike Humphreys (Brian
Thompson and Partners, Liverpool) and at Ford and Warren, Leeds.

In the case of the Liverpool video this would be available any
week day at 10.00am or 2.00pm.    Space is limited so I would ie
grateful if you would telephone Alison Davies (051-227-2876) to
let her know when you would like to come. As far as the Leeds
showing is concerned separate arrangements should be made through
Jo Dearden (0532-436601).

At the request of clients who attended the Liverpool Conference we
asked whether the uncut video of the scenes in the Leppings Lane
terraces could be made available for the bereaved to see. I asked
in my last Bulletin of the 30th May that Solicitors should let us
know whether any of their clients did wish to see this. So far we
have had two positive responses.  I will leave it until the end of
next week (the 7th July) and then ask the West Midlands Police to
make the arrangements and notify those who have expressed an
interest of the details of time and place.
The Hillsborough Trust

The Trustees have now been advertising for claims. Advertisements
were placed in the local Merseyside Papers and in some National
papers.  I do however know that not everyone has seen the
advertisement and therefore enclose herewith a copy of the
relevant Press Release.   The Trustees are anxious to deal with
the claims expeditiously and if your clients have not already
submitted a claim they are encouraged to do so.
                                                 \


Coroner's Inquests

The Inquests currently stand adjourned and no final decision has
been made by the Coroner as to the form of the Inquest itself -
i.e. 'will there be 95 individual Inquests or one combined ?'

He is currently still considering our application for post mortem
reports to be released to Solicitors acting in fatal cases prior
to the Inquest.

If he does agree then these would have to be released on a
provisional basis and will let you know as soon as we hear
anything.

In the meantime if you are acting in an Estate and have not yet;
notified the Coroner of your interest - whether or not at the end
of the day joint representation is appropriate for the Inquest or
separate representation - I would be glad if you could write to
the Coroner letting him know the position.

His full name and address is :-

             MR S L POPPER
             H M CORONER
             MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE
             WATERY STREET
             SHEFFIELD   S3 7ET



D S S Treatment of Capital Sums

I enclose herewith copies of three D.S.S. Circulars (I.D. 4749
n/DB, I.D. 1428 n/DB and I.D. 2359 T/DB) from which you will see
that in certain circumstances if money is placed on Trust either
for the injured person themselves or for children this money is
disregarded (I.D. 2359 T/DB).

Because individual circumstances will be very different it is not
appropriate for us to instruct Counsel to settle a single Trust
Document but if your client does fall into this category it is
probably a matter which is appropriate to raise with the
Hillsborough Disaster Trustees and to include in any application
for assistance the cost of advice and the settling of an
appropriate Trust Deed.

Medical Reports from Psychlatrists/Cllnlcal Psychologist

We have been in touch with Anne Scott Fordham, a Clinical
Pyschologist who has been discussing with colleagues the most
appropriate way of dealing with the reports and assessments.    The
present position is that they have had a number of meetings and
wish to see us again to iron out a few details.   We should be in
a position to report to you fully on this aspect in the next
Bulletin and hopefully, for those who are able to attend the
Conference on the 11th, if any further information is available by
then we will report to you at that Conference.

Cont ri but ions

If you have not already let Ronnie Wright of the Law Library have
your contribution of £100 (cheque made payable to Liverpool Law
Society) please could you do so.

Every good wish.

Yours sincerely,




MISS E M STEEL




P.S.   Please would you let Ronnie Wright have details of who will be
       attending the Conference with Counsel on the 11th July and she
       will send the ticket(s).
       09/06 ’89 15*15            2 0742 734060   S.C.C.PRESS OFF.            82,.**




      from SHEFFIELD COUNCIL
                                                             9th June 1989



                   HILLSBOROUGH TRUSTEES CALL FOR CLAIMS



The Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal are advertising for those

who might have suffered to contact them.



Trust Fund Manager Michael Reddington said:



"The first priority was to make payments to   the bereaved and to those who

were seriously injured at the time of the disaster.    Now we are hoping to

contact people who may have suffered in any way.”



It is thought thiB could include people who Bufferedphysically,

psychologically or materially.



The Trustees made initial payments two weeks ago.
                                       S 0742 734060   S.C.C.PRESS OFF.         03
       09/06   ’ 89   15116


                                                                                     *>-




                                       -   2   -




Although they are not responsible for raising or collecting money, the

Ti'usLeeu Imvo bvun uverwhelmed by the generosity of those who have given to

the Appeal, both in cash in giving their time to fund-raising events up and

down the country*       The effect of the disaster on potential claimants may

not be immediate, bo they will continue to need funds to distribute for

some months to come.



"We are asking people to contact us by 3let July, if possible," said Mr

Reddington.     "However, if anyone does not feel up to making a claim

themselves at the moment, we will be able to consider applications after

that time.     Alternatively, they could ask a friend or relative, social

worker or police officer to write in on their behalf," he added.



Claims should be made in writing to the Trust Fund Manager at Hillsborough

Disaster Appeal Fund, PO Box 220, Liverpool L69 2PN.




      Issued by Shirley Lanstone, Sheffield City Council, Press Office

    Contact for further information is Michael Heddington on 051 236 0044




               NOTEi      PLEASE DO NOT PUBLISH THIS TELEPHONE NUMBER
WHY DOES CAPITAL AFFECT INCOME S U P P O R T ?



     Incase Support is public money provided out of taxation.              It is intended
     to bring any resources you and your family have up to a certain level.
    Therefore, it would be wrong to ignore relatively large amounts of
    capital.      The Government believe that the capital rules strike the right
    balance between encouraging people to save and the proper use of public
    money.


CAN I GIVE C APITAL AWAY OR SPENT)    TT?



*   If you give some of your capital away          i» ordet to getIncome     Support or to
    increase the amounl payable, the capital youhave           given away maybe taken
    into account as if you still had it.


         ~ "Ple 1 You cannot 9et In«>me Support because you have £9,000 in
         the building society. You give your son £4,000 to bring you below
         the Income Support limit of £6,000.           You may not get any Income
         Support.


         Example 2     You have £2,800 capital and give your daughter £500.           Your
         Income Support will not be affected because your original capital was
         not more than £3,000.


    If you spend some of your capital in a reasonable way such as on normal
    day to day living expenses or on essential house repairs and your capital
    reduced to £6000 or less, you may be entitled to Income Support or to more
    Income Support if you are already getting it.


         Example 1      You cannot get      Income Support because you have £7,000.
         Essential     work is carried      out to repair aleaking roof costing you
         £1400.    As you   now have £5,800 you may be entitled to Income Support.


                   2    You have £5100           and are gettingIncome Support.    You spend
        £100 to redecorate your living room and another £400 to replace a
        worn-out carpet.      As you now have £4,600 you may be entitled to more
        Income Support.
    ID4754n/D B



                                       INCOME StIPPQRT




                                          CAPITAL



    WHAT IS CAPITAf.?


        Capital includes .11 saving, ,„r example money held in , bank or buildina
        society account. Premium Bonds, Rational Savings Certificates, stocks ,„d
        shares, insurance policies and property.


H OW DOES CAPITAL A F FECT INCOME SUPPORT?


*
       You and your partner can have up to £6,000 capital and still get Incoma
       Support. But you cannot receive benefit if your capital or your combia.d
       capital is more than £6,000.


       normally, all capital is counted.     But some of it may be ignored, for
       example the home you live in and certain other property, life insurance
       policies and personal possessions, such as a car.

*
       Children's savings are not included as part of your capital.      Special
       rules apply to their capital and you may still get Income Support even if
       they have more than £6,000.


       The first £3,000 capital that you and your partner have, will not affect
       the amount of Income Support you can receive.      But the amount will be
      reduced by £1 a week for every £250, or part of £250, held between £3.00»
      and £6,000.



            tople 1     YoU have ex« t l y £3,000.   Your Income Support will not be
            affected.


           Example ?    You have £2,600 and your partner has £1,000, making a
           total of £3,600.    Your Income Support will be reduced by £3 a week.


           E*£m£l£_l You and your partner have £6,000 between you.       Your Incone
           Support will be reduced by £12 a week.
IDl428n/SP



                  INCOME SUPPORT/HOUSING BENEFIT/FAMILY CREDIT

                      CHARITABLE AND VOLUNTARY PAYMENTS

     r%
1.   Regular Payments

Up to £5 a week (per family) of income which is paid or is due to be paid
regularly can be disregarded, provided that the £5 disregard has not
already been allowed on another income (eg on a war pension). Any excess
over £5 a week is taken fully into account as income.

*    Regular payments include payments paid or due to be paid at recurring
      intervals such as monthly, annually (eg every Christmas) and wherever
      a pattern can be established.

*    A payment is "due to fcs paid" when there is an agreement to make a
      payment. >


2.    Irregular Payments

These are "one-off" payments which are not made or due to be made
regularly. They are treateJ as capital and will not affect a claimant’s
benefit unless the claimant already has capital of more than £3000 or the
payment increases any existing capital to over £3000.

An income of £1 a week will be assumed in Income Support and Family Credit
for every £250, or part of £250, held between £3000 and £6000: the same
amount will be assumed in Housing Benefit for capital between £3000 and
£6000. No Income Support or Family Credit is payable if the claimant has
over £6000, and no Housing Benefit is payable if the capital has over £8000.


3.    Third Party Payments

Payments made to a third party (such as a shop or supplier) for the
claimant or his family are disregarded provided that the payments are not
used for:

      food, ordinary clothing or footwear (see belcv), household fuel, ur
      accommodation costs already covered by Income Support or Housing
      Benefit or, in Family Credit, any housing costs.

*    Payments made to a third party for any of the above items wills

             be treated as income under paragraph I above, if they are
             regular payments;

             be treated as capital under paragraph 2 above, if they are
             irregular payments.

*    Payments may be sent direct to the third party, or made by cheque
      payable to the third party and sent to the claimant.

*    "ordinary clothing or footwear" means clothing or footwear which is
      suitable for normal daily use. It does not include such items as
      school uniforms, or clothing or footwear used SQlely for sporting
      activities.
Example 1   A cheque to purchase a new bed is sent by a charity to the
supplier.   This payment will be disregarded.

Example 2 The claimant receives a cheque made payable to the gas board as
a o m y % f payment to cover a fuel debt. This payment will be treated as
capital.

Example 3 A claimant's television rental is paid by her daughter who sends
regular cheques to the rental company. These payments are disregarded.

Example 4 A claimant sends his electricity bills to a charity which pays
them for him. These payments are taken into account as income - the first
£5 a week is normally disregarded under paragraph 1 above.


4.   Payments in kind

All payments in kind from charities, such as gifts of groceries,
bedclothes or monthly bus passes, are disregarded.

Payments in kind which are not made by a charity (eg those made by a
relative) are treated as follows:

            regular payments in kind are disregarded;

            irregular payments in kind are treated as capital under
            paragraph 2 above.

*    Meal vouchers   and gift vouchers are not treated as payments in kind,
      but as cash.    They will be treated as either income or capital under
      paragraphs 1   and 2 above depending on whether the payments are made
      regularly or   irregularly.


5*    Payments For Accommodation Costs Hot Met By Benefit

Payments which are intended and used to meet accommodation costs that are
above the limit covered by Income Support or Housing Benefit are
disregarded in Income Support.

In Housing Benefit and Family Credit, these payments are treated as income
or capital under paragraph 1 or 2 above depending on whether the payments
are made regularly or irregularly.

Example X A claimant's nursing home fees are higher than the amount
allowed under Income Support. Payments to cover the shortfall are
disregarded.

Example 2 A claimant's rent is higher than the amount allowed in Housing
Benefit. Regular payments to cover the shortfall are disregarded under
Income Support but are taken into account as income in the assessment of
Housing Benefit and Family Credit - the first £5 a week is normally
disregarded under paragraph 1 above.
 ID2359X/DB




                           INJURY PAYMENTS PLACED IN A TRUST


        3           c° ^ e“8*tion Payn>ent is made to a person who was injured and it is
SlsHgardedf5               ‘          be“ £it’ th*        »eld on trust w i l l b ,


                   Ca-6 °f an adUlt' f°r 2 years* This Period can be extended in
            certain circumstances; for example if alterations to a person's home
            are necessary and these are taking longer than expected

            tn ^ * CaSe °f 3
            a. child or young
                             °hild °r y°Ung Person' for as long as the person is
                             person and is under 19 years of age. For example,
            if a payment is placed in trust for an 11 year old, his parents'
            Income Support will not be affected. (A child is a person under the
            age of 16 and a young person is aged 16 or over but under 19, who is
            in full-time education and is not entitled to claim Income Support).

2.   A young person whose trust fund was disregarded while they were dependent
on another adult, .ill have their trust fund disregarded again, for

Housina
 ousing J   ^ r Ubre<3Ue““
        Benefit,  Communityy make
                             Charge* Rebates
                                     C U i m “ or
                                                theic own Credit.
                                                  Family   ci9ht £or I«<=Ome Support,

3.   SETTING UP A TRUST FUND

Legal advice should be obtained about setting up a trust. The wording of the
trust deed is a matter for the beneficiary (or representative) and their
advisor, but it would normally allow the trustee to make payments of capital
or income for the benefit of the person concerned.

4.   PAYMENTS FROM THE TRUST

These will be treated as voluntary payments. The Charitable and Voluntary
Payments Fact Sheet explains how payments to the beneficiary will be treated.
