HILLSBOROUGH                        STEERING                 COMMITTEE

                   Castle Chambers, Cook Street, L iverp ool L2 9SH
                    Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




                                                            29 November 1991

                                                                              MH/IC
F.A.O.


                                                                      .3   DEC m i


Dear


 HILLSBOROUGH BULLETIN 27

 You will be aware that the House of Lords gave their decision on
 Thursday and dismissed the ten appeals.

 This bulletin will set out the main reasons for the decision.

 A.      TELEVISION

         Eight of the test cases concerned relatives who had watched
         the events live on television on the afternoon of the
         disaster.

         Their Lordships unanimously held that the pictures broadcast
         live on this occasion did not equate to actual sight and/or
         sound of the event or the immediate aftermath. Lord Keith
         said that none of the pictures depicted suffering or
         recognisable individuals, which differs, or course, from the
         view of Hidden J.

         Of academic interest, it can be pointed out that Lord Ackner
         and Lord Jauncey both considered that in certain exceptional
         cases, such as those suggested by Lord Justice Nolan in the
         Court of Appeal in this case, might give rise to a claim for
         nervous shock. In rejecting the claims based on television,
         their Lordships were unanimously of the view that in
         circumstances where the broadcast is in line with the
         guidelines laid down by the ITV and BBC then nervous shock
         cases arising from watching those pictures cannot succeed.

 B.      THE QUESTION OF RELATIONSHIP
t




         Their Lordships were unanimous in rejecting the concept of
         restricting relationships to those of parents, spouses or
         children.    They all agreed that where there was any
         relationship of love and deep affection then a person might
         recover damages. Lord Ackner went so far as to say that he
         could not rule out the by-stander who had no relationship
         at all to the deceased or injured.

         Their Lordships did not attempt to define^ what constituted
         a close and loving relationship. Lord Keith considered that
         some relatives could be presumed to have such a tie and in
         other cases the relatives would have to prove that the tie
         existed as a matter of fact.

         Other Law Lords did not talk— in terms of presumption but
         rather in terms of proving that closeness of tie. It would
         seem, therefore, that in such a case it is necessary to
         present evidence that there was a close and loving
         relationship.

    C.   THE IMMEDIATE AFTERMATH

         It has long been established law that a relative witnessing
         an accident can recover damages for psychiatric illness.
         The aftermath concept was approved in McLoughlin -v- O'Brien
         it* 1983. The decision in these cases gives guidance as to
         what the immediate aftermath actually means.

         It is quite clear that in the view of their Lordships, the
         immediate aftermath lasts only for a few hours.

          Lord Keith referred to the facts in the McLoughlin case
         “where the wife/mother saw her children in the casualty
          department with blood and dirt on their faces. In Jaensch
          -v- Coffey the Plaintiff saw her injured husband at the
          hospital to which he had been taken in severe pain before
          and between his undergoing a series of emergency operations
          and the next day stayed with him in the intensive care unit
          and thought he was going to die. She was held entitled to
          recover damages for the psychiatric illness she suffered as
          a result, Dean J said:

              "The aftermath of the accident extended to the hospital
              to which the injured person and persisted for so long
              that he remained in the state produced by the accident
              up   to   and   including   immediate   post   accident
              treatment...."

              "Her psychiatric illness was a result of the impact
              upon her of the facts of the accident itself and its
     aftermath while she was present at the aftermath of the
     accident at the hospital."

Lord Ackner referred to the facts in the -case of Robert
Alcock.  He said:

     "Mr. Alcock identified his brother-in-law -in a bad
     condition in the mortuary at about midnight, that is
     some eight hours after the accident.    This was the
     earliest of the identification cases.   Even if this
     identification could be described as part of the
     "aftermath" it would not in my judgment be described
     as part of the immediate aftermath."

McLoughlin's case was described by Lord Wdlberforce as being
upon the margin of what the process of logical progression,
from case to case would allow. Mrs. McLoughlin had arrived
at the hospital within an hour or so after the accident.
Accordingly, in the post accident identification cases
before your Lordships there was not sufficient proximity in.
time and space to the accident.

Lord Oliver said:

     "In the case of both Brian Harrison and Robert Alcock,
     although both were present at the ground and saw scenes
     which were obviously distressing, and such as to cause
     grave worry and concern, their perception of the actual
     consequences of the disaster ^to those to whom they were
     related was again gradual."          t

Lord Jauncey said:

     "My Lords, what constitutes the immediate aftermath of
     an   accident   must  necessarily    depend  upon   the
     surrounding circumstances. To essay any comprehensive
     definition would be a fruitless exercise.            In
     McLoughlin and O'Brien the immediate aftermath extended
     to a time somewhat over an bour after the accident and
     to the hospital in which the victims were waiting to
     be attended to. It appears that they were in very much
     the same condition as they would have been had the
     mother found them at the scene of the accident.      In
     these appeals, the visits to the mortuary were made no
     earlier than nine hours after the disaster and were not
     for the purpose of rescuing or giving comfort to the
     victims but purely for the purposes of identification.
     This seems to me to be a very different situation from
     that in which a relative goes within a short time after
     an accident to rescue or comfort a victim. I consider




                         3
     k
          that not only the*purpose of the visits to the mortuary
          but also the time at which they were made to take them
          outside the immediate aftermath of this disaster."

     I have concentrated in this, note on the aftermath cases.
     This is because most of the cases that the Committee has
     been informed of related to people -who saw the events live
     on television.

     Those members of £lie Group who have clients who were at the
     game should carefully consider--the facts of their cases.
     It would seem relatively clear that if within an hour or two
     of the disaster the body or the injuries were discovered by
     the relatives, or even a close friend, then they may be able
     to bring a claim. Our records indicate that there are only
     a few dozen such claims at the most.- Particular attention,
     should be paid to cases of bystanders.

     Copies of the decision are now available at the Law Society
     Library and it would be appreciated if members requiring a
     copy could give advance notice to Ronnie Wright so that
     adequate copies can be produced.

     There will be a charge for provision of copies.

     It was planned to have a conference on thdfe4fch December but
     the Committee now feels, J.n view of the relatively few cases
     that could successfully proceed, that that would not*now be
     worthwhile or necessary.     It is recommended that the six
     generic junior counsel, be used to obtain .. advices on
     liability if that is felt necessary by the individual
     solicitors.

     The Committee plans to discuss the matter with counsel and
     will issue a bulletin as soon as possible thereafter.


Mike Humphreys
Hillsborough Steering Committee
