*




               ILLSBOROUGH                STEERING                COMMITTEE
                        c/o CastCe, Chambers, Coo^Street, LiverpooCL2 9S^f
                                     (TeC: 2550628 Ta^J 236 0047



                                                                      20TH JULY 1989
                                                                      EMS/DW

    F.A.O.




    Dear
    RE:      HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 5
    Since the last Bulletin we have had the second Liverpool
    Conference with Counsel; the first part of the Inquiry is now
    concluded and we are awaiting Lord Justice Taylor's interim
    report; we have had a lengthy meeting with the Insurers and
    Solicitors acting for Sheffield Wednesday and the South Yorkshire
    Police; a Lead action has been commenced and application made ffor
    directions and discussions continue on other aspects of the
    matter.
    1.     Conference with Counsel 11th July 1989                 .
    257 Solicitor members and clients attended the Conference with Ben
    Hytner QC and Tim King.   We held in effect two separate
    Conferences, the first for Solicitor members only and the second
    more general Conference for Solicitors and clients. I enclose
    marked (A) a full note of the conference which may be particularly
    helpful to those who were unable to attend.
    From our discussions with the Insurers it became clear that not
    everyone has yet written letters before action - they spoke of
    having received just under 300 claims todate - and this was
    confirmed at the Conference by some members.   At their request I
    enclose a further copy of the suggested letter before action
    marked (B) together with the addresses of Sheffield Wednesday F.C.
    and the South Yorkshire Police.   As we have now decided, having
    discussed the matter fully with Counsel, that it is not
    appropriate to bring in the Sheffield City Council at this stage,
    there is no need to write a letter before action to the Council if
    you have not already done so.
    It was also apparent that some members have been copying the
    Bulletin (which is primarily intended for Solicitors) to their
    clients and it was suggested and agreed that a newsletter written
    particularly for clients which we could send to you to be copied
    and forwarded to your individual clients might be useful. 1
enclose marked (C) the first of these newsletters for
distribution.   (to follow under separate cover).

At the Conference with clients a number of matters arose on which
some clients were particularly concerned. At the forefront of
these was the question of any criminal proceedings which might be
possible against those found to be to blame.   There was also some
misunderstanding - due primarily (we suspect) to reading Press
Reports - of some of the points and evidence.   Ben Hytner has
done a note dealing with particular points where some clients
expressed difficulty. This is written so that it can be passed
through to the clients and I enclose a copy herewith marked (D).
2.   The Inquiry Part I

This has now concluded with lengthy written submissions (copies of
which are in the Liverpool Law Library for inspection) and oral
submissions heard on the 14th, July. As soon as we receive the
transcript of that day a copy of that too will be in the Liverpool
Law Library.

Lord Justice Taylor gave no particular date for his interim report
but on Friday did say that this would be available very shortly.
At an earlier stage he had expressed the view that the interim
report was wanted before the beginning of the next Football
Season.   If we have any advance notice of the date of publication
we will of course let you know.

I appreciate that some members are a distance from Liverpool and
may find it difficult to have access to the transcripts. We have
sent as agreed at the Conference copies of the transcript of our
Counsels' submissions to those acting for bereaved.   If any
member wishes copies of any particular part of the transcript
these are available - get in touch with Ronnie Wright at the Law
Library - upon payment of the normal copying charges.
3.   Inquiry - Part II

Part II of the Judicial Inquiry deals with recommendations for the
future. This part of the Inquiry will be by way of written
submissions and hearings in private when those who have particular
submissions to put forward can make application to meet the
Inquiry Team to discuss them.
We do not propose to instruct Counsel nor to seek an oral hearing
in respect of Part II of the Inquiry.

However, we have agreed - as no doubt many of your clients may
well have some views and positive and practical suggestions for
the future which they wish to put forward - to collate and analyse
those submissions and send all documents received to the Inquiry
together with our analysis.
Obviously if some particular suggestion or suggestions come from a
number of sources and are put together they may well have more
strength than being submitted individually.

I would be glad if you could take your clients instructions as
soon as possible and forward to us any of their documents
containing suggestions for the future clearly marked 'Inquiry Part
II'♦ No time table has been given for Part II which is a more
long term look at the problem but on the basis of the way in which
Part I has been conducted I do not expect Lord Justice Taylor to
permit any unnecessary delays and thus I would be glad if the
submissions could be received as soon as possible.
4.   Civil Liability^

The two Defendants both deny liability and require the question of
liability (most particularly any apportionment of liability as
although there was no formal concession that contributory
negligence would not be alleged our discussions were on the basis
that this was unlikely) to be settled by the Courts. Both
Defendants' Advisors expressed the firm view that they did not
want litigation to be delayed and would co-operate in bringing
matters to a speedy trial.   When pressed on dates they said they
considered the matter should be heard within 12 months. We would
hope that that is an over-estimate I

A Lead action - a fatal case - has been identified as a suitable
case to deal with liability.   The Writ was issued in June and
served.   The Statement of Claim has been served. The Defendants
have confirmed that they do not seek to transfer the case out of
the Liverpool District Registry and an application for directions
generally has been made to Steyn J. and will be heard on the 26th
July.   I will let you know the outcome in due course.

Once liability is determined there should be no problem over fatal
cases, those who sustained physical injury and those who sustained
nervous shock who were in the immediate areas - i.e. in Pens 3 and
4. There will be questions of causation and remoteness in
respect of other classes of Plaintiff.

It was suggested that immediately following the Lead case on
liability (but certainly so that this should not in any way delay
the hearing of that case) there should follow a limited number of
cases in which liability would follow the Lead case and thus not
have to be argued, but where the question of remoteness could be
determined.

As you will appreciate there are many   degrees of remoteness -
those who sustained shock having seen   matters from the adjoining
pen or the West Stand, those in other   Stands, those who saw the
disaster on television knowing people   who were there, those who
heard about it in the Street etc etc.
We will be letting you have a questionnaire which we would be glad
if you could complete in respect of each of your clients whose
claim lies for nervous shock, so that we can draw together the
numbers involved in any particular class, determine how many
classes there are on remoteness and, if appropriate, with Counsel
try to select an appropriate Lead case from each category.
I will send out that questionnaire with the next Bulletin.
5.   Quantum of Damage

The Defendants have confirmed that they will not delay in
considering quantum of damage because liability remains to be
determined by the Courts. Details of injuries, medical reports,
documents relating to special damage and appropriate calculations
should as in any other case be put in hand and details supplied to
the Insurers.

They have reached agreement between themselves as the mechanics of
dealing with this and all claims should be submitted to the one
office under the one reference

                  Municipal Mutual Insurance
                  Park House
                  57-59, Well Street
                  BRADFORD BDl 5SN
                  REF:   03892177022
6.   Interest on Damages

The Defendants have agreed to pay interest on damages for clients
of the Group from the date of the incident 15th April 1989. This
applies whether or not proceedings have been issued.

It only applies to those cases where we notify them of the clients
concerned. I have agreed that we will ask members to check and
bring upto date our records by the 31st, July and I would supply
details notified as at that date.

I therefore enclose marked (E) two copies showing your clients
recorded on the computer list. I would be glad if you could
return one copy having checked it for accuracy and making any
alterations or additions as necessary. Please make sure that I
have that no later than the 31st, July.

As far as clients who joined the Group after the 31st, July are
concerned interest will be paid with effect from the notification
of the claim.

Since the Conference - at which this was mentioned - one or two
people have already let me have details of additional clients
which may not yet be on the computer printout which you have.
      T



7.   Additional matters raised with the Insurers
We made application for interim payments (in respect of those
clients where remoteness is not an issue). The Defendants are
considering this and will come back to us.

We also made application for funding of interim disbursements - on
a similar basis that this of course could not relate to remoteness
cases - once again we will let you know when we hear from them.

(As it appears clear that in cases where causation may be an issue
- i.e. all cases outside pens 2 and 3 - interim relief will
certainly not be available it would be wise if your client is
eligible f°r legal aid and falls into those categories to ensure
that application is made).

We applied for confirmation that the Insurers would fund both the
generic and individual costs of the Inquest representation (see
below) and again we will let you know as soon as we hear from
them.

Finally, we did raise the question of bereavement - both the
statutory limits and as to whether they were prepared to agree any
extension of the classes of bereavement.   They were firm that
they would not agree to pay more than the statutory figures foir
bereavement. As far as any extension of the classes - to cover
those over 18 who were unmarried - was concerned they would give
no firm and overall commitment but did indicate that in cases of
hardship they would consider whether an extension (ex gratia) was
possible.
8.   Inquest

On current information it appears that this is unlikely to take
place until early in the New Year.   A member of the Committee
seeing Mr Popper, the Coroner, on Friday this week and if we have
any further information I will let you know.

The likelihood is that he will hold one Inquest covering the
general facts and matters which gave rise to the deaths
immediately followed by 95 individual Inquests dealing with the
situation of each of the deceased.

We propose to instruct Counsel to appear on all matters and to
deal with the first part of this Inquest. As far as the
individual Inquests are concerned the Solicitors acting in each
case should provide supplementary instructions with regard to
their own client.

As soon as we have further information on both the funding aspects
and confirmation from the Coroner as to the way in which he wishes
the matter to be dealt with, we will be in touch with you.
At the Conference a number of the bereaved made it clear that if
the evidence supported it they would like Counsel to seek a
verdict of unlawful killing which, if given, would strengthen -the
possibility of proceedings for manslaughter being taken against
one or more of those found to be at fault.

I would be glad if you are acting for any of the bereaved if you
would take your clients specific instructions on this point and
let us know before we instruct Counsel whether they wish him to
take this point.   There is no need for immediate instructions on
this matter as the Inquest is unlikely to take place until the New
Year and I would suggest that you discuss it with them once the
interim report is to hand.
9.    Post traumatic shock

Following discussions with Ann Scott Fordham and her team of
Clinical Psychologists they have devised a questionnaire a copy of
which I enclose herewith marked (F ).  They are now in a position
to see those clients and to give preliminary reports.
I would be glad if you would complete the proforma - a separate
one for each client - and return them to us. We will forward them
to the Team who will then get in touch with you direct with an
appointment for your client.                                  >

The Team of Clinical Psychologists will be able to assess which
clients who are ready for an immediate assessment and the
appointments may well reflect this.

I would particularly draw to your attention the note at the bottom
of the proforma and that this should not be completed by the
client or in consultation with the client but on the basis of
separate instructions taken - the most appropriate way being at
interview.
10.   Video Showing

We are in touch with the West Midlands Police with regard to the
proposed showing of video of the Leppings Lane terraces. I am due
to go to Birmingham next week together with one of the Social
Workers who has been working on the Helpline.

Before doing so I will let the West Midlands Police have details
of those individuals whose relatives have expressed a wish to see
the film so that they can confirm what film is available - there
is now a total of 70 hours film being considered by the West
Midlands Team.

They are naturally concerned as to the most appropriate way of
dealing with the request to show the video particularly as some of
the scenes are apparently very distressing indeed.   They are
hoping to see what is available in respect of the individuals
concerned and I will let you know further as soon as there is
anything further to report.
Every good wish.
Yours sincerely,



MISS E M STEEL
     r
                                                                    T D


                           THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
                                      NOTE

         'C
    1.          I have been asked by the Steering Committee to write a
    note for the clients to clarify a number of matters which have
    clearly been causing some or all of them problems.

    2.          It is clear, and I stated this publically to Lord Justice
    Taylor at Sheffield on the 14th July on the last day of the Inquiry,
    that many of the bereaved clients wish to see prosecutions for
    manslaughter. This raises a number of issues.
    3.         What is Manslaughter ?
                Manslaughter is an unusual offence, since it is really a
    description given to a number of completely different crimes; however
    they all have one thing in common, and that is unlawful killing that
    is not murder.
    4.          For the purposes of the bereaved clients, the type of
    unlawful killing with which we are concerned,can     be   shortly
    summarised as killing by reckless conduct.
    5.          To be reckless you have to have a state of mind.    It is
    therefore doubtful whether a company or corporation can be guilty of
    manslaughter. However, the law will soon be clarified on this point
    as a prosecution has been brought against a company arising out of
    the capsizing of the "Herald of Free Enterprise" at Zeebrugger.
    6.          Reckless conduct means something far more than negligence
    or carelessness. There is no offence of killing by careless or
    negligent conduct.   For example, killing by dangerous driving is not
    manslaughter, and is a special offence made by Parliament because
    juries were not convicting dangerous drivers of manslaughter.
    7.         Reckless   means   not caring whether conduct kills someone
    or not.

\   8.         Responsibility for Prosecuting
                The responsibility for deciding whether to prosecute lies
    nowadays with the Crown Prosecution Service, the head of which is the
    Director of Public Prosecutions.
                                           *
    9.          How is a Decision made ?
                The Director of Public Prosecutions adopts a simple
    rule. Is there a more than 50:50 chance of a conviction ? If so, he
    prosecutes; if not, he does not. He has to take into account the          <
    chances of juries convicting in certain types of case, and their          j
    tendencies Convictions are, from experience, more difficult to obtain
    in some types of cases than in others.
    10.         The Punishment for Manslaughter                              j
                The  maximum sentence is, of course, life imprisonment,      j
    but thatis usually reserved for wholly different classes of              j|
    manslaughter.   C Lents should not expect long terms of imprisonment
for the conduct with which we are concerned.   Apart from anything
else, any individual (of       course   a Company cannotbe sent to prison
convicted of manslaughter would be a ruined man whatever the
sentence.
      h/
11.         Private Prosecutions

             Where the Director of Public Prosecutions has considered
a case and decided not to prosecute, a private     prosecution is a
non-starter.    He has the    power,    which he uses insuch cases to sto
theprivate prosecution.

12.         How should the clients proceed ?
            Two courses of action arenow open   tothose   clients   who
wish to see prosecutions brought.
13.         The Inquest

            It is possible for a verdict of unlawful killing to be
brought by the Coroner or his jury (he decides whether to have jury
or not).    The verdict cannot however, as it used to, name any
person.    Theadvantage of such a verdict is that it is bound to carry
weight    with the Director of Public Prosecutions (note: the jury
brought   in averdict of unlawful killing in the Zeebrugger deaths).   m
14.         Counsel for the relatives of thedeceased   is notallowed ||
to address the jury and is only allowed to address     the Coroner on a
point of law.   Whether this will permit Counsel to    address him on
the verdict will depend on the individual Coroner.     They vary. Some
will allow Counsel more latitute than others.
                                                                            '-f

15.         Representations to the D.P.P.                                   J
                                                                             Pi
            There is no reason why written representations should not I
be   sentto the D P P .  My strong advice is that this should be done ;
with a minimum of publicity; public officials resent press campaigns
and tend to react against public pressures.
                                                                    /f"-
16.         The time for such representations, in my view, will be/
soon after Lord Justice Taylor's final report is published.              ;
17.         The Opening of Gate 'C'                                       .Jjjji
            Gate 'C' was opened by Superintendent Marshall on the 4
order of Chief Superintendent Duckinfield.       Since Marshall was *
obeying a superior order, he cannot senisbly be blamed for opening *
the gate.                                                             M
                                                                      > 1
18.         However, he requested that the gate be opened. Should he r j
be blamed for that ? The overwhelming evidence from the Liverpool^!
fans was that if the gate had not been opened, there would have been, ,;®
deaths and injuries at the turnstiles.                                 H
                                                                        f
19.         Had proper precautions been taken by Duckinfield. there |
was no danger in opening the gate.   Marshall was not to know that ■
Duckinfield would make this blunder.       For this reason we did not         J
blame Marshall for making his request.                                 "p
    20.         We did however blame      Marshall   for   being   partly
    responsible for the situation which gave rise to the need to open the
    gate.

    21.         For the same reasons, we did not blame Duckinfield for
    ordering Gate 'C' to be opened. In fact he should have gi-ven the
    order three or four minutes before. We blamed him for making the
    error, which in our view was the immediate and direct cause of 95
    deaths, of allowing the gate to be opened without first sealing off
    the already overcrowded pens 3 and 4. There would have been no
    deaths or injuries inside or outside the ground if he had done this.
    22.         For a full list of the allegations agains tthe                             Police
    clients are referred to Appendix I of my written submissions.
    23.            The Safety Certificate

                One client believes that there was no Fire Certificate in
    force at Hillsborough.   No member of the Inquiry Team, whether
    Barrister or Solicitor, can recall such evidence beinggiven.     Even
    if it were true, it would be completely irrelevant; there was no fire
    and no deaths or injuries were caused by fire.

    24.          The ground required a Safety Certificate pursuant to the
    Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975. Hillsborough was granted such a
    certificate by the then Licensing Authority, the South Yorkshire City
    Council; it has since been renewed annually by the Sheffield City
    Council.

    25.         It is an offence to break the conditions of a Licence.
    We have blamed the Licensing Authorities, and particularly Sheffield
    County Council, for not imposing strict enough conditions.

    26.         There were some breaches of conditions,                            andit    is
    possible that the Club may be prosecuted and fined.

    27.           Summary and Explanation of the various proceedings
                  The Inquiry

                The purpose of the Inquiry was to uncover the facts, to
£
    find out what happened and the causes of what happened. This task
    involves finding out and stating in the Report who did what, and why;
    so the    Report may well say "x did this, but he should have done
    something else". But it will not say that x committed a crime or
    should pay compensation.
    28.           Civil Proceedings

                We have commenced civil proceedings for damages against
    the South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield Wednesday F.C.   This case
    will be tried in due course by a Judge of the High Court.
    29.           The Inquest
                                                                                                          %
                This   is simply to find    out the cause of death, the
    verdicts could be either "natural causes" (out ofthe question here)
    "accidental death" or "death by misadventure" (which are really the I
    same thing) "unlawful killing" (dealt with above) or "open verdict"                              j
    (which means the jury c a i n t t b t : '           '    '    %     m
          •'* '                 ■     **   ! * * • '• '   *-   ••   *   ,   ,> ■                    - w
30.         Criminal Proceedings
       \
            These will be heard either in the Magistrates' Court (eg
breaches of the Licence) or the Crown Court (eg manslaughter).
Manslaughter charges would be tried by a Judge (probably a High Court
Judge) and a jury. The jury can only convict if they are sure beyond
reasonable doubt of guilt.

31 *         0ne ortwo clients have      given  the impression during
conferences of believing that their Inquiry Team of Barristers and
Solicitors have in some way been soft on the police, club ox F.A.
and have pulled their punches. This is naturally both puzzling and
distressing to us all. Any client who still thinks this is uxged to
read, if not the whole of my written submission, then at least the
final appendices listing my complaints against the Police, the Club
the two Councils, Dr Eastwood (SWFC Safety Consultant) and the F.A. '

                                                B A HYTNER
