       BROADCASTING STANDARDS COMMISSION
                              •   f           ‘v




 Complain'tpibout unjust or .-unfair -treatment.-from Dr.D. N. Slater.,
 submitted on 21 January ;1997 about Hillsborough, on Granada
 TeleVisibn/broadcast o n '5 December 1996.

 A d ju d ication '                   - - v
•A'.                 ■ • V:
 K In trod uction                     !v ’

  O n’ 5 Decem ber ,1996 Granada Television broadcast a' drama-documentary.'called
- H illsborough about the disaster that occurred on 15 April 1989 at the FA Cup sem i-
  final^soccer match, between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough
  Stadium. Ninety-six people died and over 400 people required hospital treatment as a
  result o f'd ie disaster.'A series o f investigations and other proceedings, including a
' coroner’s-'inquest followed. The programme examined the injustice felt by the
  survivors’;'as well^as m^ny o f the bereaved as w ell as the creation o f a dramatic
  reconstruction <^ the disaster and its aftermath. The programme included Dr Slater, a
  pathologist; giving; evidence at the Coroner’s Inquest and his telephone conversation
  with one o f tnc*‘p olice constables w ho had been involved in die tragedy. T he
  programme was repeated on 24 February 1998.

 Dr Slater complained that he had been unjustly or unfairly treated in the programme.

 The C om m ission discontinued its consideration o f the complaint on 22 July 1997
 w hile Lord Justice Stuart-Smith conducted his Scrutiny o f the Evidence Relating to
 the Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster. The complaint w as reinstated on 10
 March 1998 follow ing the conclusion o f the Scrutiny.

 2. T h e C om plnint

Dr.-Slater complained that:

a) H is portrayal in the telephone conversation with PC Bruder had been unfair; and
b) the programme had misrepresented his evidence to the Coroner’s Inquest.

  A t the hearing Dr Slater withdrew his complaints that the location o f the Inquest at
  w hich he had given his evidence had been inaccurately portrayed and that the
. programme had aimed to create false impressions.

a) T h e po rt ra y al o f D r S la ter in his te l e p h o n e c o n v e r s a t i o n w i t h P C B ru d er .


At the hearing Dr Slater acknowledged that the programme had been highly acclaimed
and deservedly so. However he said that his portrayal in the telephone conversation
with PC Cruder had been unfair. This had been confirmed by an article in the British
Medical Journal on 7 December 1996 which had said that:
-BROADCASTING STANDARDS COMMISSION
 C omplaint by Dr D N Slater- Summary o f Adjudication                              _ -

 The Broadcasting Standards Com m ission has upheld a complaint from Dr D N Slater
 about the programme H illsborough, broadcast on Granada Television on 5 Decem ber
 1996 and repeated on 24 February 1998. The programme examined the disaster that
 occurred on 15 April 1989 at the FA Cup semi-final soccer match between Liverpool
 and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Stadium. The programme included Dr Slater,
 a pathologist, giving evidence at the Coroner's Inquest which had follow ed the
 disaster and o f his telephone conversation with a police constable who had been
 involved in the tragedy. Dr Slater complained that he had been unjustly or unfairly
 treated in the programme

The Com m ission recognised that this was an important programme o f high quality
which had been extensively researched.

H owever, it considered that viewers were likely to have formed the erroneous
impression that Dr Slater had, in some way, improperly influenced the police
constable causing him to alter his earlier statement to the police. Since the effect o f
that alteration w as a principal element in the sense o f unfairness felt by the fam ilies
and one o f the major themes o f the programme, the Com m ission found that it w as
unfair to Dr Slater.                4




Furthermore, in the C om m ission ’s v iew the portrayal o f Dr Slater giving evidence to
the Inquest had been verbally correct but had been undermined by the programme’s
editing and presentation, and by comments made in subsequent scenes. Inadvertently,
this was likely to have given viewers the inaccurate impression that Dr Slater had not
given proper guidance to the Inquest and had been suggesting that the victim s had not
suffered pain or discomfort. The Commission found that this w as unfair to Dr Slater.

 Accordingly, the complaint w as upheld.

 Y ou m ay obtain a copy o f the full adjudication by sending a stamped addressed
 envelope to: The Broadcasting Standards C om m ission, 7 The Sanctuary, London,
 SW 1P 3JS.
   "the pathologist...is not let o ff M cGovern’s barbed hook either. The. programme
  show s him ringing a police witness and persuading him to change his evidence about
“ the time atw h ich he was still resuscitating one o f the victim s.” - - • -•••.•*

 Dr S la ter‘said that the-police w itness’s evidence^elated to whether the victim was
 alive or d ead an d not to' the time o f resuscitation.^However the article’s use o f the
 word ’persuasion was important and acknowledged that- the programme had given the
 impression that Dr, Slater’slactions: had been clandestiner H e submitted statements
 from colleagues w hich confirmed that that impression had been given..

 Dr *Slater said that the impression had been achieved by filming the conversation
 taking place after dark, by the background m usic used and by the comm ents actually
 made.; The police w itness had shrugged his shoulders implying that he w as not in
 agreement with Dr Slater and had said “y o u ’re the pathologist” and then “ok I’ll
 change my statement, clarify, a few points”. There had been a strong im plication that
 Dr Slater had applied pressure or coerced the witness to change his evidence and that
 the witness had iio t ije e m in ifu ll aigreement. It w as the duty o f a pathologist at an
 inquest to present the^ath ological facts and findings, and offer unbiased opinions that
 w ou ld assist die Coroner and jury. H e said that it had been incongruous to suggest that
 a pathologist w ou ld coerce a witness to change his evidence with therresulting
 potential for a miscarriage o f justice. '                      ■     . .        • , ■ >

 Dr :Slater said that,' in its ;opening credits, the drama had claimed that it w as based
 entirely on fact, u s in g . court ••transcripts and eyew itness reports. The telephone
 conversation had formed no part o f any documented evidence or court transcript and
 t h e 'programme-makers had not' sought clarification or agreement from. him. The
 telephone call had resulted ■from a request by the Coroner that Dr Slater should meet
 th e w itness to discuss specific medical points. Pathological opinion on the tim e o f
 death could be extrem ely difficult and therefore the Coroner had asked that Dr Slater
 should discuss PC Bruder’s observations with him to ensure that he interpreted those
 observations correctly. This"was not unusual practice and the telephone conversation
 had taken place during the day and had been sim ply to arrange a m eeting at the
 M edico-L egal Centre in Sheffield. The purpose o f the subsequent conversation had
 not been to initiate change to the statement and at the C om m ission’s hearing Dr Slater
 said that he had expected PC Bruder to keep to his original statement and give oral
 evidence at the Inquest.

 E>r Slater said that the programme had portrayed him as causing PC Bruder to change
 his statement. H ow ever, Dr Slater said that he had only asked PC Bruder what he had
 meant by three phrases in his statement, none o f w hich ; related to the subsequent
 changes that PC Bruder made. The programme’s portrayal o f the content o f the
 telephone conversation had been completely fictitious. Contrary to the comm ents
 made by PC Bruder in the programme, his original statement had made no specific
 mention o f 3.30 p.m. as the time for reaching the casualty K evin Williams. The timing
 had, been obtained from independent video evidence at a later date. The programme
 had also ignored PC Bruder’s second statement in which he said that he had been
 assisted in making his “clarifications” by additional first aid training he had received
  after the Hilfsborough<<iisaster. At the hearing, Granada emphasised that there- had
  never been any intention in the programme to allege any impropriety by Dr Slater or
  to question his integrity.

    Granada said that the programme had intended to explain the reasons behind the sense
-•■'O'f-injustice slrJffed bysaiiany--of the bereaved and survivors o f Hillsborough,;rThe
"''pr5graift'me'-' liad'^en.^X ftauSt'i^ely^Searphedi.for' more than a year by a senior-
   producer from [World iit^ c tio n : ?and -an'^ssistani ’producer from G ran ad a’s Tactual
   drama unit. It w as because o f the nature and volume o f this research that the
   programme had/carried the caption that-it w as “based entirely on fact using court
   transcripts and eye-w itness reports”, which had under-stated the level o f research that
   had been carried out.

  Granada said that the programme had not portrayed Dr Slater as persuading the police
  officer about his evidence nor had the programme shown Dr Slater and the police
  officer discussing the time o f death or resuscitation. With regard to the article in the
_ British Medical Journal, Granada said that the reviewer (Dr Walker) had disagreed
  w ith the Coroner’s ruling and in a letter published in T h e Independent on Sunday on
  22- D ecem ber 1996; he had described the. Inquest as “farcical” and had suggested that
  there may have been a “less [than] altruistic” reason for the so-called 3.15 p.m . “cut­
  o f f point”. Granada said that Dr Walker m ight have been influenced in his review by
  his involvem ent in the case o f Philip Hammond on whom Dr Slater had conducted a
  post-mortem. It said ,-that D r Walker had not accurately reviewed the programme as
  broadcast. Granada;said that it w as not aware o f any other reviewer or journalist who
  had reached the sam e conclusion as Dr Walker.

  Granada said that w ith regard to the portrayal o f the telephone conversation, the scene
  had been film ed .and lit as late afternoon. PC Bruder had told them that the
, investigating W est-M idlands officer, depicted in the scene, had been with him for
  several hours goin g over the details o f his first statement to obtain a revised version. It
  had been late afternoon or early evening by the time that the officer had left. T h e
  scen e had sought to reflect this impression and by the time PC Bruder had made his
  second statement he had spent a considerable amount o f time with the officer and both
  had been quite weary. The programme’s timing was supported by evidence from
  Inspector M atthew Sawers o f W est Midlands Police to the Coroner’s Court the
  follow ing day, in which Inspector Sawers stated that he had visited Mr and Mrs
  W illiam s the previous evening follow ing his visit to PC Bruder. In any event, Granada
  said it had been the conversation that had been important and the depiction o f the time
  o f day had not been used to create a sinister connotation.

  Granada said that the m usic in the scene had been used under ordinary dramatic
  conventions to draw the view ers’ attention to the significance o f the events being
  portrayed, but not to impart improper motivation or sinister connotation. The fact that
  the conversation had taken place was documented within the inquest transcript and the
  words shown as s p o k e n by Dr Slater had been reported to Granada by the police
  officer and had reflected what the jury had been told o f the conversation. PC Bruder’s
  remark “OK, I’ll change m y statement, clarify a few points...” had not been shown as
  being made during the telephone conversation with Dr Slater. PC Cruder had finished
- the telephone conversation, thanked Dr Slater and said "Bye”, before putting down the
 receiver. He had then addressed his remark to the West Midlands officer. At no point
 had it been suggestedvthat^Dr Slater had discussed with PC Bruder.changing his
 statement or making a:;new

~G ranad^said>that there had been no suggestion t h a t ^ 3 ^ S M t e ^ ( h a d j # o e r c e 4 ^ - , J**
  pressunsfed t he^witness and there had been nothing unpleasant .or ahreatening about
  either his wordsw vthe'toiie^in which they had been delivered. The w ily detail o f the
  conversation: between them had been a proper indication that Dr Slater w ished to
  discuss medical details. PC Bruder had been very clear that the telephone
  conversation had taken place during the West Midlands officer’s visit and the date had .
  been confirmed by PC Bruder having signed his statement on the same day. The m im -
  inquest into the death o f Kevin W illiam s had resumed the follow ing day, M ay 4,
  w hen Dr Slater had confirmed that he had “had a word with PC Bruder” to inform his
  opinion more fully and testified to the cause and nature o f K evin W illiam s’ death. It
  had been the. fact that the conversation had taken place outside the court which had
  been significant and not whether it had taken place on the telephone or face to face.
 ■Granada said that the programme had included the Coroner’s reference to Dr Slater
 ihaving spoken with PC Bruder and it had been clear that Dr Slater had acted with the
  Coroner’s know ledge and/or approval.                           /.

 Granada said that the programme had not shown the tim e for PC Bruder reaching
 K evin W illiam s as being part o f his statement, but rather as part o f the discussion
-between PC Bruder and the W est Midlands officer. PC'Bruder had said that the
 discussion had covered whether or not he could have seen an ambulance entering the
 ground after 3.30 p.m. when he was tending to K evin W illiams. The scene had
 reflected the discussion and not any written statement. The timing had been fairly
 stated and PC Bruder maintained that he had seen an ambulance which had been the
 fixed point for his tim e estimates.

 Granada said that the programme had not ignored PC Bruder’s second statement. It
 had been obvious from the programme that the statement’s s ig n ific a n c e lay in his
 description o f the signs o f life he had found in the victim and that these had been the
 significant details that he had changed follow ing his lengthy discussion with the W est
 M idlands officer and his conversation with Dr Slater. It had also been obvious that PC
 Bruder had made a further statement changing some o f the detail contained in his first
 statement. Dr Slater’s dialogue and the following scene which had referred to the
 conversation between Dr Slater and PC Bruder had reflected the fact that the first
 statement had not been relied upon at the inquest.

  Granada .said that there had been no justification for Dr Slater’s assertion that PC
  Bruder had made his “clarifications” because o f his improved understanding
  follow ing additional first aid training. PC Bruder had only ascribed his clarification
  about the length o f time that Kevin Williams had been convulsing, to his know ledge
  gained from further training. PC Bruder had told the programme-makers that it had
  been his discussions with Dr Slater, rather than his further first aid training, that had
  convinced him that he must have been mistaken about the medical detail in his
 .original statement. He had said that he had taken on board the know ledge o f an expert,



                                                                                                  4
    h e n c e the t e l e p h o n e d i a l o g u e " y o u ' r e the pathologist'-. O n l y P C B i n d e r k n e w w h v he
    h a d m a d e t h o s e ch a n g es .


     DFSlctter said^thcrt he-had referred to t h e -a F tic le in the-.British-Medical Journal because
     it provided evidence o f the way that the programme had been unreasonable and, had
     show n or potentially misrepresented .him asv-havingrsinappropriately.-influenoed; a
* - w itness. H e noted that Granada had not soughi-an-official-statement from Dr Walker
   " an d 'said th ath e was saddened that Granada had sought;to blame the Hammond ca se...
   ' fo r Dr Walker’s view s rather than..the programme. He said that Dr Walker’s
     interpretation o f the programme had reflected the view s o f his professional colleagues
     and acquaintances.

   D r Slater said that although several pathologists had been involved in giving evidence,
   his evidence had been the most extensive and specific in relation to the tim e o f death
   as he w as the pathologist who had given medical evidence in relation to Kevin
   W illiam s, and this had been one o f the prime issues that Granada felt that the
   programme had had to address. Dr Slater said that he had been portrayed as a central
   character in relation to the pathological evidence and although the screen tim e devoted
   to him had been small the issues had been o f primary importance to the programm e’s
   purpose.-View ers had not been presented with expert pathological opinion about w h y
   individuals were deemed to have died before 3.15 p.m. but rather with lay im pressions
   that victim s were still alive after that time. This had been a serious om ission o f
   evidence, a misrepresentation and totally inappropriate. Dr Slater said that he should
   have been consulted by the programme-makers, as PC Bruder had been. The
   programme had shown the phone*call and then PC Bruder changing his m ind from-
   thinking that K evin Williams had been alive at 3.30 p.m. to his having b een dead at
   3.15 p.m.

   Dr Slater said that the programme had not stated that the interviewing officer pictured
   w ith PC Bruder during the telephone conversation had been a West M idlands police
   officer. The officer, Inspector Sawers, had not been specifically identified nor had he
   been listed in the programme’s credits. Dr Slater said that it had not been clear w ho
   w a s interviewing PC Bruder and he said that the nature o f the conversation continued
   to cause him concern. Dr Slater said that he had been show n raising his eyebrows
   w h en he had asked PC Bruder to clarify a few points and also PC Bruder had
   shrugged his shoulder indicating that he was reluctant but had been persuaded to
   accept Dr Slater’s comments.

    D r Slater said that PC Bruder’s second statement should have been given greater
    prom inence, particularly where he gave his reasons for changing his first statement.
    D r Slater said that he was not mentioned by PC Bruder in his second statement as a
    factor in his changing his mind. Dr Slater accepted that PC Bruder’s com m ent in the
    programme that he would change his statement had not been made during the
    telephone conversation. The scene had suggested that Dr Slater had been the
    persuasive causative factor for PC Bruder changing his statement and Dr Slater firmly
    believed that his telephone call w ith PC Bruder had taken place well before PC Bruder
    had changed his statement.                                                  ------




                                                                                                                            5
  Granada said-that it did not-accept that the BMJ review constituted.,"clear public .
  evidence'’ that the programme had misrepresented Dr Slater. It said that the objective
  general view did not reflect the interpretation Dr Slater had placed on the scene.
  Granada supplied the Commission^with the-national .press,coverage for,thejseven days., ,,
  follow ing the programme’s broadcast which contained only one reference to the scene
 "in question arrd that -article made no reference to an impression having been.given.tluU.,.,
' the “pathologist” had1behaved improperly or had pressurised a witness. Granada also.*.-,
  said that contact-with relatives o f t h e victims-had not influenced its view o f Dr Slater___

 Granada said that the fact that the 3.15 p.m. cut-off time remained a prime issue for
 the Hillsborough families did not render Dr Slater a central character in the drama.
 T h e cut-off time was only one o f 10-12 issues that had been raised by the programme.
 Granada said that it had studied the pathological evidence, including the Inquest
 transcripts, in great detail with the assistance o f three independent experts. There had
 been no doubt about the accuracy o f what Dr Slater had said at the Inquest and
 Granada had not considered it necessary to consult him as part o f the research for the
 programme. However, it accepted the significance o f the pathologists’ evidence and
 said that the programme had made it clear that the Coroner, in confirming the cu t-off
 tim e, had based his opinion on the view s o f several pathologists v/ho shared or
 com plem ented the view s o f Dr Slater. The programme had also made it clear that
 differing specialist opinion had only been gathered subsequently. Granada said that
 evid en ce o f lay individuals had not been presented “at the expense o f m edical witness
 information”.

 Granada said that the ordinary vieWer would not have Dr Slater’s close interest in the
 portrayal o f the telephone conversation. The scene had made it clear that PC Bruder
 had been speaking to a police officer and the first words o f dialogue had been “Look,
 I’m a copper too. It was a year ago but...”. Dr Slater had accepted that the context o f
 the scene had been an interview. It had clearly been with a police officer. G iven that
 PC Bruder said subsequently “okay, I’ll change m y statement...” there had been no
 doubt that he had been asked by the police officer to make a second statement.
 Granada said that there had never been any suggestion that PC Bruder had disagreed
 with Dr Slater or that he had been pressurised or persuaded to accept D r Slater’s
 com m ents. The scene had portrayed PC Bruder as at most “bowing” to the know ledge
 o f an expert because he was “only a police officer, not a doctor”. At the hearing,
 Granada said that its research had not revealed overwhelming evidence o f pressure
 having been applied and therefore Granada had not sought to suggest that PC Bruder
 had been pressurised. The incorporation o f a time had been based on tim e-coded
 actuality video footage and their discussion with the Inspector Sawers about timing
 and had not been based on hearsay. Granada accepted that PC Bruder had been more
 know ledgeable at the time that he had made his second statement due to his further
 training in first aid. However, he had revised only one aspect o f his original statement
 in the light o f that training.

 Granada said that there had been clear sound and visual cues between the termination
 o f the telephone conversation and the resumption o f the conversation between PC
 Bruder and Inspector Sawers. PC Bruder had thanked the pathologist, said “B ye”, put
  the phone down and-then resumed his conversation-with Inspector Sawers. lie had
  then referred to changing his statement w hen speaking to the officer.

  bV The portraval of'Dr Slater’s Inquest-evidence.     —                 ^    -

v D r Siater said that the , first scene in the programme.-of him givingceyidence ,-ta- the -
' Inquest had been reasonable and accurate. H ow ever, subsequent scen es had giveivthe
"/mistaken im pre^ oit^ th at^ h e-h ad saidM hatfthe deaths at H illsborough had been          -■
  instantaneous With no-discomfort or pain. Dr Slater, said that his com m ents about: the
  speed with w hich unconsciousness occurred had been made in his general evidence in
  relation to concepts o f death by crush asphyxia and not the individual deaths at
  Hillsborough.          -                 .

 Dr Slater said that the programme’s editing.had presented his com m ents about pain
 and discomfort out o f context. His com m ents had only applied when the victim s were
 unconscious. W hile unconsciousness m ay have been implied his com m ents could
 easily have been understood to be referring to a conscious situation. The implications
 had been endorsed by. .relatives who had said “i f you are going to dies get Crushed at
 Hillsborough... it didn’t* hurt a bit!” T he programme had failed to reflect that until
 unconsciousness occurred,traumatic pain w o u ld have been experienced:      -

 Granada said that Dr Slater’s evidence had been included because he had provided
 complementary evidence at the inquest w h ich helped the coroner to reach his decision
 that 3.15 p.m . w ou ld be the “cut-off tim e”, or the latest tim e at w h ich any o f the
 deaths had occurred. The families had strong feelings about this decision and Granada
 said that there w a s eminent medical opinion w h ich conflicted with it. The fam ilies had
 been upset because the overwhelming majority had only been told the generic facts
 about'the death; o f athCir relatives. It had ibeen difficult for them to reconcile the
 pathological evid en ce that death inevitably follow ed crush and unconsciousness with
 the know ledge that others w ho had been in the crush and lost consciousness had
 survived. T hey had also heard evidence indicating that in a number o f Cases, victims
 had been alive som e time after 3.15 p.m . and this raised the question o f whether an
 individual m ight have survived had the em ergency response and treatment been
 different.

 Granada said that the programme’s editing had made it absolutely clear that the
 evidence portrayed had been taken from Dr Slater’s general evidence and a series o f
 different cases separated by the passage o f time. The programme-makers had taken
 extreme care to ensure that only words spoken by Dr Slater h im se lf were used in the
 mini-inquest scen es. Granada said that it had been satisfied that the dialogue was
 representative o f Dr Slater’s evidence, and this had been corroborated by the summing
 up by Dr Slater, the other prominent pathologist Professor Alan U sher and the
 Coroner. Dr Slater had referred to “instantaneous” death in tw o scenes. Granada said
 that in the dialogue used in the programme Dr Slater had said “unconsciousness
 occurs very rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there is one reported case o f it
 occurring apparently instantaneously.” This had clearly been referring to a text book
 case and not to individual Hillsborough deaths. Secondly an extract from Dr Slater’s
 evidence about the death o f Phillip Hammond, who had suffered a lacerated lung



                                                                                           7
about the West M idlands police-officer pressurising witnesses and-the programme
should have given the officer far greater prominence. Dr Slater said that he had
suffered adverse innuendo that would' have been more appropriately directed at the -
police force. A t the hearing Dr-Slater said thaWhere^had-.been a distinct-period o f time
between his conversation with PC Bruder and his being informed that PC Bruder had
changed hisstatem ent. He said that there was no way that PC Bruder had spoken to
him while preparing a n ew statement. The questions that Dr Slater -had put to PG -
Bruder had not been related to the changes that were made.            -•

Dr Slater also submitted a statement from Dr C Milroy the Home O ffice pathologist
which said that the portrayal o f Dr Slater had been professionally improper. At the
hearing Dr Slater said that in his evidence to the Scrutiny, PC Bruder had said that
Inspector Sawers had rung som eone at the Coroner’s office because they were having
difficulty understanding m edical details. PC Bruder had not named Dr Slater in his
evidence and Dr Slater said that he had no recollection o f speaking to anyone w ho had
been discussing their statement with a police officer. He said that PC Bruder had not
spoken to him on the occasion referred to and Dr Slater said that he did not w’ork in
the Sheffield Coroner’s office. Dr Slater also said that he had not provided a m edical
brief for Inspector S aw ers’ interview with PC Bruder.

Granadatsaid that sthe programme/had achieved part o f its purpose by stimulating
further official inquiry into aspects o f the Hillsborough disaster and said that the
Scrutiny ihad been instituted by the H om e Secretary largely as a result o f the
programme. .Granada provided a copy transcript o f PC Bruder’s evid en ce to the
Scrutiny. Granada said that this evidence made it clear that a medical brief had been
provided, apparently by Dr Slater, in preparation for the police officer’s interview
w ith PC Bruder. It was clear that the telephone conversation with Dr Slater had been
the overwhelming factor w hich had led to PC Bruder making a revised statement. At
the hearing'Granada said that the programme had made no suggestion that Dr Slater
had acted improperly. Granada said that the scene had accurately reflected what PC
Bruder had told them but that he had subsequently changed his version o f events in
his evidence to the Scrutiny.

Granada said that the exoneration referred to by Dr Slater related to allegations that
p olice officers had been pressurised by West Midlands Police. The programme had
not show n the W est Midlands police officer pressurising PC Bruder, because
Granada’s discussions with PC Bruder had revealed that he did not feel that he had
com e under improper pressure from the officer. Dr Slater had not suffered adverse
innuendoes because the programme had fairly reflected the run o f events involving Dr
Slater and PC Bruder’s evidence as supported by examination o f PC Bruder’s
evidence to the Scrutiny.

Granada said that it w as clear from PC Bruder’s evidence to the Scrutiny that the
telephone conversation with Dr Slater was undertaken to clarify medical details, as
stated explicitly in the programme. PC Bruder had made it clear that in his second
statement that he had bow ed to Dr Slater’s opinion and know ledge. Granada
acknowledged that Dr Slater held very different view s, but said that it had relied on
the documented run o f events. The second statement had been m isleading or
                             (t.£/ t/Vt5CA’S'Tt A Cs Cq      v&§ Jto
                                            £->eT.?~A:C_rr

    erroncous-as k appeared to withdraw die first statement's description o f feeling a...
    pulse on .Kevin-Williams, and PC Bruder, in his evidence to the Scrutiny, said-that'he
   had definitely felt a pulse: Granada said that PC Bruder had believed that conflicts o f
   evidencevand- opinion between.,himself and Dr Slater vvbuld^be.vfmaUy-resQlve^by.his,.^*;              '-ft.
.. °giving-evidence    to the Inquest. PC Bruder hadr not been called
          °                      1                              .i -w—..to. *-■
                                                                            give evidence
                                                                                      ■■ to the
   Inquest .and m isleading-or-erroneous-evidence vvas.-given about the presence o f a
   p u lsefofijbsfring-PG Bruder’s visit from Inspector Sawers and his conversation with D r
   Slater, inspector Sawers testified the follow ing day: that "PC Bruder. could not be
     categoric;
     caiegon     it was a pulse.
               c ii       pmse.                              ■                                      -
       °                                                                                          ‘n+e yus_.y,„
 Granada said that the statements obtained by Dr Slater in support o f his interpretation
 o f the programme remained irrelevant and did not reflect opinion shown to-be held
 elsewhere.                   '        .                               ,
            (•



 3. E vid en ce

 The C om m ission had before it a complaint from Dr Slater,"a: written statement from
 Granada,' the complainant’s- written comments, and a written response to these
 com m ents by Granada. The Com m ission also had before it Lord Justice Stuart-
 Sm ith’s Scrutiny o f Evidence Relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium Disaster,
 and further com m en ts'th ereon from both the complainant and Granada. The
 C om m ission watched a video-recording o f the programme as broadcast and read a
 transcript. The C om m ission held a hearing attended by Dr Slater and representatives
 o f Granada Television.
                                             '*
 4. T h e C o m m issio n ’s F in d in gs

 T he C om m ission recognises that this w as an important programme o f high quality
 w hich had been extensively researched. It also recognises that the programme focused
 on the fam ilies o f the victim s and the role o f the police and that Granada did not see
 Dr Slater as a major character in the drama. However, given that the 3.15 p.m. cu t-o ff
 time, set by the Coroner w as o f crucial importance to the v iew s o f the parents, the
 C om m ission considers that the programme-makers should have consulted Dr Slater,
 as they had PC Bruder, as part o f their research. In addition, the Com m ission notes
 that there w as a direct conflict o f evidence between the recollections o f PC Bruder and
 Dr Slater w hich w as not addressed by the programme.

 W hile PC Bruder’s evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny ^supported               ^
 Granada’s subm ission that Dr Slater played a part in causing PC Bruder to change his
 statement, the Com m ission considers that {^ p rogram m e} albeit unintentionally, w ent
 further. Viewers, including som e o f Dr Slater’s professional colleagues, were likely to
 have formed the erroneous impression that Dr Slater had, in some w ay, improperly
 influenced PC Bruder causing him to alter his earlier statement. The effect o f that
 alteration w as that PC Bruder appeared,to have withdraw n his earlier statemenLlhat
 one o f the victim s had survived beyond 3.15 p.m. Since this was a principal elem ent
 in the sense ,of unfairness felt by the families and one o f the major themes o f the
 programme, the C om m ission finds that it was unfair to Dr Slater.




                                                                                        10
