          HILLSBOROUGH               STEERING               COMMITTEE
                    c/o CastU CfumBers, CookjStrut, LiverpoolL2 SS0{
                      'let: 051 255-0628 J osq 051236 0047 D X 14100



           m
                                                               4th August 1989
                                                               EMS/DW

 F.A.O.




 Dear

 RE;      HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 7
 As you will have seen the Taylor report was publishedtoday. I
 enclose a copy of the Summary and confirm that the report itseXf
 is at the Liverpool Law Society Library copies can be purchased
 from any of the H.M.S.O. Offices, Command number
 CM765.
  The updated list of clients and Solicitors as at the 31st, July
  has been forwarded to the Insurers and interest on claims for each
  of those clients (if ultimately successful) will be backdated to
  the 15th April 1989.
  I enclose for your own information a copy of the entry on the list
  which relates to your firm from which you will see those clients
  who are covered.   In respect of any clients who consult you after
  the 31st, July interest is payable on those claims as from the
  date of notification to the Insurers,
  We are still trying to identify the most appropriate test case for
  injury outside the grounds at the turnstiles.
  If you have a client who was injured there and subsequently did
  not go onto the terraces and who would be willing for their case
  to-be taken as a test case (conducted by us as your agents) would
  you please let me know.
  I have been to the West Midlands Police Centre, which they are on
  instructions of the Coroner, seeking to establish in respect of
  each person who died their precise movements on that day.
  Therefore, if you have any statements from clients or witnesses
  which speak of other people - either by name or description
' could you let me have acopy to be forwarded to the Police for
  this purpose.
      .4


      *    ti
All statements submitted prior to the end of the Inquiry have
already been considered so this applies to more recent statements.
All good wishes.
Yours sincerely,




MISS E M STEEL
