       HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING               COMMIT TEE

                    c/o CastCe Chambers, CootStree t, LiverpoolLZ SS0{

                     Tel: 0512550628 Jo*: 051 236 0047 D X 14100


                                                                 5th September 1989
                                                                 EMS/DW




Dear

RE:    HIT.TfittOROUGH GROUP - RTTT.T.ETTW 8

As you will no doubt have seen from the Press, following
publication of the Taylor Interim Report the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, Peter Wright - who offered his own
resignation on the day the Report was published - referred the
whole   question   of   any   criminal liability and possible
prosecutions to the DPP and the West Midlands Police (who as you
know conducted the investigations for the Taylor Inquiry and
currently are continuing those investigations for the Coroner)
are undertaking the criminal investigations.

(1)       The Inquest

As a result of the criminal investigations the Coroner has
decided to postpone the Inquests which will not now start on the
15th, January.     We are still negotiating on the question of
payment of costs for joint representation and will write
separately to those of you who are acting for the bereaved
within the next few weeks.

(2)        Civil Proceedings - Lead Actions

Proceedings have been issued in respect of the two lead actions
dealing with fatalities in Pens 3 and 4 and the Defences in
those cases are due in mid-September. The third lead action or
liability (an injury outside the turnstiles) will be issued very
shortly and all three actions come before Mr Justice Rose in
October for further directions.



                                     -   1-
          'V


                                                                   i
                                                                   i



      *
Please find attached a list of Categories of Potential Nervous
Shock Claimants.   The purpose of this document is to identify
the number of nervous shock cases in each category and also to
establish whether or not there are any cases giving rise to
possible problems in relation to remoteness of damage. You
should against each category put the number of claims you are
dealing with in that category. It may be that there is some
overlap between the categories and in those circumstances we
would   be grateful if you would send a letter with the
questionnaire when you return it to the Law Library.  Also if
you are acting for a client who does not fit into any of the
categories listed would you please give brief details of the
cause of nervous shock.

Counsel wants to be in a position when we next come before Mr
Justice Rose in October to have identified the number and
category of ’’remoteness" lead actions. These will be tried
immediately after the liability lead cases and because liability
will not be an issue, will have limited pleadings etc.       Ben
Hytner would like us to be in a position to have either issued
proceedings or alternatively to have the Statements of Claim
settled and ready by that date.

With this in mind if any of your clients in your view would be a
particularly good Plaintiff in any of the numbered categories we
would be glad if you could let us have brief details at the
bottom of the form.

The lead cases would be dealt with in the same way as the other
lead cases namely that we would act as your agents for the
purpose of the proceedings but that of course all contact with
the client, instructions from the client etc would be by you and
through you.

Until we have Counsel’s further Advice the precise number of
remoteness lead claims is uncertain but will not include all 17
categories!

As you will see from the above it is very important that the
information on the questionnaire is collated as soon as possible
and we would be grateful if you could return the questionnaire
within the next fourteen days.




                               -   2-
As far as the costs of the lead actions are concerned we have
now had confirmation from the Solicitors acting for South
Yorkshire Police and the Club that the Insurers will be prepared
to meet the reasonable "generic" costs for work done by the
Steering Committee in connection with claims - i.e. that the
costs payable will not be limited to the costs of the particular
lead actions - the costs to be agreed or taxed in default of
agreement.     They reserve the right expressly for either
Defendant to give not less than one weeks' notice of termination
of the agreement,     but confirm that the giving of notice of
termination will not remove the obligation of the Insurers to
pay costs reasonably incurred upto the date of termination.

(3 )      Individna 1   r;la itb«

The Insurers have     been notified of all clients ofthe Group
notified to us as members by the 31st, July and the agreement
and payment of interest from the 15th April applies to those
clients.

As we have been notified of additional clients or additional
firms after that date I have submitted details - with the date
of notification - to the Insurers Solicitors and interest will
be payable as from the date of notification to us or the date
the claim was put into the Insurers whichever is the earlier.

(4)       Funding of Disbursements bv Insurers

We have obtained agreement from the Insurers of South Yorkshire
Police and Sheffield Wednesday Football Club that in relation to
medical reports prepared for claims purposes they will jointly
and severely fund reports reasonably obtained provided that the
reports concerned are relied on by the claimant and are
disclosed : to South • Yorkshire Police and the Club.    Payment
would normally be made on disclosure.

As with the generic costs South Yorkshire Police and the Clui
reserve   the   right to terminate this arrangement, either
generally or in relation to any specific case, by one weeks'
notice but making payment in respect of any report reasonably
commissioned prior to notice being given.

We would suggest that when submitting reports to the Insurers
that you enclose a copy of the fee note concerned and on the
basis of this agreement should receive early re-imbursement.




                                    -3
      -f*
(5)         Clinical Psychologists Ryamlnat-ion

We have received a very large number of completed questionnaires
which are being processed by the Clinical Psychology Team.
Appointments will be sent out to you direct.

In case there still are some forms which have not been returned
I would remind you to let us have these as soon as possible.

Of course if you are consulted by new clients subsequently
please let us have the completed forms as soon as they are
available and we will pass those through for attention.

(6)         Part II Inquiry

Although   no official time table has been given work         is
continuing on the general Part II of the Taylor Inquiry.      We
will be submitting the comments of clients together with any
general comments which come out from the representations fairly
shortly - we hope to do       so before the end of the month.
Therefore, if any clients have not yet written in and do wish
their views    to be heard we would be glad if you could let u.s
have these as soon as possible.

(7)         Hillsborough Trust

We had a useful meeting with the Trustees with whom we continue
to liaise on procedures.      In particular, we dealt with the
formation of individual Trusts to be used by them in appropriate
cases where money would be paid for the benefit of an infant or
for those under a disability which made it appropriate for the
money to be in Trust.

Because i-t would be sensible in cases involving infants for any
such Trust Deed to be in a form which would be approved by the
Court as an appropriate vehicle for receipt of damages the
trustees after consultation with us have instructed Counsel to
settle draft Trust Deeds and advise.   Once the proposed infants
Trust Deed is settled in draft form we will seek as part of the
directions in October an Order approving a trust in such fora
for the receipt of infants damages so that monies from the Trust:
(which undoubtedly will be paid first) and damages can be paid
into a single fund for a particular client.




                                 -   4-
                  *


      *•»




      *
Finally, there are still a few firms who have not yet paid the
£100 contribution and who have not been in touch to ask for
payment to be deferred because of individual difficulties.

If you do fall into this small category I would be grateful if
you could let us have a cheque made payable to the Liverpool Law
Society as soon as possible.

All good wishes.

Yours sincerely,

            u *       ^

MISS E M STEEL




                               -   5-
        HILLSBOROUGH                    STEERING                COMMITTEE
                    t/o CastU Chambers, Cookjtreet, LiverpoolL2 9SM OX 14100
                                <Tct: 0S1 2SS 0628 J«c:0S1236 0047

         P

                              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


  CATEGORIES OF NERVOUS SHOCK CLAIMANTS : REMOTENESS OF DAMAGE



1.    The Claimant w as in pen 3
or 4 and suffered p h y s i c a l injury
and nervous shock.

2.    The Claimant w as in pen 3 or
4 and suffered no p h y s i c a l injury
but suffered nervous shock.

3.          The Claimant w as in another
p a r t of the ground and saw a close
r e l a t iv e injured or k i l l e d .

4.         The Claimant w as in another
part of the ground and knowing or
b e lie v in g a r e la tiv e to be in pen
3 or 4, la te r found them injured
or dead.

5.         The Claimant w as in another
p art of the ground and knew or
b e lie v e d a r e la t iv e w as in pen 3
or 4, or could be in those pens,
but la te r found them not to have
b een phys'ically in ju red or to have
su ffered nervous s h o c k .,

6..       The Claimant w as in another
p a r t of the ground and knew or
b e lie v e d a frien d w as in pen 3 or
4 and la ter found th at they had
been k ille d or in ju r e d .

7.         The Claimant w a s in another
p a r t of the ground and knew or
b e lie v e d a frien d w as in pens 3 or A,
or could be in those p e n s , and la te r
found that th ey had not been
k i l l e d or injured .



                                              I




                                                                  c o n t ’d . . . . /
(JLa^^aS1
                                            -   2   -




8.     The cla im a n t was in another part
of the ground and no r e la tiv e or
friend in or b e lie v e d to be in pen
3 or

9.           The cla im an t was not at the
stadium but saw the e ven ts liv e on
t e le v is o n a n d /o r d escribed on radio
and knew or b e lie v e d a r e la tiv e was
in pen 3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane
end and same w as injured or k il le d .

10.         The Claimant was at the stadium
but saw the even ts liv e on te le v is io n
a n d /o r d e scr ib e d on radio and knew or
b e lie v e d a r e l a t iv e w as in pen 3 or 4
or at the L eppings Lane end and same
w as not in ju red or k i l l e d .

11.         The Claimant w as not at the
stadium but saw the e v en ts liv e on
te le v is io n a n d /o r d escribed on radio
and knew or b e lie v e d a friend was in
pen 3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane
end and same was injured or k i l l e d .

12.         The Claimant was not at stadium
but saw the e v en ts liv e on t e le v is io n
a n d /o r de scr ib e d on radio and knew or
b e lie v e d a fr ie n d w as in pen 3 or 4 or
a t the Leppings Lane end and same was
not injured or k i l l e d . ✓

13.            The Claimant    saw recorded footage
o f the d is a s t e r and     knew or b e lie v e d a
r e l a t i v e was at the     match and knew that
person would be at             Leppings Lane and
l a t e r found him /her       to h a ve been
in ju r e d or k i l l e d .

14.          The Claimant was not at stadium
b u t saw the e v en ts l i v e on te le v is io n
a n d /o r de scr ib e d on radio and knew or
b e l i v e d a r e l a t iv e w as in pen 3 or 4
or at the L eppings Lane end and same
w a s not in ju red or k i l l e d .



                                                         c ont'd
/




                                                         -   3   -




    15.        Persons in v o lv ed in rescue
    a t t e m p t * w h o were not o r i g i n a l l y
    in pens 3 or 4.

    16.    Attending to id e n t ify the body
    or to enquire in S h effield a s to
    w hereabouts of v ic tim s.

    17.      Other:




      t
