        Jtfl L L S B O R O U G H           STEERING                COMMITTEE
                          Castle Cham bers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                           Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




                                                                 16 May 1991
                                                                        EMS/DW


        F A 0
                                                                        117 MAY 1991




        Dear

        RE:     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BULLETIN 22

        No doubt you will have seen in the Press the outcome of the Court
        of Appeal hearing in which Judgments were given on Friday the 3rd
        May.   Unfortunately in all matters Judgment was given for the
        Defendants but with a very strong recommendation both in the body
        of the Judgments themselves and during the discussion in Court
        following the Judgments that matters should proceed to the House
        of Lords.   I trust that (like Mrs McLoughlin who lost 0-3 in the
        Court of Appeal and then succeeded 5-0 in the House of Lords) we
        will meet with greater success there.

        1.           The Remoteness Appeals

        The arguments for the Plaintiffs in these cases firstly traced the
        development of the case law in respect of claims for damages for
        psychiatric injury and dealt in detail with the Judgments of the
        House of Lords in McLoughlin -v- O'Brien.

        Our Counsel sought to rationalise the five decisions but
        emphasised that of Lord Bridge, arguing from that decision that
        in the case of psychiatric injury when determining whether or not
        a particular Plaintiff's injury was reasonably foreseeable the
        correct approach - rather than seeking to categorise the claim -
        was to weigh up the various factors taken into consideration in
        the McLoughlin case.       Factors mentioned by Lord Bridge of
        time/space/relationship/the circumstances of the tragedy should
        all be taken into account in each individual case, so for example
        the closer to the incident in time and space and more horrific the
        incident and lesser need there would be for a close family
        relationship.

        The Defendants relied substantially on the Judgment of Lord




\

    \
HILLSBOROUGH                      STEERING                COMMITTEE
                  Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                   Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




     j
         %
Wilberforce and his categorisation of claims, contending that
there should be no expansion beyond the categories mentioned by-
Lord Wilberforce, the need for certainty and the argument that
if there were expansion or if cases were approached on an
individual basis this would open the flood gates to unlimited
claims.

In their Judgments all three Lord Justices expressed sympathy
with the Plaintiffs as individuals but took a restrictive view
of the dicta in McLoughlin -v- O'Brien.         They adopted the
reasoning of Lord Wilberforce rather than Lord Bridge (commenting
that in the later case of Caparo -v- Dickman Lord Bridge appeared
to have tempered his views - certainly as far as financial loss
was concerned - finding that not all loss which was reasonably
foreseeable was necessarily recoverable.

They adopted the Wilberforce approach limiting the categories of
Plaintiffs entitled to the recover to spouse/parent or those
where there was a caring relationship in which they would require
evidence of an equivalent relationship to the normal spouse or
parent situation.

As far as television is .concerned they took the view that this
was - novus actus interveniens and did not put the Plaintiffs in
the same position as if they had been present at the ground.

To summarise,    they found that the psychiatric injury to
Plaintiffs in the position of our Plaintiffs was all foreseeable
but was not reasonably foreseeable in that they were not "persons
who are so closely and directly affected by the tortfeasors act
that they ought reasonably to have them in contemplation...."

There is a fairly full note of the argument and cases relied upon
at the Law Library (this applies both to the remoteness cases and
the pre-death pain and suffering cases) and as soon as we receive
the official transcript of the Judgments that too will be lodged
at the Law Library - we have at the moment only the handed down
version.

If you want further or more detailed information you are welcome
to see those at the Library or alternatively to ask Ronnie Wright
for copies which she will supply on payment of the normal copying
charges.

2.           Appeal to the House of Lords

All the Lord Justices made it very clear that the law was
uncertain and should be reviewed by the House of Lords.     The
Court of Appeal readily granted leave to appeal to the House of




                                  3t.
HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING                COMMITTEE
               Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




Lords and in his lead Judgment Lord             Justice    Parker   said,
referring to McLoughlin -v- O'Brien :-

          "Although their Lordships decision was unanimous there
          were considerable differences in approach and substance
          between them. Not only have these differences not been
          resolved by later decisions of this Court and Courts
          of first instance but to some extent they have, as it
          seems to me, lead to a situation when it is of vital
          importance that the law on the subject should again be
          reviewed by their Lordships in the light of the facts
          in the case before us."

After having given Judgment he said that it was the view of the
Court of Appeal that the matter should be heard by the House of
Lords as soon as reasonably practicable.

Appeals are being made to the House of Lords and we are hopeful
that these will be listed for hearing sometime in the Autumn and
that there will be a definitive decision one way or the other
well before the limitation period expires.

I will of course let you know as soon as there is anything
further to report and inparticular once we have a date for
hearing.


3.        Pre-Death Pain and Suffering Appeals

The arguments in this case on behalf of the Plaintiffs were that
there was a period of increasing discomfort suffered by each
deceased elevated to extreme discomfort apprehension or fear of
death, pain leading to asphyxia and death and that damages should
be assessed for this injury.

There was considerable discussion on the point that apprehension
of death - i.e. knowledge that ones life expectancy was reduced -
must follow injury and not precede it.

In the event the Court adopted the reasoning of Hodson J in
Bishop -v- Cunnard White Star Company where there was a collision
at sea between the Queen Mary and a Naval Cruiser which sunk the
Naval Vessel within a few minutes and where claims were made for
pre-death pain and suffering but where in the absence of clear
evidence of reasonably prolonged suffering no award was made.




                              3.
      i
      ,4




Once again leave was granted to appeal to the House of Lords and
the question of an appeal is under active consideration with the
Counsel and clients in the test cases.

As soon as any firm decision is made I will of Course let you
know.

In the meantime if you have cases where pre-death pain and
suffering is an element which remains open I would strongly
suggest that you keep that option open confirming with the MMI
that you reserve the right to re-open that aspect in the light
of any decision of the House of Lords.

4.         Medical Reports in remoteness cases

Although we trust that the House of Lords hearing will be
completed and Judgment given well before the limitation period
inevitably there will be only a relatively short period of time
between that Judgment and April 1992.

We would therefore strongly advise those of you who have clients
who are eligible for legal aid and who fall within the remoteness
categories to apply for limited legal aid to cover investigation
and obtaining medical evidence at this stage so that in the event
of a successful appeal you are not left with insufficient time
to prepare the case properly.

As soon as there are any further developments I will of course
let you know.

Every good wish.

Yours sincerely,


MISS E M STEEL




                             4-.
