               )                                                                9 buckingham g a te
                                                                                   LONDON    SW1E 6JP
^ 0b

071-828 1558



 Sir Malcolm Thornton MP
 House of Commons
 London
 SW1A OAA
                                                                                   19 March 1996




 The Attorney General has asked me to examine in detail the application made under s. 13 of
 the Coroners Act 1988 for authority to apply to the High Court for an order directing a fresh
 inquest in relation to Kevin Williams. This is in accordance with s. l(l)(c) of the Law
 Officers Act 1944.


 I am sorry that this decision has taken longer than I would have wished but the application
 has been thoroughly reviewed and considered in view of its importance and the
 representations made by Mr and Mrs Williams. Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 applies
 when an inquest has been held and "by reason offraud, rejection o f evidence, irregularity o f
 proceedings, insufficient o f enquiry, the discovery o f new facts or otherwise, it is necessary
 or desirable in the interests o f justice that another inquest should be held".


 I have considered this matter in detail and with great care but have come to the conclusion
 that there is nothing in the new evidence presented to me which would justify the authorising
 of an application to the High Court for a new inquest in the case of Kevin Williams. This
 decision has been made on the grounds that the application would have no reasonable
 prospect of establishing that it was necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh
 inquest to be held.
In making this decision I have taken into account the new and further evidence presented in
the Memorial by Mr and Mrs Williams. I can understand Mrs Williams’ wish to establish
the full facts of her son’s tragic death and have them recorded in a formal inquest. I have
considered these issues carefully but I have to consider them in the context of the statutory
framework within which coroners are required to work and the questions which must be
answered on the inquisition. I am unable to authorise an application to the High Court under
s. 13 unless it could be said, with reasonable confidence, that further information is likely to
be elicited which would have a bearing on the issues to be considered at any such further
inquest. In my opinion this is not the case in the present application.


I realise that this will be extremely disappointing to Kevin Williams’ parents but can only
assure them that I have considered this matter in detail and with the utmost sympathy.


I can only reiterate my very deepest sympathies for the Williams’ tragic loss.


                                          V
