           MiHJEES of the first neeting of the Hillsborough Solicitors (Soup
                                      •i iqqq af Castle ct^Tffesrs. Cook Str60t t
         held at 5:30 p.m. on 25th April, i v w attastxe          '
         ^                 '           Liverpool 2




Present
'   —                ..               .■.,■>.•


                                  -        xaw Society;'


           ?-H - ^         ^ e ' - ^ ^ i a e n t

            R . N ^ K ^ n ^ ! , - ^ a i n S Contentious Business Sub-Committee

Representing.tte.Law Society:

            Mrs. Edwina Donne



Group Members;               "Stefe annexed Attendance List



    1.      APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN
            Mr. Arden w a s appointed as Chairman by acclaim of the meeting, and duly
             took the chair.

    2.       TNTTRODUCTION    and     PURPOSE OF j g C T n g

             Mr   Arden     after introducing the members of the panel (being the
                                                                           tc^appear o ^ h a l f of
             the group at tte opening on 28.4.1989 of the Biquiry un er                 e
             chairmanship of Lord Justice Taylor.

             With regard to financing, Legal Aid would not be                                   the


             families;       he   was     conscious of the risk that any                    i

             S«-SSM!r-S
              of tte donations which had been made to the Trustees.
                                                                              5SSS
              Approaches had also been made to the Home Office t e e n e r * as t0 the
              jSsibility of funding, but no response had bean received.


              K .“        ; S i 3 e “ ”w 5

              ^ IS ^ & H S sr .» * = a r
 incurred costs. He took the view that if there was a reasonable
 possibility of proceeding through the medium of a group steering
jcommittee, and of initiating a test action, firms which elected to go
 their own way might well have a-substantial part of their costs
 disaj1 — J

     nairman emphasized the scale of the problem, with possibly tens of
thoqsands of wi^esses to be interviewed, and evidence from many sources


REPORT ON ACTIVITIES OF LIVERPOOL LAW SOCIETY

The Chairman reported that from 9:00 a.m. on the Monday following the
disaster, the Society had continuously manned two telephone lines with
volunteer solicitors to take calls from members of the public. En
excess of two hundred calls had been received in the first week. The
main function of the volunteers had been not so much to give legal
advice as to to identify the type of advice which the caller required,
which might involve a reference to Social Services or to counselling
services. When legal representation was required and the caller did not
have a solicitor he would be referred to member firms of the A.L.A.S.
scheme on a rota basis.

FORMATION OF STEERING OCMMTETEE

The Chairman asked Mr. Neville T. Whittle of Messrs. Ford and Warren,
Leeds, ’to address, a few words to the meeting based on his experiences as
a member of other, similar, steering cornu.ttees.

Mr. Whittle had been professionally involved in the Paris, Tenerife and
Bradford disasters, and in general advocated representation on Steering
Committees by firms rather than individuals. In the case of the
Bradford disaster, one firm had been instructed to handle one test
action, which was initiated following the publication of the Popplewell
Report. He felt that the role of the Steering Committee was to
establish liability, and that issues of quantum should be left to
individual firms, who would be best placed to assess the loss suffered
                   idiente««&*w-
He .enphasized the Chairman's conrnents about the risks inherent in using
funds from the disaster fund in order to fund such a test action.

         Goldsnith, t°f Messrs. Goldsmiths (Liverpool) addressed seme
remarks to the meeting based ch his experience as a member of the
Steering Committee relating to the Piper Alpha Disaster. The
circumstances there were different, as the initial meeting of group
solicitors had been attended by a representative of Occidental (the
owners of the oil rig) and had indicated that liability would be likely
to be accepted provided that the level of damages claimed was not geared
to American levels. They had managed to persuade Occidental to
underwrite the expenses of the Steering Committee.
He thought that any sort of central funding in this case would be
unlikely. His;Committee had asked solicitors for a contribution of £100
per client,' which could be increased to £200 but on the understanding
that any member could withdraw if he was not satisfied with the
financing proposals.

He stressed the importance of public relations, particularly via the
                      — —       — -                          ^

Each Committee MSnber should be allotted a particular role.

He expressed the- importance of medical evidence, and recommended the
compilation of a panel of psychiatrists who were sympathetic to the
latest thinking,"such as in relation to post-trauma stress disorders.
Problems might not be identifiable until months or even years later;
sometimes the problem might seem to be at an end, but could be triggered
off years later; he instanced the case of members of the Navy who had
taken part in the Falklands War, where later events in the Gulf had
created a recurrence of stress symptoms which had been caused in the
Falklands.

Mr. David Harris' of Henry Cross & Son (Prescot) said that he was a
member of the Cpren Committee, where the defendants had denied
liability. Many claims had followed, which had led to the appointment
of'a High Court Judge specifically to deal with that particular cause of
action; the risk was that where one Judge dealt with all the actions he
was liable to become bored with the repetition of events and then might
possibly mis§. the finer legal points. He warned that the Steering
Committee should not be seen to become too remote from group members.

In that case the actions had been funded partly by Legal Aid (Nottingham
Area), and partly from private sources.

Mr. J. McGlashan of Colin Watson & Co., (Warrington) asked the Chairman
for details of the Discretionary Fund. The Chairman replied that he had
just received a faxed message from the Trustees, which indicated that it
would be their policy to make an initial payment within four weeks, that
the degree of hardship would be reflected in the distributions made,
that they did not propose to interview beneficiaries personally, and
they intended to keep costs of administration of the fund to a minimum.

The Chairman advised the meeting that Messrs. Brian Thompson & Partners
had kindly offered the use of the library at their Sheffield Office, and
had also indicated they had clients who might be funded by their Trade
Unions if test actions were to be brought.

.On a show of hands, all present (save one against) confirmed that if
 insufficient funding from other sources was forthcoming for
 representation at the Enquiry, contributions - not fixed, but suggested
at £100 per client - should be made by firms in the group towards that
 representation.

ELECTION OF MEMBERS

The Chairman stated that he felt that membership of the Committee should
be limited to six, and asked for volunteers and nominations from the
       floor. In the event nine names were forthcoming. The Chairman
     w therefore declared that the members would be elected by ballot, and
     ^ invited each volunteer/nominee to address the meeting with a few words
       as to his or her"-experience and qualifications for the position.

6.     BALLOT     ™                -....

       Messrs, Bark-“Jor«s, Dawson and Mrs. Dunne were appointed scrutineers,
       and after the voting papers had been collected and counted,
       Mr. Bark-Jones announced that Messrs. Harris, Fraser, Humphreys and
       Whittle, Miss Harrison and Miss Steele, had been duly elected.

       The Chairman thanked all those who had put their names forward, and
       expressed the hope that those who had been unsuccessful would still be
       able to co-operate with the Committee.

7.     ROLE OF GROUP MEMBERS

       The Chairman identified this as being principally to maintain a liaison
       between clients and the Steering Committee.

8.      ROLE OF LIVERPOOL LAW SOCIETY

       The Chairman offered to the Steering Committee the use of the Society's
       Committee Roan, and such other facilities as might be appropriate.

There being no other business, the meeting was closed just after 7:00 p.m.
