         HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING                COMMITTEE
                      c/o CastCe Chambers, Cookj>treet, LiverpooCL2 9S^f
                       TeC: 051 255-0628 Ja^ . 05l 236 0047 <DX 14100



            \
To All Solicitors
acting for next of kin
of fans killed at Hillsborough




31st August 1989

Dear Sirs

RE:   HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS




According to our list of members you act for        the next of kin of the
above named. Regardless of whether your return the enclosed Questionnaires
(see below) would you please inform us immediately if you do not represent
the next of kin so we may try and trace the practice which does so
and if you act for more next of kin than are shown would you please
supply us with the appropriate details in order that we may bring our
records up to date.      We stress that we are interested only in next
of kin at this stage and not simply members       of the deceased's family
... this information is required in connection with the 'block representation
which we are trying to arrange for the forthcoming Inqests.

As you will be aware from the recent publicity the annoucement by     the
Director of Public Prosecutions of his intention' to have the possibility
of criminal charge being preferred against individuals or organizations
who upon investigation are revealed to have perhaps    committed offences
the adjourned hearings of the Inquests will not now     reopen in January
as previously expected.   No new date has been fixed by H.M. Coroner,
as soon as we have any information in this respect we will get back
to you.

Intervention of the D.P.P has radically altered the sequence of events
which we    had anticipated would take place.       The original sequence
was thatthe Public Inquiry having been concluded and the Interim Report
publised Lord Justice Taylor would conclude        his Inquiry as regards
future safety recommendations ect and publish       the final part of his
Report towards the end of this year.        The Inquests would then have
begun in January and lasted anything between a month and 12 weeks depending
upon how much evidence H.M. Coroner decided to call and the trial or
the lead civil actions would then have begun shortly after Easter in
Liverpool.   The announcement of the 'criminal investigation' has caused,
the Inquests to be adjourned. We understand that the criminal investigation
is likely to last anything up to 6 months which would take us to about
the end of January 1989 and the time of the Inquests may then depend
upon what action (if any) the D.P.P. decides to take.

If no a^j^?n is taken or only minor criminal charges are preferred
then there would seem no reason why the Inquests and civil action could
not  proceed in    that order almost immediately but if serious charges
are preferred then certainly the Inquests will have to be delayed until
the conclusion of a criminal trial or trials.

The  families ofthe bereaved are likely to have mixed        feelings about
the delayed resumption of the Inquests, thos who were keen to see the
question of criminal charges investigated will doubtless         be pleased
but those who had no strong feelings about that question will doubtless
be upset by the delay which could be as much as a futber 9 months from
now and no doubt you will explain the situation to your clients ...
unfortunately there is nothing the Steering Committe can do to bring
the Inquest hearings forward in the light of recent developments.

Despite the delay before the Inquests resume we are anxious to continue
to try and make arrangements for 'block representation' at the Inquests
and in an attempt to clarify how this might be arranged and presented
a member of the Committee recently visited Sheffield and spoke at length
to H.M. Coroner.

He confirmed that he would "warmly welcome" representation of as many
of the deceased as possible by one team, the alternative to this would
present such enormous problems as to make the hearing of the Inquest
almost unmanageable.

We feel that much the same arrangements as were put in hand for          the
presentation of evidence to the Public Inquiry should be adopted         for
the Inquests and we would therefore suggest as follows

1.   Each Solicitor acting for next of kin should obtain from   them relevant
information and pass it to the Committee via the Law Library.

2. The Committee have appointed 1 member to gather together that information
and instruct Counsel in relation to both parts of theInquest (see
below).

3.   The Committee will arrange with the Coroner a 'running order' for
the hearing of individual inquests and notify Solicitors of the dates
and times upon which their clients Inquests will be held and it will
be responsibility of that Solicitor to pass that information to his/her
client and arrange for the attendance of the next of kin and any other
witnesses (see below) at Sheffield.  Your clients may wish you to attend
in a "supporting role" to introduce them to Counsel etc and you would
of course be free to do so.

4.   Your costs for gathering together preliminary information, completing
the   questionnaire  and   all  subsdequent correspondence  and  attending
the Inquest if you are instructed so to do should be dealt with by
the Insurers involved following settlement of the civil claim attracted
by each deceased's estate.

5.  The costs of the Committee for co-ordinating the information, attending
the Inquest throughout and instructing Counsel will not borne by you
or your clients in the event we can arrange independent funding but
we are unable to do this we will return to you with a number of alternative
suggestions for considersation by yourselves and your clients.

The alternative to 'block representation' is for at least 54 separate
practices (this being the number of firms who have presently indicated
to us thatljj^hey act for one or more deceased) from all over the country
preparing to deal with an inquest in the normal way i.e. gathering
together as much information as they can and attending by Solicitor
or Counsel to hear evidence and cross examine where appropriate.       An
essential element of that preparation would be the obtaining and reading
of a full copy of the transcript of the evidence taken by the Public
Inquiry together with all the documents produced ... the writer has
seen the pile which that would create and it exceeds 4 ft in height!
H.M.   Coroner presently intends to hold a generic inquiry to determine
what happened in general terms on the afternoon of the 15th April and
then   to hold 95 separate inquests to try and determine a precise cause
of death in each case.

Our present understanding is that the generic inquiry will involved
calling witnesses from amongst fans, police officers, club officials,
the Local Authority, the consulting engineers responsible for advising
the club on safety aspects, the ambulance and fire service.   Each witness
is likely to give evidence in chief and then be available for cross
examination by Counsel instructed by of the bodies or organizations
present.   Much of evidence will of course have already been given at
the Public Inquiry and H.M. Coroner has indicated that he has read
the full transcript but he is obliged to carry out an Inquiry into
the cause of death of each individual and he cannot do that without
satisfying himself as to what happened at Hillsborough. It is anticipated
that in addition to the Coroner calling witnesses those bodies who
are represented before him may also be allowed to call witnesses to
give evidence and be cross examined,, their evidence must be 'new' in
the sense that it adds something to the evidence already heard or presents
a substantial new slant on that evidence.

There will then be 95 separate short inquests each lasting possibly
an hour or more.    These will be to determine individual causes of death
and although the preliminary cause of death which has already been
given might ultimately be pronounced as the final cause of death for
the Death Certificate H.M. Coroner must determine an individual cause
in each case and he is personally very concerned to ensure that each
family has its own 'private' inquest if this is possible in these circumstances.

H.M. Coroner has not finally decided whether he will run the generic part of
the inquest first and the individual ones later or the other way round,
as soon as he informs us of his final decision we will let you know.

In our view it is not necessary for family to be present the generic
hearing unless they particularly wish to be but we would recommend
that they seriously consider being present for their own individual
hearing ... this is of course a matter for you and your client to discuss
at the appropriate time.

Our present view is that Leading Counsel should be instructed in relation
to the generic inquiry but he is not likely to be needed for the individual
inquests so we propose instructing Junior Counsel only to attend these.
This view may change once we have ascertained the views of the Solicitors
acting for the Police and Club, we are firmly convinced that the bereaved
should have at least same level of representation as they do throughout
the inquests and we trust that you and your clients share this view.
4




In addition to having Counsel       present throughout the Committee   will
be in daily attendance by at       least a Legal Executive/Articled Clerk
and a Committee member each day on a rota basis but there is of course
no reason wnj you could not attend for any part of either the generic
or individual hearings should you wish to do so.

If the next of kin who you represent are happy        with our suggestions
concerning  'block representation' would you please complete one of
the enclosed questionnaires in relation to each deceased for whose
next of kin you act and return it to us at the Law Library as soon
as possible so that we may being the task of co-ordinating information.

If either you or your clients would like any further information before
deciding whether or not to come underneath the umbrella please do not
hesitate  to contact us and we will respond to your inquiry as quickly
as possible.    All enquiries should be in writing and directed to us
at the Law Library, your letter should be headed 'Hillsborough Inquests'
and should be indicate the name of deceased involved.

If you have instructions not to take part in the block representation
from one or more of your clients would you please let us know as soon
as possible, and also indicate whether you will be arranging representation
yourself and if so in relation to which of the bereaved.

You are   invited to   retain a   copy   of   the   completed   Questionnaire   for
your own purposes.

We are anxious as to ascertain the numbers of deceased likely to be
the subject of block representation as soon as possible would you therefore
ensure that the Questionnaires are returned completed before 29th September
1989 at the latest.

Yours faithfully
            HILLSBOROUGH                      STEERING                COM M ITTEE
                            c/o CastCe Chambers, Coo^Street, LiverpooCL2 9 S ti
                              TeC: 051 255-0628 Jo*: 051 2360047 <DX 14100


                                    —


                            I N Q U E S T       Q U E S T I O N A I R E




1.    Full name of deceased

2.    Address of deceased




3.    Age at date of death

4.    Name of person instructing you

5.    Relationship to the deceased



SOLICITORS DETAILS



6.    Full name of firm

7.    Address




8.    DX number

9•    Phone number

10.    Fax number

11.    Your reference



ATTENDANCE AT INQUEST



12.    Will you be present at this Inquest

13.    Will the preson instructing you be
       be attending
POST MORTEM REPORT



14.
             ft
      Have you obtained a copy of the
      Post Mortem Report

      If so will you please supply a
      to us as quickly as possible
      (see covering letter)




EVIDENCE




15.   Does your client wish to give
      evidence at the Inquest

16.   Does any other person connected
      with the deceased of who you
      aware (relative, friend,etc) wish
      to give evidence?

17.   If the answer to either 15 & 16
      is in the affirmative please let
      us have copies of their detailed                 ^
      statements as soon as possible so    ^       /
      that we might arrange the calling        /
      of these witnesses with the
      Coroner will permit in appropriate
      order.
