HILLSBOROUGH                      STEERING               COMMITTEE

                  Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L29SH
                   Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100

            ''    '       ■■ i                               17TH JANUARY 1991
                                                             EMS/DW

—^                — —     —                                   ylft JAN 1991
F.A.O.




 ^ear   ■


 RE:        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER -BULLETIN 20
 I am pleased to say that the applicationfor expedited hearing of
 the appeals has been granted and we now have a date for the hearing
 of the remoteness appeals by the Court of Appeal.. I will comment on
 the appeals and other developments.
 1.          Court of Appeal -remoteness cases               and pre-death    pain
 and suffering appeals.
 These cases are listed for hearing before the Court of Appeal
 (estimated length of the remoteness cases four days) commencing 9th
 April 1991.    The pre-death pain and suffering appeal which has an
 estimated length of half a day will be fitted in to follow
 immediately after the remoteness appeals.
 There are appeals pending in 15 of the 16 test cases heard by Hidden
 J. The cases were consolidated in May last year and of course all
 issues will be heard at the same time.
 Copies of the Pleadings in the Appeal cases have been lodged at the
 Law Library and are available for you to inspect - or if you are too
 far away to do so conveniently copies can be supplied by the Law
 Library upon payment of usual copying charges.
 Counsel has now settled the Cross Appeals and the Notice of
 Additional Grounds is with the papers  at the Law Library. In
I




     *

                                                       ........
apprq&riate cases we contend that Judgment should be affirmed on the
additional grounds that the Plaintiffs participated in events making
up the "immediate aftermath" of the Hillsborough disaster by either
searching for lost relatives: seeing relatives in intensive care: or
being present, identifying the body and seeing the scenes at the
temporary mortuary in the Gymnasism at the Hillsborough Stadium.
These matters were included before Hidden J but he based his
decision on other grounds and effectively no decision on these
points was made at first instance.
In additional a supplemental Notice of Appeal   will     be   lodged   in
respect of the costs order made by Hidden J.
If there are any unexpected developments then I will of course let
you know.   Subject to that we will attend on the hearing of the
Appeals and let you have a full report in due course.
2.         Appointment for Psychiatric medical reports.
There have been some further sessions when Morgan O'Connell or
members of his team have been to Liverpool and seen clients
sometimes these visits have had to be fixed up at very short notice
because of the Gulf situation means that the Psychiatrists are on
constant call.     As a result there are now relatively few requests
awaiting an appointment.
The consultants will be needed in connection with the Gulf but if
you still send through requests for appointments we will try to deal
with these although as you will appreciate there may well be a
delay.
It is clear from questionnaires and letters which are coming through
from some Group members that appointments are being sought for
clients who will fall within the remoteness categories which are
currently under appeal. Where Nicky can identify this from the
letter or the accompanying questionnaire she has been contacting the
firms direct to draw the costs position to their attention.
As you will appreciate if your client falls within the remoteness
categories then the fee for medical report does not fall within the
terms of our agreement and will not be paid at this stage by the
Insurers.
If you have clients in this category you should therefore either
obtain a legal aid certificate (if their means are appropriate) or
clarify with the client that they will be personally responsible for
     0




         *   ■




     Jj-
the £fie for the report at this stage and its recovery               from   the
Insurers will depend on the outcome of the appeal.
3.                   Costs.
I am pleased to learn that many people have been able to negotiate
satisfactory settlements on behalf of their clients. In some cases
there is apparently a difficulty over agreeing the amount of costs
with the MMI or Solicitors for the Defendant.
I would remind you of the procedure which is available to tax a bill
of costs where the matter has been settled but no proceeding
instigated.   This is by way of originating application and ideally
should be dealt with by issuing the application endorsed with the
consent of the Solicitors for the Insurers together with a ccpy of
the bill for taxation.
I attached a suggested form of application.
4.                   Copy statements made to West Midlands Police.
As mentioned in Bulletin 19 the case is now back under the control
of the Coroner - as far as those who died are concerned - and we
made application for the release of statements again. The Coroner
had no objection.
Subsequently the point has been taken that those statements are
technically the property of the South Yorkshire Police who are
currently refusing consent to their release until they have had an
advice from the Police Authority Solicitors that it is in order for
them to agree.
At one stage it was indicated that they would require a court order
from any court and at the Inquest immediately before Christmas I did
make application to the Coroner who confirmed he could see no
objection to the release but that he only had control over natters
directly relating to the deaths.    I am still awaiting to hear from
the South Yorkshire Police and will let you know as soon as I have
further information.
In the           meantime it would be useful for us to know the number of
people           who are affected by this decision and if you have applied for
a copy           of the statement and that is still awaited or are likely to
apply            for a copy of your clients statement would you please me
know.




                                   3
5_i_   v     Medical examinations bv Dr Johnstone.
The Municipal Mutual are taking issue        with us and with the
individual Solicitors over the refusal       to allow clients to be
examined by Dr Johnstone.
We have received a number of letters and in some cases copies of the
medical report which give particular instances of Dr Johnstone's
attitude to the clients and the way in which his reports are framed.
We will seek initially to deal with this by way of the trouble
shooting procedure but if it is necessary to take the matters
further by testing it in a particular case then we will of course
need to produce hard evidence of particular objections.
I would be grateful if any of your clients have been examined by Dr
Johnstone if you could let me have the details, the objections and
copies of the medical reports. We would not of course release those
reports and identify the individuals without first clearing the
position with the Solicitors concerned.
All good wishes.
Yours sincerely,
           <kx WA'
MISS E M STEEL
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEENS*BENCH DIVISION
AND I^THE MATTER OF TAXATION OF COSTS
B E Tv4 E E N :-

                                                       Applicant

                  -and-

                  PETER WRIGHT (SUED AS CHIEF
                  CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                  POLICE                               Respondent
                           ORIGINATING APPLICATION
LET Peter Wright of South Yorkshire Police, Headquarters, Swigg
Hill, Sheffield S3 9LY attend before the District Judge at
on      day the            day of            1991 at           o'clock in
the          noon on the hearing of an application by the Applicant
for an Order that :-

1.    The bill of costs annexed hereto of the Applicant be taxed.
2.    The District Judge do tax the costs in accordance with the
       agreement of the parties on the      day of        1991 that
       the Applicant's case be settled on payment of £
       damages and costs.
3.    That the costs of the Applicant in respect of the Bill and
       the costs of reference be paid by the Respondent according
       to the event of the taxation.
DATED this        day of             1991
(SIGNED) SOLICITOR FOR THE APPLICANT.
