HILLSBOROUGH                     STEERING                COMMITTEE

                 Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                  Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100
        I
       y.

                                                           5th April
                                       „ 9 APR 1991        EMS/DW




Dear
RE;    HILLSBOROUGH PIASTER BULLETIN 21
As you will have read in the Press        the Inquests have now concluded
(after a 80 day hearing!) and as I        reported earlier the Court of
Appeal are due to hear the Appeals        in the remoteness cases and the
pre-death pain and suffering cases        next week.
1.    Court of Appeal 10th April 1991
The post traumatic stress disorder remoteness cases are listed for
hearing before the Court of Appeal (Parker L J (Presiding) Stocker
L.J. and Nolan L.J.) on Tuesday next although the word is that their
Lordships intend to use the Tuesday as a reading day and the
substantive hearing will not start until Wednesday the 10th.
Ben Hytner QC and Tim King QC will be appearing for the Plaintiffs -
and I am sure that you will be as delighted as we all are that Tim
King was amongst the Silks named on Maundy Thursday and will be sworn
in in London next Tuesday.
He has done a tremendous amount of work on the Hillsborough matters
and I am sure you and your clients will join us in expressing our
pleasure and congratulations.
In the light of the Appeals and Cross-Appeals all issues that were
before Hidden J are before the Court of Appeal who will therefore be
considering the position of those at the ground (but not in Pens 3 or
4), those who identified bodies in the temporary mortuary, those who
saw events on simultaneous TV, those who heard the news on radio
and/or saw events on recorded TV (i .e . Bulletins later that evening).
          %


      *


You may have seen in the Press that there have been two cases after
ours where Judges at first instance have awarded damages in a similar
situation and although not binding on the Court of Appeal one at
least will be referred to in argument.
Skeleton Arguments have been prepared and lodged by Counsel on both
sides and copies of those skeleton arguments are at the Law Library
and available for you to read.    If you wish copies then Ronnie will
be pleased to supply these from the Law Library on payment of the
usual copying charges.
The estimate of length for the PTSD appeals was four days although
again the latest information we have from the Court of Appeal is that
it may take slightly longer.   As there is a possibility or
probability that this matter will end up in the House of Lords and in
view of the complexity of some of the legal points we do not expect a
decision at the end of the argument but that their Lordships will
take time for consideration.
2.   Pre-Death Pain and Suffering Appeal
These appeals are listed to follow immediately after the remoteness
appeals and once again both Counsel have prepared and lodged their
skeleton arguments. Copies are lodged at the Law Library where once
again they are available for inspection and if you want copies please
get in touch with Ronnie Wright.
In this case as the point is a relatively straight forward one there
may well be a decision at the end of the hearing and if so I will of
course let you have details.
I would remind those of you who have settled fatal cases on the basis
agreed with the MMI - namely in satisfaction of all aspects of the
claim save for pre-death pain and suffering - that if you wish to
pursue that leg of the claim notice has to be given to the MMI once
the Court of Appeal decision is known.
If your clients are in this category then within 28 days of the Court
of Appeal decision you should write to the MMI saying that you do
wish an additional payment to be made (assuming of course that their
Lordships do make an award of damages!).
3.   Inquests
The generic part of the Inquest hearings was completed in Sheffield
on the 28th March. The hearings had resumed on the 19th November and
     A
     /
         /




over a period of some 80 working days the jury heard evidence from
over 250 witnesses and watched 5 hours of video film.
In addition to Tim King who appeared on behalf of the 47 families who
wished to be represented, Counsel or Solicitors appeared for the
Chief Constable, 4 of the senior police officers, the junior
officers, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and Eastwood and
Partners. One family chose to represent it's own interests.
Under the Coroners Acts and Rules no "closing speech" is allowed from
Counsel for any party to the jury but legal submissions are
permissible and these were made as appropriate with particular
reference to the various verdicts that the Coroner should address the
jury upon.   Dr S F Popper did direct that the jury could return
verdicts of unlawful killing, accidental death/misadventure or an
open verdict and he explained that as each of the 95 deaths were
individual it was possible to return a "mixed bag" of these verdicts
if the jury wished to do so.   The requirements for each verdict were
explained at some length and if you need to have more details please
make contact and further information can be supplied.
The jury retired at lunchtime on the 26th March and returned on a
couple of occasions for clarification of matters and at about 4.00pm
on Wednesday afternoon on the direction of the Coroner when he
explained the position concerning majority verdicts. The jury
finally returned at 12.15pm on the 28th March having indicated that a
majority decision had been reached and they delivered verdicts of
Accidental Death in each of the 95 cases with a majority of 9 to 2.
The scenes at Sheffield Town Hall following the announcement of the
verdict were well reported by the press and a great deal of media
coverage has been given to the views of some of the families since
then.
After the verdict had been delivered Dr Popper mentioned a number of
matters that caused him c oncern     I enclose a copy press report
giving details.
Death Certificates will now be issued (interim certificates only
having been issued so far) and they will be sent to the next of kin
during the course of the next two or three weeks. They will not come
from the Coroner's Office but from the Registrar in Sheffield and any
family who has not had a certificate by the end of April should
contact the Registrar in Sheffield.
Following the verdict there has been a lot of press coverage and
comment - some of it informed and some of it misinformed.




                            -3-
Your clients may be contacting you having read articles which
question the effect that the jury's verdict may have on civil
proceedings. The answer is of course entirely straight forward - the
verdict of the Inquest Jury has no effect on the civil claims which
are covered under the terms of the order to stay and agreement
reached with Hammond Suddards and the MMI namely that those claims
which fall within the ambit of that agreement will be paid in full
and that the PTSD claims will not be disputed as to liability but
solely on the issue of remoteness.
4.       Medical Reports for clients whose claims are currently accepted
The arrangement for Psychological examination of clients whose claims
fall within the agreement - i.e. those who were in or escaping from
Pens 3 and 4, those who were involved in the rescue and those who
were in other parts of the ground but who had a spouse/parent/child
in Pens 3 and 4 are now almost up todate. There are a further series
of appointments fixed for examinations next weekend after which.
Nickie Harrison has only a handfull of requests for appointments
which have not yet been satisfied.
If you have clients in this category who are awaiting first
appointment or review appointments please let Nickie have the details
as soon as possible so that appropriate appointments can be made.
5.       Clients whose claims are subject to the remoteness appeals
There are a number of clients who have staffered PTSD or Psychological
injury whose cases are not currently accepted by the MMI but who will
be affected by the outcome of the Court of Appeal decision in the
remoteness cases. As I indicated earlier it is likely that the Court
of Appeal will not be the end of the story and, whatever the outcome,
a further appeal to the House of Lords is likely.
It is now almost two years since the cause of action arose and thus
there is only one year left before the limitation period expires.
It does take some time to arrange medical examinations for a large
number of people and, even assuming that we get a decision from the
House of Lords within the next 6 or 8 months (which would be lucky),
a rush of applications over the last three months might cause some
problems.
     <

I would therefore strongly advise those of you who have clients in
this category who are eligible for legal aid to apply for legal aid
now (probably limited to obtaining medical reports and advising as.
      AJ

under the agreement, there is no need to issue proceedings for any
reason other than limitation) and to obtain a medical report.
If your clients are above the legal aid limits and so ineligible on
financial grounds it may also be sensible to obtain a medical report
at this stage - which must initially of course be at their own
expense - to enable the claim to be ready to proceed once the outcome
of the appeals is known.
We would be pleased to make the usual arrangements for medical
examination and if you have clients in this category please let
Nickie have the application for appointment and please would you mark
that application very clearly "remoteness case".
6.   Treatment Courses for clients suffering from post traumatic
     stress disorder
One of the Consultant Psychiatrists tells us that he has been
approached by a number of Solicitors asking for details of possible
treatment courses for clients suffering from post traumatic stress
disorder.
He has supplied us with details both of courses involving an 8 day
inpatient course with follow up sessions and details of a Consultant
Psychologist who has established a private out-patient consulting
practice.
If you have clients who fall into this category then Nickie Harrison
has details and will be pleased to supply these to you.
7.   Dr Johnstone
I have written individually to a number of you who have had problems
over appointments sent by the MMI for examination of your clients by
Dr Johnstone suggesting the grounds for objection and as far as I am
aware no application has been pursued by the MMI to insist upon the
examinations taking place.
Dr Johnstone himself, sadly, suffered a slight heart attack and
therefore over recent weeks there have been no requests by the EMI
for examination of your clients by that particular Consultant.
We have received no complaints about the alternative Consultants that
they have nominated and therefore everything seems to be in order.
8.   Hillsborough Trust
      A
       j:
The Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal have now completed
their work as far as the major trust is concerned and I enclose a
copy of the Press Release which was put out at the appropriate time
for your information. As you will see there are still some funds in
the charitable trust and the trustees are considering appropriate
applications which would comply with the charitable objects of that
trust.
9.   Supply of Copy Statements
We are still having trouble in persuading the South Yorkshire Police
to authorise the West Midlands Police to disclose copies of
statements made by clients and witnesses to West Midlands Police.
They refused access on the basis that the Inquests were proceeding
and possible further disciplinary proceedings were pending against
some officers.
Now the Inquests are over, I have written again and will continue to
press for disclosure. I will keep you advised of all developments.
I will let you know as soon as there is anything to report from the
court of appeal or otherwise.
Every good wish.
Yours sincerely,


MISS E M STEEL




                         -6-
Coroner outlines problems
HM closing remark*, Dr Popper railed           «eth Baker suggesting * national licensing
n potato of concern:                           Inspectorate
                                                ------------- for sports grounds
                                                               ------------
-e problem oTdlrectlng spectator* watch*       • There will always be a safety problem for
i match to escape routes either behind or      specie tor* standing en terraces. “The only
  slde.of them                                 Mfe stadium In my. view is an empty one,
                fiu» followed. the Manche*-
           thathad                             said Dr Popper, adding that be w lllalse ask
    lla iite r ana ether Incident* should be   Mr Baker,to consider this aspect
  1 ae expertise eould be shared               • Dr Popper will also ask Kr Baker to
     wilt write te the local licensing         address “a* a matter ef relative urgency" the
   ■ty endSheffield Wednesday FC asking        question of police Involvement at matches.
      cee if * method ean be Introduced to        The coroner will also ask Mr Baker seri­
    oectstors entering part* ef the ground     ously to consider the entire relationship
    ' turnstiles                               between coroner's inquests and public
      ■tie writing te Home Secretary Ken*      tnqalrles In mstfor disasters.

                             i .
 08-92-1991      13:45   FROM HILLSBOROUGH TRUST            T 0 2275957                                   P 02




     THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL
          THE TRUSTEES OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL
              ~ ~ 'm          P.O. BOX 220,    LIVERPOOL L69 2PN.
                 *                   Telephone: 051-236 0044
                                        Fax: 051-236 0090

The Ttust Fund Manager,
Mr. C. M. Reddington,



                                         PRESS RELEASE


The Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal have virtually
completed the distribution of the Discretionary Fund with final
payments to bereaved families and to those injured at Hillsborough.
Just over £11,7 million has been contributed to the Fund since it
was set up in April 1989. Payments will be made in the near future
to the few injury cases remaining to be dealt with. All the money
contributed to the Fund will then have gone to those bereaved or
injured in the disaster.
The bulk of the Fund was paid out within the first twelve months to
those who were bereaved or who suffered serious injury, but it has
taken rather longer to deal fully with the many hundreds of
survivors who suffered less serious injury
The Trustees will now be considering the distribution of the
Charitable Fund which was set up at the time of the disaster to
receive contributions from organisations which could only give to a
charitable fund. This fund will also be receiving the surplus
interest from the Discretionary Fund together with a refund from the
Inland Revenue of the tax paid on that interest.
Consultations have already taken place with the sponsors of the
Appeal Fund in Merseyside, Sheffield and Nottingham, and with the
Family Support Group, on the principles for the distribution of the
Charitable Fund .
It is envisaged that these will reflect, in part, the role played by
voluntary and other organisations in response to the disaster and to
the ongoing needs of those who survived. Funding directed towards
the training and education of young people may be considered an
appropriate memorial to those who died.
Finally, to reflect the generosity of those who contributed to the
Fund, and in particular the support from football fans and clubs
throughout the country, the Trustees intend to explore with the
appropriate national voluntary organisations ways in which the Fund
can contribute towards improving standards of safety provision at
sports grounds throughout the country.
8th February 1991
                                                                                                      «
Enquiries to Mike Reddington
               051-236-0044

 TRUSTEES: DEREK H. MORRIS, MICHAEL D. DLANKSTONE, MICHAEL H. E HAMMOND, W. NORMAN ADSETTS
                                                                          '   £t-___;___ . . . .      ____ _

                                                                                              TOTAL   P . 02
