                                                                                                    \




        HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING                COMMITTEE

                     c/o CastCe Cfiam6ers, Coo/^Street, LivcrpooCL2 9S9(
                       7eC: 051 2550628 fa^ : 051 236 0047 ‘D X 14100




                                                          Our ref:         DRF/SB/HILLSB/INQUESTS

                                                          Your ref:

                                                          Date:            19th January 1990


                                                                             22 JAN 1990

Dear Sirs

RE:   HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

Following the    announcement by the Insurers of South Yorkshire Police
that they are prepared to settle at full value the 95 claims arising
as a result of the fatalities the Insurers are writing to all Solicitors
concerned inviting them to submit details of each claim for consideration.

Whilst it is not the purpose of this Committee to advise or assist you
in the assessment of any individual claim we are taking this opportunity
to remind you that the following factors should be considered in each
case

1       Damages for pre-death pain and suffering/pre-death terror.

2.      The "Bereavement" award of £3,500.00 (Where appropriate).

3       Dependancy (in appropriated cases)

4.      The funeral account.

5.      A refund on the ticket price.

6       The cost of travel to Sheffield.

7.      Interest.

We are currently in discussion with the Insurers with a view to negotiating
a "minimum figure" in respect of item 1 above and also to extend the
categories of people entitled to receive the "bereavement" award and
to increase the £3,500.00 on an "ex gratia" basis, and reports on thos
negotiations will follow in future Bulletins.        However, if you are
instructed to attempt to negotiate settlement now we would respectfully
suggest that you make it clear to the M.M.I. that if a minimum figure
in respect of pre—death pain and suffering etc is negotiated and your
settlement has been at a figure below that, or the categories of people
                                      -    2   -




entitled to receive the bereavement allowance is extended or the £3,500.00
is increased than you would expect your client to be given the benefit
of that negotiation by way of a further payment if appropriate.
     %
The primai*f purpose of this letter however, is to deal with something
not contained in the above list, that is the cost of representation
of th^j family of the deceased at the Inquest.

Despite pressure from this Committee the Insurers have not yet agreed
to fund    "block representation" (our previous correspondence" refers
and   in thecircumstances and until that confirmation is received you
should consider the possibility of having to represent the family on
a personal basis and this is something which we would urge you to raise
in correspondence with M.M.I.

If you do achieve settlement of a fatal claim now or in the very near
future and if settlement is concluded on the usual "full and final'*
basis and block representation could not be arranged you might find
that you are subsquently instructed to represent the family and you
may not be able to recover the costs of that representation from the
Insurers and may therefore have to look to your clients directly for
payment of your costs.

We regard payment for representation at the inquests as something which
the families ought not to be asked to bear and we woulvA respectfully
suggest that you include the following paragraph in any letter you write
to the M.M.I. dealing with terms of settlement

        "We understand from the Steering Committee that you have
        still   notconfirmed   your   agreement       to  fund   block
        representation   at theadjourned inquest whenever that
        will be held.      In the circumstances it is likely that
        our clients will require us to attend on their behalf.
        Whilst it is at present impossible to offer a view as
        to the likely cost you will appreciate that we have not
        had a detailed involvement in the investigation of liability
        for this disaster, that having been dealt with on our
        behalf by the Steering Committee.      We will therefore have
        to conduct those investigations ourselves and almost certainly
        instruct Counsel to represent our family.          Before any
        settlement of this claim is achieved we will require your
        written confirmation that .you will meet the cost of such
        representation in any event."

The Committee      feel that a concerted effort by members of the Group
in writing a      letter with this type of wording in is likely to produce
an agreement      to fund block representation.   Please see our previous
correspondence      concerning your involvement in the inquests if block
representation    can be arranged.

If you have    any further queries        concerning the   inquests please do not
hesitate to contact us.

Yours
          \t



For and        Dehalf of Hillsborough Steering Committee
