F or    T^E        R ire M T io ifv )    oF                 '£F) in    W C&T
                                                                      3 . P oG £S .


  Dr. Ian West. M. B. C.H.B.                                   Mrs. Anne Williams.
  Consultant Forensic Path
  Director, Department of Forensic Medicine.
  Guys Hospital.                                                Merseyside.
  London S.E.1. 9.R.T.                                          L37


                                                                 6th June 1995




  Dear Dr West,
                  Once again I am sorry to bother you, I no how busy you must be.
  Last week I received the draught off Alun Jones Q.C. and my solicitor and I are
  in the process of preparing another written submission to go to the Attorney
  General.

   After judicial review failed my barrister Mr Edward Fitzgerald recommended that
  I get in touch with Mr Robin Oppenheim from Doughty St Chambers to ask his
  advice and to put a claim in for the pain and suffering of Kevin, as there was
  medical evidence that Kevin was still alive after 3.15.pm that day. which I did, I
  received the report off Mr Oppenheim a few weeks ago, Mr Oppenheim says "I do
  not consider it neccessary or possible on the prescent papers to establish the
  exact length of time Kevin Williams would have remained alive following the initial
  crush or more importantly remained conscious and aware of his injuries. This
  would require a conference with Dr W est and proofs of evidence to be obtained
  from W PC Martin and PC Bruder.

  Dr W est would you mind doing a more detailed report for me, I am prepared to
  pay for your time,

  I have also contacted the Chief Constable of the Liverpool police to ask his
  permission to speak to Mr Bruder again, I have had a nice letter back, the police
  are going to come round to see me to talk about the matter. What I realy want js
  Mr Bruder to put it in writting what he told me about Kevin's condition that day,
  before my submission goes back to the Attorney General.

  I have also found another witness that was with Mr Bruder while he was attending
  to Kevin, he came forward after seeing himself on the cook report.

  I know you have the autopsy report on Kevin and have seen the autopsy
  photographs and you have read the inquest papers on my son. I have found out
  some new evidence since you did your reports. I hope you don't mind but I will
  start from 3.28.pm when Kevin was lifted out of pen 3.
Kevin was lifted out of pen 3 by pc Craighill at 3.28.pm. the south yorkshire police
will not let me have a copy of pc Craighills statement.
I have seen visual evidence of Kevin being lifted out by a police officer at
3.28.pm.

I have a timed photograph of Kevin being run across the pitch on an advertising
board the timing is 3.32.pm. by 4 fans and two police officers, I can not have the
statements of the police officers but I have spoken to two of the fans that carried
Kevin.
Mr Steven Hart says Kevin was alive, he says he was semi conscious he says he
was no docter but he could see the difference in the colour of Kevin it was
natural to what he had seen in other people he had tried to help on the ground
that day. Mr Hart and the other fans ran with Kevin to the spion kop end of the
ground to get him seen to, he passed Kevin over to a police officer, he asked the
police officer if Kevin would be alright, but was told to go.

M r Tony O'keefe an off duty fireman says he grabbed hold of the advertising
board and then looking to my right, looking down on Kevin and seeing some
colour and some signs of life, he says he was of good colour but he wasn't close
enough to feel a pulse, at some stage Kevin's mouth was open. Mr O'Keefe says
he had seen a lot of people with marks on there chests they looked like they had
been glazed with red lines and blue were they had been crushed, Kevins shirt
was pulled up Tony said it just looked normal, normal skin. Tony said he looked
very young you know he'll be okay, they will sort him out. Again Tony was not
allowed to touch Kevin when he left him at the spion kop end of the ground.

I have seen visual evidence of Kevin lying on his back at the spion kop end of the
ground where the fans had left him, just before pc Bruder would have got to
Kevin. The policeman the fans left Kevin with must have left him.

Mr Bruder told me when I met with him, he saw Kevin lying on his back up at the
spion kop end of the ground, he left his seat in the north stand to go to attend to
him, Kevin was moving he is not sure wheather'it was a convulsion or a twitch all
he knows is that Kevin's head was moving, he bent down and found a pulse in
Kevin’s neck with the first two fingers of his right hand, Kevin had been sick pc
Bruder cleared Kevin's air ways and checked the vomit for blood, pc Bruder
worked on Kevin for about five minutes with the help of a st Johns ambulance
man and a Liverpool fan, the Liverpool fan was saying to pc Bruder "Help my
mate will yeh don't let my mate die." At 3.37pm an ambulance passed them as
they were attending to Kevin, Mr Bruder asked the St Johns ambulance man to
stop the ambulance as he wanted to put Kevin in i t , it would not stop. After a
while a young St Johns Ambulance woman took over from Mr Bruder, It was the
St Johns Ambulance lady who said Kevin had gone, pc Bruder then left the
scene.




                                        X.
I have photo evidance of pc Bruder attending to Kevin on the ground that day it
also shows the Liverpool fan very clearly.

After the Cook Report the Liverpool fan contacted me, he had seen himself on
the programme his name is             he told me Mr Bruder found a pulse in
Kevin's neck,        told me he had stayed with Kevin when the St Johns
Ambulance lady attended to him            says she shone a torch in Kevin's eyes
and told them he had g o n e , | t o l d me Kevin was of normal colour, he also
remembers the ambulance passing. He then left the scene.

At about 3.45.pm swpc Martin came across Kevin lying in the recovery position
on the grass, she told me she saw colour in his face, she bent down and found a
pulse in Kevin's neck, she said to the pc with her run with him he is still alive,
Miss Martin put Kevin on the side of the gym set aside for the injured and was
told by high authority to stay with him and carry out resuscitation and heart
massage, after a while Kevin started to breath again his ribs were moving, Miss
Martin picked Kevin up in her arms, she told me she had got him , Kevin them
opened his eyes, moved his mouth and murmured "Mom", tie flicked is eyelashes
closed his eyes slumped back in Miss Martins arms and died. Miss Martin told me
Kevin went grey and then very quickly went blue.
After we had both calmed down I made Miss Martin a cup of tea, we were talking
about Kevin, I was telling her what he had been doing at school and what kind of
little boy he was. Miss Martin said to me Kevin had the same colour eyes as you,
I was upset both my other two children have blue eyes Kevin had my eyes which
are a brown and green.

Nobody has given me an explination why Kevin had opened his eyes.

Once again Dr West I hope I have explained things properly to you, all the
information that I have written down I have the evidence to go with it.
I realy hope you don't mind doing another report for me.




                                 Yours Sincerley.




                                  3
