HILLSBOROUGH                   STEERING COMMITTEE

               Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 D X 14100




                                                           29th August 1991

                                                                    EMS.JC.




 Dear

 RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BULLETIN 215

 I have received a message from Counsel that they would like to
 have available for the House of Lords a reasonably accurate
 estimate of how many nervous shock claims have been brought
 arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster. They would like those
 details divided into categories - minor, moderate or serious.

 The message is not clear as to whether they want the numbers
 restricted to those claims which are now the subject of the House
 of Lords Appeals - i.e. those claims which are not covered by the
 Agreement and Order to Stay - or whether they want details of all
 claims.

 For that reason, I would be glad if you could cover both
 categories and include in your figures claims which (a) have been
 settled (b) have not yet been settled but where the Insurance
 Company have indicated that they will pay; and (c) those where
 liability is denied.

 In cases which have been settled obviously the values can be
 easily categorised. In cases which have not been settled, please
 give a reasonably accurate estimate as to the category.

 I enclose    a form for completion and return (numbers only are
 needed).    Would you please let me have these as soon as possible
 - we have   a conference on 6th September and it would be helpful
 to have a   good response by them.

 I have now received the Defendant's Statement of Case and copies
 both of the Plaintiff's case and the Defendant's case are with
 Ronnie Wright at the Law Library if you wish to read these or,
 of course if you wish copies, she will be able to supply them
 upon payment of the usual charges.
As you may have seen from the local press, one of the clients
contacted the media following our request to members in Bulletin
24 for any copy of the "Grandstand" transmission.    As a result
of the publicity, the B.B.C. have had a further - and presumably
more exhaustive - search and have found the original!     Copies
have been sent to us and to the Defendant's Solicitors.

Many thanks to all members who contacted clients and for your
helpful response.    Interestingly no-one who was injured or
bereaved had kept a copy, although following the local radio
coverage, we had 3 offers of full or partial coverage from
individuals not involved.

All good wishes.

Yours sincerely,




MISS E.M. STEEL
                  HILLSBOROUGH - NERVOUS SHOCK CLAIMS



NAME OF M R M :
         4
REF:



1.     Number of Nervous Shock Claims where liability is denied
       (i.e. remoteness cases)


(a)    Minor (£5,000 or less)



(b)    Moderate (£5,000 to £50, 000)



(c)    Serious (above £50,000)




2.     Number of Cases where settlement has been agreed       or
       liability admitted   (i.e. those in Pens 3 or 4        or
       Parents\Child\Spouse at the ground)


(a)    Minor (£5,000 or less)



(b)    Moderate (£5,000 to £50,000)



(c)    Serious (above £50,000)
