\
.V

              HILLSBOROUGH                 STEERING                COMMITTEE
                     c/o CastCe. Chambers, Coo^Street, Liverpoo(L2 9S9f 'DX14100
                                   Td: 051 255 0628 Ja^: 051 236 0047


                                                                     3rd May 1989
                                                                     EMS/DW


     F.A.O.




     Dear

     RE;      HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 1

     We have been notified that you have been instructed in connection
     with a claim arising out of the Hillsborough disaster on the 15th
     April. A meeting of lawyers instructed was held on the 25th April
     under the auspices of Liverpool Law Society when the Hillsborough
     Solicitors Group was formed and Steering Committee elected.

     We duly appeared by Counsel, Mr Tim King, at the preliminary
     hearing at Sheffield last Friday when Lord Justice Taylor
     authorised representation of the injured+bereaved by the
     Hillsborough Solicitors Group and confirmed that the costs of
     Counsel and those instructing would be met from Public Funds.

     I enclose herewith a copy of the Minutes of the Meeting of the
     Group on the 25th April together with a copy of the objects of the
     Group.

     We do need to keep an accurate record of members of the Group and
     the clients they represent. I therefore enclose herewith in
     duplicate a list of the clients of your firm notified todate.

     I would be glad if you could check this list carefully, comple-te
     any missing addresses and - where numbers only have been given -
     let us have the details of individual clients for our records and
     confirm that you wish to be included in the Group.

     Would you then please return one completed copy to me so that -the
     "Master List" can be kept upto date.

     Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry

                                                                           o
     The substantive Inquiry is to start at Sheffield Town Hall at
     10.30am on the 15th May 1989 and Lord Justice Taylor hopes to
     complete all evidence by the end of June.   Through Counsel we
     made representations that part at least of the hearing should ke
     in Liverpool because of the problems of travel for witnesses. He
     replied to say that he was conscious of the problem but that
     initially at least the hearing would be at Sheffield.
At the initial hearing representation was allowed for the
following interested parties only

Counsel to the Inquiry:                  Andrew Collins QC
                                         Bernard Phillips
                                         Alan Goldsack
(The injured and bereaved)               Tim King (Counsel)
                                         (Instructed by
                                         Hillsoborugh Solicitors
                                         Group)
Football Supporters Association          John Jackson (Counsel)
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club        Edwin Glasgow QC(Counsel)
Football Association                     John Dyson (Counsel)
South Yorkshire Police                   Mr Woodward (Counsel)
Fire Service                             Andrew Robertson(Counsel)
Sheffield City Council                   Represented on Friday by
                                         Solicitors.

Transcripts of the evidence will be made available and a copy kept
at the Law Library for reference.

Witness Statements


The evidence to be presented will be determined by Counsel and
Solicitors to the Inquiry (the Treasury Team) who will consider
all witness statements submitted (either taken by the West
Midlands Police or submitted direct).   They will give advance
notice of witnesses to be called but there is no disclosure of all
evidence submitted. No witness will be called who has not
submitted a written statement.

We have received at the Law Library a number of witness statements
which we have forwarded to the Home Office.   They have made it
clear that they would rather have duplication of statements - i.e.
submitted direct and given to the Police - rather than to lose a
witness on the basis that no statement was received.

As we will not have prior disclosure of statements which    the
Counsel to the Inquiry do not intend to call if you have    already
received statements from witnesses, could you please let    me have a
copy and, if those statements have not already been sent    to the
Home Office, please send the original and we will ensure    that it
is immediately forwarded to the appropriate Department.

Civil Action


Lord Justice Taylor made it clear at the opening of the Inquiry
that he did not intend to apportion blame but that his Inquiry
would cover two separate aspects :-
                >




     jf
            1. Findings of fact as to what actually happened on
            the 15th April at Hillsborough and

            2. Recommendations as to the safety of Football
            Grounds in the future.

Once the findings of fact are available questions of liability and
the appropriate Defendant (s) will become much clearer.

We are immediately contacting the potential Defendants and seeking
a meeting with their Insurers to discuss matters generally.

If no admission of liability is forthcoming then a Test Action
will be necessary to determine liability and we will keep you
fully informed as to the position.

As the facts appear at present it seems to be a case where it is
very unlikely that there will be any allegations of contributory
negligence on the part of the injured and deceased and the
problems will be related to establishing liability in the first
place and apportioning of liability between a number of
Defendants.

In the meantime we recommend you to write on behalf of your own
clients letters before action to all potential Defendants
notifying them of those claims. A list of those most likely to be
Defendants in any test action is attached, together with a
suggested form of letter before action. Further potential
Defendants may be identified in the light of allegationsmade to
the Inquiry or as a result of allegations from the named
Defendants. We will keep you advised of all developments.

Legal Aid

We are meeting Peter Crook of the Legal Aid Board locally and
further information will follow.  It is hoped to be able to
co-ordinate and simplify procedures for applications and
thereafter for funding.

Members are asked not to submit applications at this time but as
soon as we have any information we will let you know.

Quantum of Damage


The Group was formed and the Steering Committee are acting on the
basis that the settlement of quantum in any individual case is a
matter for the Solicitors instructed for that particular client.

Having said that "we will share with all members of the Group
information that we receive in relation to specific heads of claim
and, if dealt with in due course in the Lead Action, any opinion
obtained from Counsel.
There are four aspects which may be worth noting at the present
time :-

        1. You will have seen in the Press over the weekend the
        recent awards for post-traumatic stress which range from
        £1,750 to £30,000. He will obtain further details of
        these and let you have what information we can as soon as
        this is available and, at the same time, advice as to
        psychiatrists experienced in this kin(f' of injury.

        2. He have undertaken some research on the possibility of
        claims on behalf of relatives who saw the disaster on
        television and suffered shock as a result.   It appears
        such a claim is possible although it is likely to be
        restricted , for example parents or close relatives.
        He are undertaking further research and will advise in
        a further Bulletin.


        3. Pre-impact terror has been acknowledged as a proper
        head of damage and we will let you have further
        information on this aspect in due course.

        4. He would remind you, particularly in relation to
        claims from relatives, to take full instructions now,
        whilst matters are still fresh in their minds, as
        to when, where and how relatives found out about the
        disaster - by T.V., telephone, did they have to
        visit the hospital or scene etc. It is also wise,
        in the case of injured clients to get preliminary
        medical reports at an early stage.

Claims on behalf of clients to the Hillsborough Disaster Fund


Two members of the Steering Committee have had a preliminary
meeting with Mike Reddington trust Fund Manager to discuss
procedures generally.   Claims in due course should be submitted
to him at Barclays Bank Pic City Office, Water Street, Liverpool
L69 2EX. On your clients' behalf or clients can contact their
local Social Services Department. So far modest payments in case
of need have been made through the Social Services on behalf of
the Fund.  (currently standing at £2.75 million).

No final decision has been made as to procedures. We will be
meeting again and will let you know as soon as there is anything
to report. In the meantime we have established that Grants of
Probate or Letters of Administration will be needed.

Where funeral accounts have been paid by the Trust receipted
funeral accounts are being returned to relatives. We remind
members that these documents will have to be produced in
connection with the civil claims as, of course, gratuitous
payments privately conferred are ignored for the purpose of this
    (
f




        action, and thus the funeral expenses are a proper part of the
        claim.

        We will keep you fully informed of all developments and equally if
        you have any relevant information, or there is a particular point
        which you wish to clear please do not hesitate to get in touch.
        Every good wish.

        Yours sincerely,




        MISS E M STEEL
        CHAIRMAN STEERING COMMITTEE




        P.S.    Since dictating the above we have confirmed instructions
        to Mr B A Hytner QC to lead Tim King at the Inquiry.
