HILLSBOROUGH                  STEERING COMMITTEE

              Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
               Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100
   \¥

                                                         17th September 1990
                                                         EMS/DW


F.A.O




Dear

REj_____HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BUI.T.KTTN 1ft
Since the last Bulletin we have met the Police Insurers (on a without
prejudice basis), considered with Counsel the question of Appeals in
those matters where we were unsuccessful before Hidden J, the DPP has
announced his intention not      to take criminal proceedings, the
Sheffield Coroner, Dr Popper has         announced the date ofthe resumed
Inquests — 19th November 1990 - and      the inter-Defendantproceedings
are listed for hearing at Manchester Crown Court starting on the 2nd
October.
I will deal with each of these matters in turn :-
1_._____MEETING WITH THE INSURERS
This meeting took place before our Conference with Counsel and at
that time neither we nor the Insurers had any firm instructions as to
appeals save that we had already received a firm advice and firm
instructions to appeal the pre-death pain and suffering decision.
(a). Pre-Death Pain and Suffering
In the light of the case and decision the Insurers regarded the
across the board offer of £1,000 for this head (subject to proof of
any additional suffering) as rejected and it is formally withdrawn.
They noted that an appeal would be lodged - the Notice of Appeal  has
now been lodged     and served (a copy is held at the Law Library if
       <1




members wish to see this).
It is possible that there could be an approach compromise the Appeal
but pending any agreement or the findings of the Court of Appeal
settlements in fatal cases should not be held up solely for the
reason this head of damage is still open.
If; you have a fatal case where all other heads of damage are agreed
this can be settled on the basis that the payment is accepted in full
and   final settlement of the Plaintiffs claim other than the
Plaintiffs claim for damages for pre death pain and suffering
sustained by the deceased which head of damage can be negotiated or
litigated once the appeal in the test case has either been settled or
heard.
Obviously there will have to be a time limit within which that claim
must be notified to the Insurers. We felt that 28 days after notice
of the outcome of the test case was a reasonable period hut are
clarifying that with the Insurers and will let you know.
In the meantime it is safe to settle fatal claims provided   you   make
it clear that this head of damage is still open.
(h).        Identification at the temporary mtvrtiiai-Y
Although    test cases were taken which involved identification at the
mortuary no decision was made by Hidden J as to whether in these
particular circumstances that fell within the "aftermath" and would
entitle those suffering pre-death pain and suffering (provided they
were within the appropriate family relationships) to succeed.
We asked     the Insurers whether they were prepared to concede those
claims. They were not prepared to make any concessions but aslted to
be notified of the numbers and individuals concerned and if there
were onlya small number would look at them sympathetically. We have
been notified of ten cases which fall into this category in response
to the last Questionnaire (i.e. those who identified the body but
were not present at the match and did not see events on live *TV) and
those details will be given. If you have any additional clients in
this category please let me know immediately.
( c ) . Common Law Wives

The Insurers agree that common law wives will be treated as wives
provided the relationship is of a couple of years standing. On this
basis some clients who have been notified to us as fiancees would
qualify as common law wives and I would recommend that you approach
negotiations on this basis.
       k
       r
 ( d ). Trouble Shooting

The arrangements whereby Blaise Smith and Ken Holmes of the MMI take
up issues where there is a dispute as to whether or not a particular
client    falls within the agreed category seems to be working
reasonably well although sometimes there are problems when individual
clients can fit into more than one category - e.g. they took some
part in ^the rescue attempts and also had been in the Pens for a verv
short time at a very early stage.    Blaise will come back to you with
suggestions as to how to put a particular case and it is important
that these are followed up with the Insurers.
   ^ hirS ?ystem breaks down then we will seek to agree a speedy method
of bringing these disputes to trial but so far this has not been
needed.
(2).       APPEALS IN REMOTENESS TEST CASES
We have had a long and helpful conference with Counsel both Ben
Hytner QC and Tim King who have advised in favour of appeals in all
six test cases where the Plaintiffs were unsuccessful at first
instance.

For the moment we are having to work from our notes of Hidden J ’s
Judgment as the transcript is not yet available (as soon as it is a
copy will be lodged in the Law Library) but subject to anything
unexpected coming in the transcript Notices of Appeal will be settled
and lodged.   The basis and strength of each appeal does of course
vary but detailed written opinions will be given to the individual
Solicitors concerned and for the Legal Aid Board in their cases where
appropriate.

Todate we have not received any Notice of Appeal in any of the cases
where the Plaintiffs were successful although they are still well
within time for appeal and equally may be awaiting the full
transcript.                                             ^

I      let you     know    in    future   Bulletins   the    progress   of   these
appeals.
(3)    THE DPP

The    DPP   announced    that   he   did   not   intend    to take any criminal




                                  3
     ¥


   %
proceedings
         ■
            as in his view there was insufficient evidence     against
individuals or corporate bodies to justify such proceedings.
This means that the resumed Inquests can now take place and there is
no application to adjourn the civil liability issues.   As with any
other case if any additional information comes out in evidence at
either the Inquest or liability proceedings then it is open to the
DPP to reconsider the matter but for the moment it is a closed issue.
4.   THE INQUESTS
The Sheffield Coroner has announced the resumption of the Inquests at
Sheffield starting on the 11th November. He is seeking details of
those parties who wish to be represented at the Inquest and also
asking the level of representation and whether parties intend to be
represented for the whole or only part of the Inquest.
I enclose at Appendices '1' and '2' a draft letter which sets out the
position much more fully and a questionnaire. I would be glad if all
of you who are acting in Fatal cases would send a letter in this form
to your client so that we can know as soon as possible hov many
families wish to be included and represented by Counsel at the
adjourned Inquest.
The cost of such representation cannot be met from any other sources
and will have to be met by the families themselves - the likely cost
cannot be known until we have further information as to the length
and way in which the Coroner intends to run the Inquest and until the
level of representation is agreed.
We have arranged a Conference with Counsel in Manchester on the 3rd
October when all these issues can be considered. This Conference is
open to all clients who either firmly do wish to be represented or
who at this stage have not yet made up their minds.      If you are
acting for such a client then you are of course very welcome to
attend that conference although as this conference will not be
dealing with any of the civil litigation matters it would not
properly fall within the costs payable by the Insurance Company.
Therefore appropriate arrangements should be made between y ou and
your own client for payment for your attendance.
The Conference has to be in Manchester because it is the only time
and place thatBen and Tim can manage.   When we know how many people
will be attending we can make appropriate arrangements as to venue
and therefore I would be glad if when returning the form from your




                            4-
     ¥



clieryt you would also let me know whether you will be   attending   the
Conference.
5.   INTER-DEFENDANT PROCEEDINGS
These are listed for hearing at Manchester starting on the 2nd
October. At our meeting with the Insurers they indicated that,
certainly at that stage, there were no proposals for settlement and
the matter was likely to run its full course.
It is not our intention to be present throughout that          liearing
although we will attend to take a note of the Judgment.
We have made arrangements with the Listing Officer to let uslenow as
the case reaches its conclusion when this is likely to be and    theMMI
have also agreed to let us know if for any reason the case goes short
and an earlier Judgment given so that we can be present.
If there are any developments on any of these fronts I will of course
let you know.
All good wishes.
Yours sincerely,



MISS E M STEEL




                            5-
      y
          it




LETTER TO BE SENT BY SOLICITORS ACTING IN FATAL CASES TO THEIR
INDIVIDUAL CLIENTS____________________




Dear
RE:        HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNED INQUESTS
The Sheffield Coroner Dr Popper announced at the end of last week
that he would be resuming the adjourned Inquests and that that
hearing would start in Sheffield on the 19th November 1990 and is
estimated to last several weeks.
The Inquests which were held earlier this year determined in the case
of each person who died, the medical cause of death and where at the
ground they were (as far as there was any evidence in any particular
case).
The adjourned Inquests will now deal with the question "why" - trying
to determine the reason for the crushing which caused the deaths.
There will be one hearing although there were 95 deaths and the
Coroner certainly expects there to be only one set of representation
for the relatives of all those who died.
Whereas representation at the earlier Inquests was funded by       the
Insurance Company -     as the question how and where each individual
died was very relevant as to the claims for damages (there may    well
be a different split of liability between the Defendants dependent
upon whether someone was in Pen 3 or Pen 4) - the Insurance Company
will not fund representation at the adjourned Inquest - the Steering
Committee have requested them to do so, but they have declined and as
a matter of law they cannot be obliged to pay.
It follows from this that if the families are to be represented at
the adjourned Inquests then this will have to be funded by     the
individual families themselves.
  7   '

      ¥


The^J Steering Committee would be happy to instruct Counsel on your
behalf.    The individual cost per family will obviously depend upon
the way in which the Coroner takes evidence at the Inquest and how
many families wish to be involved and have the opportunity through
Counsel of questioning witnesses who give evidence and making
submissions to the Coroner.
The Coroner will decide what evidence he wishes to call at this
Inquest.   He may rely wholly or substantially on the Taylorr report
and the transcripts of evidence, or part of it, given to the Taylor
Inquiry.   (That could be helpful as far as you are concerned both on
the question of costs but more particularly because of some of the
evidence and answers under cross examination given by some of the
senior Police Officers).   He may call all the witnesses he wants the
Jury to consider before him to give evidence on oath or he may decide
to combine the two approaches by relying substantially on the "Taylor
evidence" and calling only some witnesses to give evidence in person.
Until the exact form of the Inquest is known it is impossible to give
any accurate guidance as to the figures         for   the   cost   of
representation.   The appropriate level of representation on any
particular day of the Inquest would obviously depend on what was
happening on that day.
As far as the length of time the the Inquest will take is concerned
all the Coroner has said so far is that he expects that it will run
for a period of "several weeks".
The Steering Committee will work out with Counsel's Clerk the likely
cost when the Coroner has given a further indication of 2iow he
intends to take the evidence and thus the level of representation
needed and once the Steering Committee know how many families wish to
join together will be able to give you an estimate of the likely cost
to each family.
At "top level" - i.e. an Inquest for say 6 weeks at which both junior
and Leading Counsel were instructed on a continuous basis the total
cost would be approximately £150,000.   The Steering Committee would
not expect this level of representation to be necessary throughout
the Inquest and the cost should therefore be proportionately less.
Once they can calculate the likely cost to each family they would ask
that this money is paid before Counsel are instructed. It would be
placed on deposit where any interest earned would of course be for
your benefit and if the Inquest runs a shorter period of time or if
       •


   ¥




fofPTany reason there is    any   saving   on   costs   there   would   be   an
appropriate refund.
Equally if the Inquest runs longer than expected or there are any
unexpected additional expenses then you might have to make a further
payment.
Having considered all these matters I would be glad if you could let
me know as soon as possible and in any event within the next seven
days whether you wish to be part of the joint representation or not.
The Steering Committee will only be able to give figures when they
know how many families will be joining in sharing the cost.
The Steering Committee have arranged a Conference with Counsel (both
Mr Hytner QC and Mr T King) in Manchester on Wednesday the 3rd
October at 10.00am. They apologise for the time and venue but it is
the only time that both Counsel are available.
This Conference is open to all those who firmly wish to be
represented at the Inquest or who (at this stage) have not yet made
up their minds whether they do or do not wish to join in        the
representation.
I would be glad if you would complete and return to me as soon as
possible the form sent with this letter indicating whether you do
wish to join the Group for the Inquest, do not wish to do so orhave
not yet made up your mind and whether you wish to come to the
Conference.
If you     wish   to   discuss the matter or call to see me please get in
touch.
Yours sincerely,




                                                                                  I
APPENDIX 2
                            QUESTIONNAIRE

1.   I definitely wish to be represented at
     the Inquest and agree to contribute my
     share of the cost of joint representation.           Yes/No
2.   I may wish to be represented at the Inquest
     but would like to know more before making
     up my mind.                                          Yes/No
3.   I definitely do not wish to be represented
     at the Inquest                                       Yes/No
4.   (ONLY IF YOU HAVE ANSWERED YES TO EITHER
      QUESTION 1 OR 2)
      I will/will not be attending the Conference
      with Counsel in Manchester at 10.00am on
      Wednesday the 3rd October 1990.**



DATED..
SIGNED.
NAME. ..
ADDRESS




**Details of the place where the Conference will be held will be
arranged when the numbers attending are known and will be notified to
those attending and their Solicitors.
