HILLSBOROUGH                 STEERING                   COMMITTEE

              Castk Chambers, C oaiS m et, Liverpool L2 9 S t(
             ‘TeC: 051255 0628 fa*: 051236 0047 <DX 14100
        ■A

                    _ _ __ n                                ©JH.MAY 1990
                                                            EMS/DW


                                                            -,p.m   1990
 F.A.O.             I'                                      . --




 Dear
 RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BULLETIN 15
 We are pleased to note from some members that Settlements have
 already been reached in a number of cases and as clients1 cases
 are settled and they leave the Group as a result I send, good
 wishes from the Steering Committee through you to them.   \
 As far as the remaining matters are concerned the present position
 is as under
                                                              v
 Test Cases on Remoteness

 We have taken sixteen test cases on remoteness to cover both the
 closeness of relationship between the Plaintiff and the individual
 who died or was injured (these range from friend, fiance, other
 relatives through to widow) and to cover the various categories of
 case which are not included for settlement under Hammond Suddards1
 letter which is included in the Schedule to the Court Order of the
 20th December 1989. The categories range from someone who was at
 the ground and saw what was happening in Pens 3 and 4 and as a
 result suffered post traumatic stress disorder through those who
 watched the scenes on television to those who identified bodies at
 the temporary mortuary.
 These cases came before Rose J for directions on Monday last the
 14th May. Ben Hytner QC and Tim King appeared for the Plaintiffs,
 the Police and Club were represented by Counsel, and directions
     ,A    .

        ♦
included an order to consolidate the 16 actions, provision for
trial TO/ithout pleadings and directions as to service of generic
and individual medical reports, statements of facts and witness
statements.    Chapters 1-5 of Taylor L. J's Interim Report are to
be admitted without further proof. The Judge gave directions for
skeleton arguments to be filed and the hearing date was confirmed.

The trial commences on the 19th June at Liverpool before Anthony
Hidden J (who, prior to his appointment, was involved as Counsel
in the Inquiry into      the Clapham Rail    Disaster so will be an
especially appropriate forum).

Arrangements are being made with the Victim Support Group at the
Court to take care of the Plaintiffs and witnesses during the
trial.
Pre-death Pain and Suffering

In the last major Bulletin (number 14) I reported     the   agreement
reached with the Insurance Company that in any case   they would pay
£500 under this head of damage subject to the right   to argue for a
higher figure in the particular circumstances of       the case or to
raise the matter again once the test cases had been    taken.

After our meeting they raised the figure to be paid without proof
of any special pre-death pain and suffering to £1,000 in each case
and we did notify all those of you who      were acting in fatal
cases.   I mention it     at this stage so that everyone knows the
situation.

We asked on the directions hearing before Rose J in the remoteness
test cases for     a direction that if time permitted at the end of
the remoteness cases      two test cases on pre-death pain and
suffering should be listed for assessment of deimages.

This application was granted and directions given on a similar
time-table as in the Remoteness cases and the issue of pre-death
pain and suffering will be determined immediately following the
conclusion of the Remoteness consolidated actions.

Bereavement Damages

It has been very obvious to us, both during the conferences with
Counsel and generally, that there is intense feeling - not only
amongst the lawyers but also very acutely amongst the clients of
    A
the |roup - that both the level of bereavement damages is
unacclptably low and the limited categories of those entitled to
claim/too restricted.

The Steering Committee having seen the opportunity in the general
debate on the Courts and Legal Services Bill to raise this matter
did seek through the Law Society London to get an amendment in the
House of Lords on the question of categories - as you will know
the question of amount is a matter which the Lord Chancellor can
deal with but the question of categories requires amendment to the
legislation.

The House of Lords were unwilling to table an amendment on. the
basis that the issue lay outside the long title to the Bill but
two things may have come out of this approach.

Firstly,    the LordChancellor did produce a Consultation Paper as
to whether the level of bereavement damages should remain where it
was, be raised to £5,000 or raised to £10,000. The Liverpool Law
Society put in a very strong response favouring £10,000 or a
higher figure if there were not to be a regular review.

Similarly responses have been put in favouring the higher figure
by Birmingham Law Society and by Leeds Law Society.   The general
Council of the Bar Law Revision Committee made a response also
supporting the lifting of the level to "at least £10,000" and the
Law Society's response was similar to ours recommending

         1.   The level of bereavement damages should be increased
         to £10,000 and subject to triannual review.

         2.   Legislation should be introduced to increase the
         class of persons who could claim damages for bereavement
         to include co-habitees, children and any person who   by
         virtue of the special relationship with the deceased
         suffered bereavement loss.

         3.   That there should be further consultation as to
         whether the Fatal Accident Act 1976 should be amended
         removing the present restrictions on the right of the
         parent to claim bereavement for the death of a child.

As far as the level is concerned we are therefore hopeful that
there will be an increase in level which although unlikely to
affect our   own   clients   at   least   should   assist others in the
futur«f^

Secondly the Liverpool Law Society took the opportunity to write
to all Local Merseyside Members of Parliament setting out our
concerns on the level and particularly on the class of people who
are able to claim bereavement deimages and inviting them or one of
them to raise the matter on the second reading of the Courts and
Legal Services Bill in the House of Commons.

George Howarth MP did so and I enclose (marked 'A') a copy of his
Speech taken from Hansard.   In addition a number of the others
raised the matter on our behalf directly with various people in
Authority - two Members of Parliament referring the letter to the
Lord Chancellor's Department. I have now received a copy letter
from the Lord Chancellor to the particular Members (identical in
each   case)   and   I enclose a copy (marked 'B') for your
information. At the moment there appears to be no will to
increase the categories but it is a matter where there seems to be
quite alot of goodwill and, who knows, a change may come at
sometime in the not too far distant future.

Once again if it does it will not be a matter which will
particularly affect your clients but they may like to know there
are moves to change the situation.

Inquests
The individual Inquests dealing with the medical cause of death
and the particular circumstances relating to each individual are
now concluded.     These ran exactly according to the time table
laid down by the Coroner Dr Popper, who was meticulous in his
treatment of the bereaved relatives and eased what inevitably was
a very difficult situation for them.

The Inquests themselves have been adjourned pending the outcome of
the criminal investigations.    No announcements have been made on
this point although we understand that the actual investigations
themselves are now complete and a decision from the DPP is
awaited.

Although we have no part to play in those proceedings no doubt
your clients will be anxious to know the decision of the DPP euid I
am sure that that will receive appropriate publicity whether it is
in favour of a prosecution or against.
HilllTborouqh Trust
You may have seen the Press Release from Mike Reddington, Trust
Manager, of the Hillsborough Disaster Trust.   In case you have
missed this I enclose herewith a copy (marked *C •) from which you
will note that the Trust itself is closing and they have given a
closing date for applications - 30th June 1990.        If you have
already put in a claim on behalf of your client then there is no
need to take any further action.

If your client or indeed any other member of the family who has
suffered and who may feel that they have a claim they want
considering, has not yet put in a claim then they should <io so
without delay.

Every good wish.
Yours sincerely,

       eta-
MISS E M STEEL
                                                      .2 2 MAY 1990       'A'
MR GEORGE HOWARTH (Knowsley North): I, too, have no interests to declare,
other than the fact that, in common with many right hon. and hon. Members,
I deal from time to time with the consequences of legal cases and with
Solicitors and Barristers.
        *
I welcome, together with my hon. Friend the Member for Barnsley, Central
(Mr IMtley), the concept of a legal services ombudsman. Any right hon. or
hon. Mfpnber who has dealt with a case against a firm of Solicitors or a
Barrister knows of the appalling difficulties presented by the existing
procedures of the Law Society and Bar Council. That is not to be critical
of either body, but the existing arrangements and the relationships between
both bodies, and between members of the legal profession and their clients,
are so complex as to make it very difficult to secure a positive outcome.
The result is, perhaps inevitably, always something of a fudge. My experience
of the legal profession is that there is a need for an ombudsman, and I am.
pleased that the Bill makes provision for one.

No right hon. or hon. Member has yet welcomed the extension of the role of
the Parliamentary Commissioner. There has long been a need to clarify the
relationship between the commissioner1s department and that of the Lord
Chancellor in investigating the actions of court officers in relation to
administrative matters in general. I congratulate the Lord Chancellor on
addressing that issue. The provisions in the Bill mean that anyone who has
waited for some time for money from the courts, for example, will be able
to look for seme redress from the ombusman.

ffy final and most inportant point concerns compensation for those who are
bereaved as a result of an accident. I particularly have in mind correspondence
that I have received from members of the Liverpool Law Society following their
experiences in dealing with the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy 12 months
ago* The Criminal Justice Act 1982 provides for compensation of up to £3,500
where the deceased person was under the age of 18 or was a husband or wife
of someone over that age. The experience of the consortium of Liverpool
Solicitors dealing with the bereaved families of those killed at Hillsborough
is that neither category deals with all cases satisfactorily. They point
out that the age limit is not the best way of assessing the relationship between
a young person and his family. The youngster who continues receiving education
at college or university after the age of 18 is a classic example of someone
who is still, to some extent, dependent on his or her parents. The Solicitors
argue that the age limit is too arbitrary a criterion and that each case should
be considered on its merits.

The 1982 Act does not provide for common law husbands or wives and thus reflect
society as it is. The existing legislation creates much hardship and certainly
a great deal of heartache in dealing with the aftermath of tragedies such
as Hillsborough, Zeebrugge, and King's Cross. The view of the Liverpool Law
Society is that the amount of compensation should be increased. I suggest
a figure such as the £10,000 proposed by my hon.   Friend the Member for Leigh
(Mr Cunliffe) i n a private Member!s Bill.

The question of age as a key criterion for eligibility should also be re­
examined, taking more generously into account the circumstances of the
individuals concerned. Finally, in the context of compensation, common law
partnerships should be recognised as being equally as valid as marriage. I
hope that those inportant issues will be pursued in Committee. If such proposals
are adopted, I am more likely to vote for the Bill at a later stage than I
am tonight.
         F   rom   T h e R ig h t H   onourable     T he L ord M   ackay o f   C la sh fern




                                                                          H ouse   of   Lords,
                                                                                          SW1A OPW


               C90/224/4                                                                //✓May 1990




                      MISS E M STEEL, LIVERPOOL LAW SOCIETY


     Your letter to the Attorney General of 22 March enclosing

one from the President of the Liverpool Law Society, Miss E M

Steel, has been passed to me because of my responsibility for the

civil law on compensation in personal injury and fatal accident

cases.



     The       whole        nation       was    shocked      by     the    tragic       events    at

Hillsborough.             The injured survivors and the relatives of those

who died in the disaster have my deepest sympathy.



     It would not be proper for me to comment on the comparisons

between payments made for fatal accidents in individual cases.

However, I hope it will be helpful for me to explain why the law

stands as it now does,                    and^' ^n particular why and how it was
                                               Us    *

modified in 1982.




Eric Heffer Esq MP

House of Commons

London

SW1A OAA                                                                                      .../2.
    ^Before 1982 the estate of a deceased person could claim
      i■ ■
damages in respect of the deceased's "loss of expectation of

lif %         The   conventional     award    was       usually     about     £1,250.

Following a recommendation of the Law Commission, this right was

wholly abolished by section 1 of the Administration of Justice

Act 1982.       Two other kinds of damages which might commonly be

recovered after a death were and remain unaffected.                       These are

the damages recoverable under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 by

close relatives who had been dependent on the deceased,                           and

damages       recoverable    by    the     estate       under    the    Law   Reform

(Miscellaneous       Provisions)     Act    1934    for    loss    to   the   estate

resulting from the accident.               This will include any pain and

suffering of the deceased and any financial loss he could have
recovered.



        A new claim, for damages for bereavement, was introduced by

the 1982 Act.       The Law Commission found that there was in two

cases a strong case for allowing recovery of damages for the

bereavement      caused     by the   death of       a    close    relative.       The

Commission believed that an award of damages, albeit small and

arbitrary, could have a slight consoling effect where a person

was widowed, or parents lost art infant child.                  It considered, but
          f                                                         w

did not feel justified in recommending any further extension,

such as a more widely available claim for loss of a relative's

society.      The level of the award was fixed by statute at £3,500,

but the legislation gives me power to vary the sum by order made

by statutory instrument.          The present level of the award is under
review and, as Miss Steel has indicated,         I recently issued a
       )   '   •

consultation paper inviting views on what          the revised   level

shc^tf be.         I hope to announce my conclusions on the review
   /

before the Summer recess.



           I respect the concern which Miss Steel and others have

expressed about the effect of the present law insofar as it does

not provide for compensation for the distress of bereavement of

parents of unmarried children of all ages and those who had

common law spouses.       However, I am not at present persuaded that

either the Law Commission or Parliament,         when it enacted its

proposals in 1982, reached the wrong decisions on this issue.



           I enclose a copy of this letter which you may wish to pass
on to Miss Steel.
                                                             f   ■)
                                                             c
IN THE MATTER OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL FUND


  AND IN THE MATTER OF SECTION 27 TRUSTEE ACT 1925




  f
Notice is hereby given pursuant to Section 27 of the Trustee

Act 1925 of the United Kingdom Parliament that the Trustees

of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund propose to wind up

the Discretionary Fund and to use its assets for the purposes

specified in the Discretionary Trust which was established as

a result of the Trust deed executed on the 21st April 1989

following the Hillsborough Disaster on Saturday, 15th April

1989; and accordingly any person interested who considers

that they have a claim against the Fund should send particulars

of such claim to the Trust c/o:-

              C. M. Beddington, Esq.,
              The Trust Fund Manager,
              P. 0. Box 220,
              Liverpool,
              L69 2PN

not later than 30th June 1990.


This notice is a formal notice.    Anyone who has already notified

the Trustees of his or her claim need not make a further claim.




                           Dated        April 1990
