         HILLSBOROUGH                STEERING                COMMITTEE
                    c/o CastU ChamBers, Coo^Street, LiverpoolL2 9S9(
                     <IeC: 0 5 l255-0628 Jo*: 051236 0047 <DX 14100
          %


                                                                27th July 1989
                                                                EMS/DW

F.A.O.




Dear Mr Cowan,

RE:      HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 6
                                                         *


As you know we appeared before Steyn J . yesterday (Wednesday 26th)
for Directions in the Lead action and for directions and guidance
to ensure speedy resolution of all matters.

The Plaintiff was represented by Ben Hytner QC and Tim King, the
Police by Mr Woodward QC and the Club by Mr Edwin Glasgow QC.
Steyn J. made it clear that he had discussed the matters fully
with the other Presiding Judge Rose J. and both are of a similar
mind.

As far trial is concerned he stated that this would be after
Easter 1990, the current estimated length of hearing four to six
weeks.  It should be fixed either for the first half or the second
half of that term, the date to be finally decided by Rose J. in
October this year when he would sit in Manchester on the second
Pre Trial Review on these matters.

Although the Defence itself has not yet been received the Club
indicated in their Affidavit and in Court that there would be a
difference in the Defences applicable to Pen 3 (where the barrier
collapsed) and Pen 4 where there was no such collapse.  In the
case of Pen 3 they have given advice to the Insurance Company that
two further parties should be joined as Third Parties and
ultimately. Third and Fourth Defendants.  By yesterday they had
not received firm instructions as to whether that advicehad been
taken and Third Party proceedings would follow or whether for
political (with a small 'p') reasons the Insurance Company wish
the Defendants to be limited to the two currently named. He
should have those instructions very shortly.

It was obvious from that that there would be a need for more than
one Lead case to cover the various alternative liability
questions. Mr Hytner indicated that we would bring two further
Lead cases (proceedings to be commenced as soon as possible) and
these would be :-
Lead case no 2 a fatal which occurred in Pen 4 - where the
Defendants would be the Police and the Club only.

Lead case no 3 a Plaintiff who was physically injured in the crush
outside the ground by the turnstiles before gate ’C ’ was opened.

Those three actions should not be consolidated but should be tried
together and once the Pleadings were closed it should be possible
to isolate issues and thus cut down the potential length of trial.

As far as the Order for Directions made this was of course limited
to the action which was before the Judge yesterday. He took the
approach that starting with the anticipated date of trial he
wanted to get everything through in good time and therefore made
very comprehensive directions.

Firstly, he directed that time should run in the vacation allowing
6 weeks for Defences and 3 weeks for Replies to the Defences.

Because of the possibility of inclusion of other parties it was
agreed that the draft Defence of the Club should be produced at
this stage to our Counsel and if they did intend to add additional
Defendants he would grant leave to amend the Writ to add those
parties as Third and Fourth Defendants, the Statement of Claim be
withdrawn resettled and reserved.  (This would save the time and
expense of Third Party proceedings).

He ordered mutual exchange of documents by list four weeks from
close of pleadings and inspection seven days thereafter.

He put forward a positive suggestion with regard to the status of
Lord Justice Taylor's report.   He gave a strong indication that
his view and that of Rose J. was that the report should be
admitted as evidence of facts found within the report with the
reservation that any party had the right to call evidence on any
fact found within the report with which that party did not agree.

As there was some resistance from Counsel for the Police to this
suggestion he made no order on that yesterday but adjourned
consideration to October when the matter next comes before Rose J.
in Manchester.

He ordered mutual exchange of statements of witnesses of fact
within 6 weeks after close of pleadings covering

(A).   Statements of "new" witnesses.

(B).   Reference to those Inquiry witnesses on which the party
       wishes to rely.

(C).   The Transcript of Evidence at the Inquiry should be
        accepted as an accurate record of the evidencegiven
        at the Inquiry.
He gave leave to each party to call expert evidence limited to
three witnesses, one from each of the following categories
Consultanting Engineer, Metallurgist and Safety Expert and ordered
mutual exchange of reports six weeks after close of pleadings,
supplementary reports to be exchanged fourteen days thereafter.

He directed that the parties be at liberty to make interlocutory
application to either himself or to Rose J. whoever was on the
Circuit in appropriate cases. He gave directions as to documents
he would expect to be provided for the Trial Judge before the
hearing and directed that the case be further listed for Pre Trial
Review in early October, on a date to be agreed between Counsel's
Clerks and the Court, before Rose J. sitting in Manchester.

The Defendants had made application that all other cases should be
stayed whilst the Lead actions proceeded. He could make no order
on that this application because no other action was before him at
that time.

He did however direct that any applications by the Defendants to
stay other actions should be made to Rose J. in October and ga-ve
an indication that as far as he (Steyn J. ) was concerned he would
be inclined not to order a stay prior to close of pleadings but
would approve a stay after close of pleadings.

In relation to pleadings in other matters he indicated that in all
cases other than the test cases pleadings could be abridged by
permitting cross reference to the pleadings in the Lead actions.

Although this might on the face of it indicate that proceedings
should be issued in other cases, and of course it is up to
individual Solicitors to conduct their cases in the way which they
wish, in.view of that direction and the agreement already reached
with the Insurance Company to pay interest from the 15th April
1989 on claims by all clients notified by us next week, there
would seem no point in a proliferation of actions at this time.

Once the Lead actions have been heard if proceedings are necessary
- either because quantum of damage has not yet been agreed with
the Insurers or remoteness is an issue or to obtain interest on a
Judgment debt, the pleadings themselves can be very speedy and
short by cross referencing to the appropriate Lead action (and in
that respect will let you have the appropriate numbers for the
various Lead actions for cross reference in due course).

We will be in touch with you to let you know the outcome of the
further Pre Trial Review in October.

No date has yet been given for the issue of Taylor L.J.'s interim
report but it is expected very shortly.
     X
I will keep you informed of all developments.

I enclose herewith enclosure (a) and (c) which
the last Bulletin.

Every good wish.

Yours sincerely,




MISS E M STEEL
