     H I L L S B O R O U G H       STEERING                C O M M I T T E E

                 c/o CastCe CftamBers, Cool^Street, LiverpooCL2 SSOi
     %
     \7;
                   Vd: 0512550628 Tat: 051 236 0047 2)X 14100



                                                               EMS/DW
                                                               29TH DECEMBER 1989


 F.A.O.




 Dear
RE;   HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 12
Since the last Bulletin the Conference with Counsel has taken
place, the Lead Cases have again been before Mr Justice Steyn and
stayed on terms, the date has been fixed for hearing of the
remoteness test cases (which should dispose of the remaining 10%
of caises not covered currently by the agreement with the South
Yorkshire Police and Municipal Mutual), we have held a further
meeting with the Police Solicitors and Insurers to finalise the
agreement before it went before Mr Justice Steyn and another
meeting to deal with some of the common matters of damages will
take place in January.

I will deal with all these matters in turn.
Conference with Counsel
308 clients and Solicitors attended the Conference with Counsel,
Ben Hytner QC and Tim King, at the Faculty of Law on the 7th
December. As before the Conference was held in two parts, firstly
for Solicitor members of the Group and then a separate Conference
with Solicitors and their clients.
                                        ,         *
To a large extent matters which we expected to cover had been
overtaken by events - namely the offer from the First Defendants -
whidn'Counsel dealt with in detail together with any ancilliary
matters.   I enclose at enclosure 'A' a full note of both
Conferences for your information.
The Hearing before Stevn J. on the 20th December 1989
There was a hearing before Steyn J to deal with the stay of the
two existing Lead Actions upon terms, directions in the remoteness
Lead Actions (one case has been issued in order to bring the
matter before the judge on that occasion) to deal with Directions
for the contribution proceedings between the Defendants and to
consider the draft Trust Deed in conjunction with the draft Deed
of Appointment as an appropriate vehicle for receipt of damages in
the case of infants.
Ben Hytner QC and Tim King appeared for the Plaintiffs. Mr Payne
Junior Counsel appeared for the First Defendants (the South
Yorkshire Police), Edwin Glasgow QC and Mr. Davies appeared for
the Second Defendant (Sheffield Wednesday).    The Third Defendants
(Sheffield City Council) were not represented but had given
authority to the representatives of the First Defendants to deal
with matters on their behalf.    (They are insured with the sane
Insurers, the Municipal Mutual).    Mr. Fenwick appeared for the
Fourth Defendants (Eastwood and Partners).
By consent an order was made in each of the two Lead Actions
staying those actions on the terms contained in a letter from
Hammond Suddards of the 15th December 1989 and countersigned on
behalf of the Steering Committee (a copy of that letter is
enclosed herewith and marked 'B'). In each case an order was made
that the costs of the action should be paid by the First
Defendants.   The Plaintiffs discontinued their action against the
Second, Third and Fourth Defendants, the costs of those Defendants
being reserved and if necessary will be argued at another date.
Those three Defendants had requested an Undertaking that the
Plaintiffs would not bring other proceedings against them. That
Undertaking was given on behalf of the Plaintiffs in Lead
actions. It was stated in open court that if a very substantial
number of the Firms in the Group would give a similar undertaking
(which it is sensible and practical to give as the full value of
the claims will be met by the First Defendants) then apparently
none of the other Defendants will seek costs against the
Plaintiffs in the Lead actions.   If costs are sought by them at a
later stage and the cases restored for argument on this point then
                                                        1




  V


there has been an agreement.with the First Defendants that   they
will indemnify the Plaintiffs in respect of those costs.
Because the Lead Actions have now been stayed the time reserved
for the hearing of those actions (6 weeks from the 19th June 1990
at Liverpool) was available.
After hearing argument as to the use of that time for the
remoteness cases and/or the contribution proceedings Steyn J
directed that the nervous shock Lead cases (to be argued as to
remoteness only) should be listed for five days commencing on the
19th June.
There was argument between the Defendants as to the validity of
the current contribution proceedings.   He directed that the trial
of the current third party proceedings between the Defendants and
any additional proceedings for a declaration of non-liability (if
such were taken) should be heard on the 18th October 1990.   That
should resolve the position between the Defendants although of
course no Plaintiffs will be involved in those proceedings and
those proceedings will not delay settlement of individual claims.
As far as the remoteness cases are concerned these affect the
First Defendants (the police) only and both their Counsel, our
Counsel and the Judge were of the view that these should proceed
without any undue delay and - because the arguments are purely
ones of the application of law to particular sets of facts -
without unnecessary pleadings and unnecessary oral evidence.
It is likely that this case will proceed under Order 18 Rule 21
procedure with little oral evidence and the Judge made the
"suggestion" that it will be appropriate for skeleton arguments
and photocopies of relevant cases and Judgments to be lodged prior
to the hearing.
He noted the draft Trust Deeds and adjourned for consideration of
those until a date in January or February when he would give
further consideration assisted by Chancery Counsel.
The "agreement" 15th December 1989 (enclosure 'BM
Following recent authority the Steering Committee cannot and has
not purported to reach agreement With the First Defendants on
behalf of the Group as a whole. I would draw your attention to
the top of page 2 of Hammond Suddards letter. The Steering




                                   I
Committee have entered into negotiations with the Defendants
Advisors and Insurers as a result of which terms of settlement are
on offer to each individual member of the Group in respect of each
individual client.
I would draw your attention to the fact that these terms are on
offer to existing members of the Group and automatically to any
new claimants who instigate claims before the end of 1990.
Between the beginning of 1991 and the end of the limitation period
each new claim will be looked at on its merits but is not
automatically covered by this agreement.
Those clients who are covered and who will receive 100% of theix
claims from the First Defendants are detailed in Bulletin 11.

As far as term 2 is concerned there are one or two matters to note

       (a)         The particulars required at 2 (a) are needed by the
 First Defendants to enable them to pursue the contribution
 proceedings against the other Defendants.   They appreciate that
 the "best particulars" may in a number of cases be limited. It is
 important to them to be able to establish which Pen individuals
 were in initially (the agreement to pay covers those who for
 example scrambled out of one of the overcrowded pens into one of
 the adjoining safe areas) because the liability between Defendants
 may vary as to whether the cause of action originated in Pen 3 -
'where the barrier broke - or in Pen 4 where it did not.

     From the statements we have seen many people are not aware
which Pen was which. As one came to the ground through the tunnel
those people who went to the right when coming out of the tunnel
went into Pen 3 and those who went to the left went into Pen 4.
     (b)       We made it clear during negotiations with the Defendants
that as far as the supply of medical reports to the Insurers is
concerned that the normal practice would apply and that we would
be advising members of the Group that that was the case.

     As in any other case you are only required to produce medical
reports upon which you intend to rely and there is no obligation
to produce those as soon as they are received particularly if this
is a case where injuries are reasonably severe and where it would
                                 1




   'V

be more appropriate to have simultaneous exchange of medical
reports between Plaintiffs and Defendants.
     Each case must of course depend on its own merits and on the
judgment of the Solicitor having conduct of the case. The
Insurers do require some medical evidence within 6 months (in
order to deal with the inter-Defendant proceedings) but you will
note that all that is necessary is a brief description of the
nature of the injury from a medical practitioner - in other words
you have no obligation to supply the opinion or prognosis part of
the report at that stage if    you do    not wish to do so.
        Of course the agreement by the Defendants to pay thefees
for medical reports (mentioned in.previous Bulletins) only
operates once those reports   have been disclosed.
        (c ).  The agreement to pay    expenses and costsinvolvedin
supplying further information for use in the inter-Defendant
action extends to cover Solicitors costs.
Procedure for dealing with claims covered by the Agreement
The settlement or hearing (if quantum is disputed) of individual
claims is of course a matter for the client's own Solicitor to
deal with directly with the First Defendant's Insurers.
We understand from the Insurers that a number of people have not
yet submitted letters before action although their clients are
known as members of the Group. For example letters before action
have not been received in respect of 11 of the 95 fatals.
If you have not already done so please immediately write a letter
before action to the South‘Yorkshire Police, the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and Eastwood and Partners.
There is no need to write a letter before action to Sheffield City
Council as they are covered by the same Insurers as the Police.
A specimen letter before action and the full names and addresses
of the Defendants is enclosed at enclosure 'C'.
                                               u
At the same time please write directly to the Municipal Mutual at
Bradford giving details of the claim and marking the letter for
the attention of Mr Ken Holmes.
    ■\

    9
                 F.A.O. HR KEN HOIMES
                 MUNICIPAL MUTUAL INSURANCE
                 PARK HOUSE
                 57-59 WELL STREET
                 BRADFORD   BD1 5SN
If you have not already had a contact from them would you enclose
with the details of your client’s individual claim a copy of the
letter before action which you have sent. That will ensure that
the matter is dealt with speedily.
We trust that some cases may be capable of early settlement or, in
the case of those with continuing disabilities, an early interim
payment made.

If in any case figures cannot be agreed and the matter has to
proceed to trial it has been agreed this can be dealt with under
theprovisions of Order 18 Rule 21 to ensure a speedy resolution.
I would draw your attention to this Rule in the White Book. All
that is necessary is a Writ - against the single Defendant, "The
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire" - with a simple endorsement
referring back to the Order of Steyn J - e.g. :
            "the Plaintiff's claim is for damages for
            personal injuries sustained at Hillsborough Staduim
            Sheffield on the 15th April 1989 and payable by the
            Defendant under the terms of the schedule to
            the Order of Mr Justice Steyn of 20th December
            1989 in the case of Chapman -v- The Defendants and
            others".

An application under Order 18 Rule 21 for trial without pleadings
should be made to which the First Defendants will consent and the
matter should proceed on the basis of a letter setting out details
of the injuries and loss involved.
Valuation of Claims

As there, are certain aspects of injury which have particular
significance in the case of disasters we are compiling a file of
published material - articles, reported cases and transcripts of
unreported cases - together with updated valuations of specific
matters which may be of assistance to members in considering and
advising on their individual cases.




                  I
This should be in the Law Library by mid-January and available for
reference. If anyone wishes copies then these can of course b«
supplied upon payment to Liverpool Law Society.
Opinions from Counsel on quantum

If in any particular case you wish to seek an opinion from Counsel
which Counsel you use is of course entirely a matter for you and
we would not seek in anyway to interfer with your freedom of
choice.
We did however think it might be helpful to give "generic
instructions" to a limited number of Counsel - four in Liverpool,
two in Manchester and two in London - so that they would have
background knowledge of this particular disaster, the "agreement",
the proceedings and relevant matters which have arisen from other
disaster cases.
If you wish to avail yourself of this service and instruct one of
these Counsel then it would only be necessary for you to draw
instructions dealing with your own particular client's injuries
and circumstances - medical reports, special damage calculations
and documents, dependency etc - and to make reference to the fact
that they have the generic instructions.

The Counsel who have agreed to take part on this basis are :-
Tim King,
LIVERPOOL CHAMBERS, DX NO: 14,224,
Tele no: 051-236-0718
Fax:      051-255-1085
                            V
David Lynch,
LIVERPOOL CHAMBERS. DX NO: 14,232
Tele no: 051-236-4919
Fax:      051-236-2800
Andrew Moran,
LIVERPOOL CHAMBERS, DX NO: 14,232
Tele no: 051-236-4919
Fax:      051-236-2800
Andrew Sander,
LIVERPOOL CHAMBERS, DX NO: 14,106
Tele no: 051-236-7191
Fax:      051-227-5909
Allistair Forrest,
MANCHESTER CHAMBERS DX NO: 28,854 (Manchester 4)
Tele no: 061-834-9843
Fax:      061-835-2051
      %


    *
Caroline Swift
MANCHESTER CHAMBERS DX NO: 14,326
Tele no: 061-833-9801
Fax:     061-835-2483
Richard Hone,
LONDON CHAMBERS DX NO: 80
Tele no: 01-583-7355
Fax:      01-353-2144
Brian Langstaffe,
LONDON CHAMBERS DX NO: 452
Tele no: 01-583-0303
Fax:     01-583-5597
Particular matters affecting fatal claims
There are three aspects affecting the quantum of fatal claims
which we raised in general with the Defendant's Solicitors and
Insurers and which we will be discussing with them again at our
meeting in January.
Two of these were underlined at the Conference with Counsel when
dis-satisfaction and distress over the existing state of the law
was expressed by a number of people.
(i)       Those to whom bereavement damages are payable

The Defendants Insurers made it clear at our meeting that they
were not prepared to agree on a global basis that bereavement
damages should be paid in respect of those individuals who died
unmarried and aged 18 or over.
They did however agree that they would consider any such case
which was put to them on its individual merits and consider
whether they were prepared in that particular instance to make an
ex gratia payment.




I
           V

       t
Thus, although I must make it clear that        no promises at all have
been made, it is clearly well worth your        while if you have clients
who fall into this category putting up a        case to the Municipal
Mutual and asking them to consider an ex        gratia payment.
(ii)           Level of bereavement damages

It is common ground that the current level of damages for
bereavement £3,500 is far too low and although Parliament has
nevjsr pretended it should be a compensatory figure it has remained
static since 1982and should be increased.
At the Conference we could only advise those concernedthat this
was a matter for the Politicians not the Lawyers and that if they
wish to have the matter changed this should be done through
representation to M.P.s. In fact the day after the Conference one
of our Local M.P.s was in the area and we took the opportunity of
putting the point to him together with the fact that the Courts
and Legal Services Bill recently introduced in the Lords would be
an appropriate vehicle to use for such an amendment.
The M.P. was interested and said he would seek cross party support
for such an amendment. He has written to confirm he will raise it
and let us know the Government's response.

There therefore is a possibility that there will be a change in
the Law and we are seeking to get agreement (which is not yet
forthcoming but which we will again pursue in January) that if the
Law is amended in this Parliamentry session then whether or        not
that Law is retrospective the amended figure should be payable in
all Hillsborough cases and any cases settled prior to the
enactment of any new Law should be settled on the basis of
acceptance of a figure in full and final settlement of all claims
save for any additional sum payable to bring bereavement damages
up to the new level.

I should stress that this is not agreed and is only the subject of
negotiation but as soon as there is anything further to report I
will of course let you know.

(iii)          Damages for pain and suffering prior to death




                                                                    I
We have raised this aspect of damages with a view to reaching
agreement if possible on a minimum figure for damages payable
under this head - as the individual circumstances of each fatal
will inevitably be slightly different. The matter was dealt with
very briefly at our lengthy meeting in December and it was agreed
that we would deal with it in more detail in January.
Again I will let you have further details   as soon as they are
available.
Remoteness Cases
Those members who have returned the questionnaire indicating that
they have clients who are outside the scope of the current
agreement will have received separately more detailed
questionnaires. I would be glad if these could be returned as
soon as possible so that we can agree the categories for the
remoteness test cases and get appropriate individual Plaintiffs
identified as soon as possible.
As soon as there is anything to report onthe remotenesscases we
will be in touch.
Clinical Psychologists

I know a number of people have had to wait for Clinical
Psychologists to be allocated. This is due to the very large
number of people involved.   The team Clinical Psychologists are
working as quickly as they can and (apart from those who have
submitted their questionnaire forms in very recently) everyone
should have heard with details of the Clinical Psychologist
allocated to each of their particular clients shortly.
I apologise for the length of this Bulletin but the number of
points to be covered I am afraid made it inevitable.
I will be in touch again - probably in late January - once we liave
met with the Insurers.
Every good wish to you and your clients for 1990.
Yours sincerely,



MISS E M STEEL
         {
         5

         \
         \        'K

             “    f




     Conference with group solicitors 6.00 p.m. to 7.00 p.m. The conference was
     opened by EMS who welcomed the group members and explained that since the
     conference had been arranged it's function had changed, since at the time
     it was organised it was intended to discuss civil liability, tactics, and
     procedure.           The recent agreement by South Yorkshire Police to pay compensation
     to those injured and bereaved had obviously rendered this largely un-necessary,
     except with referenaeto the remoteness cases.                  It was stressed that the
     proposals put forward were still strictly confidential and not for general
     publication.




J t?00           ’HONy^ia N 0 1 A D H    S3N0r > S 3 0 V W   £££ I 6i?t? I £0           S I :9 t   5 0 — 10 - 0 6 G t
Ben Hytner gave a summary of events since the directions hearing on the
26th October , including the police application for a stay at that hearing
and the f m * that it was the police determination to remove, the cases from
the list w*June that had lead to the current settlement offer.      He explained
that we were left with the remoteness cases and that we would be trying to
keep the court time allocated for June 1990 to have these cases heard.       We
also wanted to maintain a very rigid time table.     Where the valuation of
agreed claims became disputed then it washoped that an accelerated assessment
of damages procedure could be used,     BH also mentioned that we were seeking
approval from the court for the use of the Hillsborough Trust Deed as n vehicle
for damages awarded to infants in Hillsborough actions.


EMS continued to deal with some practical matters:-


i.     On the remoteness cases she stressed that we needed to act with great
       speed and asked group members to return detailed remoteness questionnaires
       as soon as possible and in any event prior to Christmas,    She also
       asked that where members had a remoteness claim a Legal Aid application
       should be submitted immediately, since there was no absoluLe ccrtainty
       of recovery and funding would be very important,


ij..   Arbitration procedures had been suggested by Lhe insurers   as in the
       Zeebrugge cases but there the arbitration had been agreed iu exchange
       for higher bereavement damages than allowed by statute.     Here the
       insurers would not increase the statutory bereavement, damages and we
       had no means of forcing them to do so;     accordingly there was no
       attraction in binding all group members to an arbitration procedure.
       There was nothing to stop individual solicitors agreeing to arbitration
       should they want, to do so.    They had the option to do so at the moment
       should their clients accept that there could be no appeal, or they
       could appeal a lowerawrard of damages made by a court.


iii.   She mentioned that category 16 (identification) remoteness cases were
       not at the moment within the categories agreed to by MMI although these
       were still under discussion, since apparently Sun Alliance thought
       that these should be amongst those paid.
           EMS stated that it was hoped to get the terms of the agreement incorporated
          into an Order as soon as possible and discussion were currently going
          on about written proposals submitted by the insurers.     This included
           the 12 month time limit for the submission of new claims, and she
          explained that whilst the insurers would have to look at loter claims
          it seaaied sensible to get claims in as soon as possible in order to
           take^advantage of the terms of the agreement.   The insurers had asked
          for further information and a form of questionnaire would be prepared
          by the committee as a suggested   means of complying with this request,
          with regard to medical evidence, it would of course be left with the
           individual solicitors to decide whether to disclose and/or exchange
          this.     Where the Defendants were seeking assistance to enable them
          to pursue claims against the other Defendants it was felt that it would
          be reasonable to expect co-operation from our clients on the basis
           that it should be done through their solicitors and with the solicitors
          present at all times.


          On the point of quantum EMS explained that the group members would be
          left as individuals to deal with valuation and agreement of cJaims.
          The Committee were clarifying exactly how the insurers required to deal
          with this and would provide further details in due course,     Where
          members felt that they wanted to take Counsel’s opinion on quantum      a
          list of 8 Counsel to whom full general instructions had been provided
          would be supplied and a package of case law, articles and helpful inform-
          atiOn on quantum would be available In the Law Library in the near future
          Copies would have to be purchased from the Law Society,


          EMS at. this point asked the conference whether they felt the Steering
          Committee should try to negotiate a minimum pre-death pain and suffering
          figure, on the basis that individual solicitors should argue for a
          higher figure were particular cases could justify it.     Ben Hytner added
          at this point that on the basis of the evidence which came out at the
          Inquiry it may well be difficult to prove the circumRtances of .individual
          deaths, and the conference approved this cour-seof action by the Committee.




Old too   -HONwaa   nqiaoh        saNorwowH     eseiGmso
                                                                          9 t =9 t    20-10 -OGG
         The conference concluded shortly before 7.00 p.m., in time for the commence­
         ment of the client conference at that time.




                    \
         Conferene^With Clients of the Hillsborough Solicitors Group.
         EMS welcomed the clients to the conference and the conference opened with
         a minutes silence in memory of Sir Harry Livermore who had died some days
         earlier.


         After an introduction by EMS, Ben Hytner spoke to the clients at length,
         dealing with the following points


         1.      Negotiations and civil procedure to date.
         2.      The trial date allocated for the test cases.
         3.      The subsequent discussions and the offer tosettle cases, made     by SYP.
         4.      The fact that there was no fixed figure fordamages e.g. fifty     million
                  pounds quoted frequently in the press.
         5.      The fact that there was no admission of liability by SYP and the reason
                  for that namely that the consent of the insured was required.
         6.      The fact that there was no binding agreement forcing clients to go
                  to arbitration, and that assessment :fc>f damages procedures would remain
                  open to them.
         7.      The nervous shock and remoteness cases which would be breaking new
                  ground.
         8.      The fact that we were attempting to keep the original trial dates in
                  June next year,


         A variety of questions were taken from the floor to include the question
         of limited compensateanwhere a fatal case involved someone who was over the
         age of eighteen, without dependants, and who was unmarried.      It was confirmed
         that bereavement damages would not apply in this instance, although application
         could be made to the trust fund and the estate claim would attract damages
         for pain, suffering, and terror between injury and death.      Further questions
         included the relevance of trust fund payments to D.S.S benefits and Legal
         Aid.     Answers were provided in accordance with the previous minutes.    A
         number of general queries were raised and it was confirmed that the settlement,
         agreement did not bind any individual client who was free to accept or reject
         settlement as he or she wished.     In particular any one who wished to reject
         a settlement as a matter of principle would be able to do so, even where

         it would not be possible for higher damages to be awarded by the court.



l td   t?00     ‘H O N V a g   NOiAflH   S3N0rsS30VW   CSGtGfcfctSO                21:91     S O - 10~OS
The fact that inflated bereavement damages had previously been paid by the
insured rather than the insurers was distinguished in this case, where the
          V
Defendant’was dependant on public funds and therefore unlikely to make any
kind of       up, although the possibility of seeking some top up from Sun
Alliance was not discounted.


The conference concluded at 9,15 p.m. that evening.
H am m ond Suddards
                          S O L I C I T O R S
M/NL«QTTQML£Y                  PETER C. METCALF                     H O ttR D BURNS          CONMVTAMTt:                    EMPIRE HOME
ftllC V Q ftu ili*             CHRISTOPHER W JONES                  W H S W I t AflMTAGE     ROGBIW SUOOAfCScx              ttPtCCAOLLT
.MCH^fc'Oitt3£ON               ANDREW f t JOADAN                    J. PATHCX MTTCHELL       SR OESMONO HEAP                Muoranoaoiajt
JOHN Ot DC UNN                 SIMON ft 8. STELL                    C M S IC F H St MARKS    IAN W. WHT90N
                               M M k l ft mrntA*.*                  MQMa&HBCEr                                              TELEPHONE (0074) 7 3 0 N
MKNAGLL!
KTON-l                         RCHAflO W. WAOE-SMTTH                (WSAMOC J MARSHALL SMITH                                TELEX 517201
                               JOHN a . BECKETT                     PHLTW.HARJNQ
                                                                                                                            OX NO. 11730
ftAfltiAAUf'nSunK              a N. lANGREEhFIEU)                   WUUMIKOOMNS
C. NOB. MI/nQML;               STB *«Q A L£                         UJCQOMMONE                                              FAX (0Z74) 737547
                               MARK W HR.TON                        /W OmVKMcOOUGAU.
v*ta SHunueabmH                RONALDS. DRAKE


OURREF.            •                                 ¥ 0 1 * REF.                                           date      15th December, 1989



 Dear Sirs,

                                         Hillsborough
          Chapman and R i m e r -v- Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and Others

 We are writing on behalf of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and his
 insurers;

 It has M e n decided that, whatever the rights and wrongs of the Hillsborough
 stadlus disaster, it is inappropriate for persons who were injured at the
 ground to be kept waiting for coapensation. Accordingly, without a decision
 as to liability and subject to the terss below, all bona fide clains for
 compensation by those injured and the dependants of those who died at the
 gpround vlll be paid on a c o m o a lav basis to be agreed if possible or, failing
 agreeweSv to be assessed by the Court.
          ••
 Compensation will be paid for nervous shock cases, if they would be entitled
 to damages by law. Our clients would include in this category, without
 further ado, the cases which fall into categories 1-4 and 15 put forward by
 yourselves, listed in Appendix ’A ’ to this letter. In all other categories
 cases will be defended on the basis of remoteness, proof of injury and quantum
 only.

 This offer applies to the deceased and those injured in, or escaping froa,
 pens 3 and*4 at the ground. Our clients will also give consideration to the
 cases of persons injured elsewhere within the precincts of Hillsborough
 stadiua on receipt of details.
                                                                                                                       /

 The Chief Constable will pursue action against the other Defendants to the
 test actions, with a view to recovering sums expended pursuant to this offer.



                                                                                                                                /...contd
 Hillsborough Steering Committee




LEEDS OFWXS:           BRTTANMA CHAMBERS 4/5 OXFORD PLACE LEEDS LS1 3AJ< TELEPHONE (0532) 444921 TELEX 557202 FAX 444794/421199
                       JOSEPHS WELL HANOVER WALK LEEDS LS3 'AS TELEPHONE (0632) 4506*5 TELEX 56366 FAX 426868

                                  im s n m s «QUAiH) m n «                 ax x iv n t * cjotcucr o f m /estvent au srcss
              SUDDARDS                                                   F*3£N0.2




         \
Our clients are willing to proceed upon the basis of an acceptance of this
offer byf<feie Hillsborough Steering Committee. The offer is sade to all
claimants currently co-ordinated by the Committee. It will be the intention
of our clients to sake the same offer to any claimants not currently
represented by the Committee and also to claimants who have not yet come
forward, but who do so within twelve months from the date of this letter. Our
clients would not rule out making the same offer to claimants coming forward
after the expiry of that deadline, but would not, at this stage, wish to give
an Indefinite conmitment for the future.

Any unresolved questions as to the means of putting this offer into effect
shall be decided by application to the Court under term 1. If jurisdiction is
refused because no action has been commenced in a particular case, then the
dispute shall be resolved by action.


Terms

1.      These actions will by consent, be stayed until further Order, with
        liberty to apply for the purpose of putting the terms of this offer
        into effect.

2.      Within six months of the acceptance of this proposal:

        (a)    Bach claimant shall, through his Solicitors, put forward a
               statement of the factual basis of his claim, including the best
               particulars he can give as to the following:

               Time of arrival at ground.

               Whereabouts when injured/deceased.

               Cause of injury.

               Nature of injury.

              * Confirmation whether Amended Statement of Claim in Chapman (Pen 3)
                or Rimer (Pen 4) adopted as statement of claimant's case.

        Our clients accept that the "best particulars" in this connection may
        be very limited in cases of bereaveaent and indeed in some cases of
        injury.

        (b)    Each claimant shall put forward medical evidence of injury and a
               schedule of loss, with supporting documents.

               In cases of continuing symptoms it will be sufficient if an
               initial report briefly describing the nature of the injury is put
               forward within the time indicated.
                DARDS                                                   r^IjfiNO 3
                          r=~ £ Z & :



        Each claimant shall co-operate with any reasonable request by the
        j^npst Defendant to provide further medical or other evidence.

        Each claimant will agree (subject to payment of expenses and costs) U>
        respond to any reasonable request for further information from the
        First Defendant in connection with his jttroposed action against the
        other Defendants to the test actions.

        The reasonable costs of each claimant will be paid by the First
        Defendant.

6   .   Upon settlement of his claim, each claliwmt'will assign to the First
        Defendant all his causes of action against each of the other Defendants
        to the test actions limited to those arising out of the injuries in
        respect of which compensation is paid.

In cases where agreement cannot cannot             «n quantum Writs will be
issued pursuant to the terms of this letter ang .tbe First Defendant will agree
to trial without pleadings pursuant to order IflTrule 21 subject to provision
by the Plaintiff of details of injury and financial loss.

We are happy for a copy of this letter to be produced to the court.

Yours faithfully,

                                               '   Jr
                                              • v.V‘
                                              ■ • .•



We accept the offer on behalf of the Hillsborough Steering Committee.



    l&ZXjiyJXZ.             ■
                                     APPENDIX A

             CATEGORIES OF NERVOUS SHOCK CLAIMANTS : REMOTENESS OF DAMAGE

       The Claimant was in pen 3 or 4 and suffered physical injury and
nervous shock.
         \
2.     The Claimant was in pen 3 or 4 and suffered no physical injury but
suffere#^^rvous shock.

3.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and saw a spouse or
child injured or killed.

4.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and knowing or believing
a spouse or child to be in pen 3 or 4, later found them injured or dead.

5.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
arelative was in pen 3 or 4, or could be in those pens, but later found them
not to have been physically injured or to have suffered nervous shock.

6.     The      Claimantwas in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
friend was      in pen 3or 4 and later found that they had been killed or injured.

7.     The Claimant was in another part of the ground and knew or believed a
friend was in pens 3 or 4, or could be in those pens, and later found that
they had not been killed or injured.

8.     The  Claimantwas in another part of the ground and no relative or
friend in or believed to be in pen 3 or 4.

9.     The   Claimantwas not at the stadium but saw the events live on
television and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relative was in
pen 3 or 4 at the Leppings Lane end and same was injured or killed.

10.    The Claimant was at the stadium but saw the events live on television
and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relative was in pen 3 or 4 or
at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or killed.

11.    The   Claimantwas not at the stadium but saw the events live on
television and/or described on radio and knew or believed a friend was in pen
3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane end and same was injured or killed.

12.     The Claimant was not at the stadium but saw the events live on
television and/or described on radio and knew or believed a friend was in pen
3 or 4 or at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or killed.

13.     The Claimant saw recorded footage of     thedisaster and knew or believed
a relative was at the match and knew that person would be at Leppings Lane and
later found him/her to have been injured or killed.

14.    The Claimant was not at stadium but saw the events live on television
and/or described on radio and knew or believed a relative was in pen 3 or 4 on
at the Leppings Lane end and same was not injured or killed.

^5.     Persons involved in rescue attempts who were not originally in pens 3
or 4.

16.    Attending to identify the body or to enquire in Sheffield as to
whereabouts of victims.

17.     Other:
      %


TO:       SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
          TOWN HALL
          SURREY STREET
          SHEFFIELD SI 2HH


          THE CHIEF CONSTABLE
          SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
          HEAD QUARTERS
          SWIGG HILL
          SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


          EASTWOOD AND PARTNERS
          BOWMAKER HOUSE
          23 KINGFIEEBRROAB
          SHEFFIELD Sll 9AS



Dear Sirs,

We have been instructed on behalf of (
of                                          who sustained injury/the
personal representatives and dependents of
                      who died) as a result of the incident at the Leppings
Lane End of the Hillsborough ground on the 15th, April 1989.

From the information in our possession it would appear that the incident
was caused or contributed to by the negligence of your servants or agents
and/or by a breach of duty on your part and we shall be glad to hear
from you that you are prepared to compensate our client for his/her
loss and injury.

May we respectfully suggest you pass this letter through to your Insurance
Company.

Yours faithfully,
