      HILLSBOROUGH                       STEERING               COMMITTEE
                        t/o CdstU Chambers, Coof^tnet, LiverpoolL2 9SM
                          ‘Tit: 051 255-0628 7a*j 051 23$ 0047 <DX 14100


                                                                           24th July 1989
                                                                           DNH/SD


             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER -               CLIENT BULLETIN No. 1

If you were in attendance at the last Conference with our Instructed Barristers at
Liverpool University you will recall that there was a request made that the Steering
Committee provide a bulletin for the clients In addition to the bulletins that are
being provided to Solicitors with a view that such bulletins could then be forwarded
by the Solicitors to their clients so as to keep the clients informed - in layman’s
terms - as to exactly what was happening. These bulletins are in addition to those
that are currently being provided to Solicitors, the most recent being Bulletin No.
5 fo rw a rd e d on the 20th July. It may be that some of you will have seen a copy
of this bulletin for we are aware that some Solicitors are forwarding the bulletins
direct to clients.

1)    The Inquiry
      As you will no doubt be aware Phase 1 of the Inquiry has now been
      completed. All Barristers Involved addressed Lord Justice Taylor on the 14th
      inst., having previously made written submissions. The written submissions are
      available to be read at The Law Library, Castle Chambers, Cook Street,
      Liverpool. Lord Justice Taylor has now gone away to consider his Interim
      recommendations which hopefully he will be making available before the start
      of the football season. He will then enter the second part of the Inquiry
      which will deal with technical recommendations relating to future changes and
      improvements to ground safety and he will be inviting comments from any
      Interest party. If you wish any such recommendations to be placed before him
      could you please forward these to your Solicitor and ask him to forward them
      to the Steering Committee we shall ensure that they reach the appropriate
      authorities.

ii)   Civil Liability
       This relates to claims being made by families of those who died or people
       injured in the disaster who are pursuing claims through the Civil Courts for
       damages. This is totally different from the Inquiry which Is a Judicial analysis
       of the facts and at which, at the outset, Lord Justice Taylor Indicated It was
       not his intention to apportion blame. A lead action has been issued by way
       of Writ out of the High Court in Liverpool and directions on this lead case
       are being sought before a High Court Judge on the 26th July. The Defendants
       to the Writ are the South Yorkshire Police Authority and Sheffield Wednesday
       Football Club.     It Is consequently against both these Defendants that
       allegations of negligence and allegations of breaches of their duty under
       Statute (i.e. Acts of Parliament) are made. Hopefully the Judge will be laying
       down a strict timetable for the legal procedures to be completed before the
       test action comes to trial and there will be further test actions relating to
       the claims for nervous shock that are being made. In effec t the Judge will
       be asked to decide In exactly what circumstances a claim can be made for
       nervous shock. As a Steering Committee we would strongly recommend that
       you discuss with your own Individual Solicitor the particular aspects of your
       claim and the obtaining of medical evidence (if appropriate).
til)   The Trust Fund
       We would wish to stress that as a Solicitors Steering Committee we have no
       influence whatsoever upon the decisions made for payments out of the Trust
       Fund. The Trust Fund payments are a t the total discretion of the Trustees
       of the Fund and t)ie amounts to be paid to each individual will, so far as we
       are aware, be a matter of secrecy between the Trust Fund and the Individual
       concerned. Visits are being arranged by representatives enquiring as to the
       needs of the families of the bereaved and of the effects of the Injuries
       suffered upon the survivors. So far as we are aware it Is at present the
       intention of the Trust Fund to arrange for medical reports In support of claims
       to be dealt with by themselves rather than through us and it Is by no means
       certain that if your Solicitor wishes you to attend upon a Consultant for the
       purpose of the preparation of a Report that the Trust Fund will not
       themselves require a further medical appointment with a different doctor. It
       may seem unnecessary but unfortunately It is a matter beyond our control.
       Our brief relates to the co-ordinating of          claims for civil liability,
       representation at the Inquiry and representation at the forthcoming Inquests.

lv)    Inquests
       Indication has been given that there will be a short Inquest on each of the
       deceased which will follow a more general Inquest on the issues generally.
       As a Steering Committee It falls as part of our brief to co-ordinate such
       inquests but if you are one of the bereaved It will be your Solicitor’s right
       and, of course, your own to attend the short individual Inquest on the member
       of your family. We do not, however, anticipate that the inquest will take
       place until probably mid-January, This may seem a very long way off.
       However, it is improbable the inquests would start before the conclusion o1
       the Inquiry and it Is again improbable that Lord Justice Taylor’s full report
       will be available before mid-November. The Coroner has indicated he doesn't
       wish to have to adjourn over the Christmas break and consequently he seems
       likely not to commence the inquests until after Christmas.

       I would impress that as a Steering Committee we shall be representing and
       putting forward the views and wishes of the bereaved. We are very conscious
       indeed of the current view expressed at the Conference with Counsel a t
       Liverpool University that a substantial number of the bereaved feel that the
       Jury should bring In at the Inquest a verdict of unlawful killing and that
       thereafter the papers should be placed before the Director of Public
       Prosecutions to see if manslaughter charges can or should be brought. It is
       I think important to stress just how aware we are of public opinion In this
       m atter and to give an assurance that we shall give every due consideration
       to the families wishes. However, as the Inquest is not going to take place for
       a further six months It is obviously prudent to reserve our position as to how
       we address the Inquest until such time as the full Inquiry Report Is available.

As a Steering Committee we have held an initial meeting with the Insurers and
Solicitors who act for both the South Yorkshire Policy Authority and for Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club. You will no doubt be surprised and disappointed to note
th a t they are both not prepared to make a formal admission of liability but they are
neither prepared to Indicate they are prepared to make a payment by way of
compensation. It Is not unusual in civil claims for liability to be denied but despite
this for the Insurers to indicate that they will settle claims. It has been made very
clear to us that such a course of action Is not going to be voluntarily taken*
                                       -   3   -




It Is difficult to envisage that liability will not be found against one of the main
Defendants at the end of the day but, of course, they have their right under English
Law to defend themselves and it may well come to pass that what in fact Is
happening Is an exercise between Insurance Companies as to the percentage of
contribution they should egch make to the damages. In such circumstances they have
Indicated and, In fact, openly encouraged the lead action to take place and for the
litigation to be heard in the High Court. They are also hopeful that steps can be
taken to have the m atter heard In the High Court within twelve months. It may
well seem to you that it takes an Inordinate length of time to get cases to trial in
this country albeit that this is often substantially due to the waiting list of having
cases brought to trial in any event.         You have our assurance as a Steering
Committee that every step is to be taken to try and expedite the hearing of the
main test action. It Is encouraging to note that the Insurers for the two Defendants
have Indicated a similar concern to expedite the bringing to trial of this matter.
It remains to be seen whether their good Intentions hold up over the coming months.
Obviously if they start dragging their feet we shall have to put pressure upon them.

If you have found the Information In this newsletter to be useful and to explain In
simpler terms than the Solicitors Bulletin exactly what is happening then It would
be useful for us if you could, via your Solicitors, pass on your views. Further, If
there are any specific points you would wish future Bulletins to deal with or you
have any specific points which you require clarification from either the Steering
Committee or your individual Solicitor, please contact your individual Solicitor and
if he Is not in the position to answer then please request him to refer the query to
ourselves and we shall endeavour to assist.



Yours sincerely,




D.N. HARRIS
for and on behalf of
The Hillsborough Steering Committee
