HILLSBOROUGH                        STEERING                COMMITTEE
X
                    CastCe Chambers, Coo^Street, LiverpooCL2 SS'M.
                    <TeC: 051 2550628 Jaxi 051236 0047 <DX 14100



                                                                 9th July 1990
                                                                 EMS/DW


    F.A.O.                                                           1,11 1UL139®




    Dear
    EE!    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER BUT.T.RTIN 16
    As you will have heard the test cases on remoteness and on pre-death
    pain and suffering came on for hearing before Hidden J on the 19th
    June 1990 . Directions had been given previously providing for the
    filing of substantial amounts of evidence including statements from
    witnesses of fact, both relating to the individual cases and the
    generality of conditions at Hillsborough. Very shortly before the
    cases were due to be heard the Defendants confirmed they did not
    require evidence from the individual Plaintiffs and all witnesses of
    £f*ct- The evidence and legal argument in both cases was completed on
    the 25th June 1990 and in all cases Hidden J reserved his Judgment
    indicating that he would give it before leaving Liverpool at the end
    n -F .Tnl                                           '


    I will of course let you know as soon as the Judgment has been given
    as this may well affect clients of yours.

    The separate cases were dealt with as under :-
    Remoteness Test Cases

    We took 16 separate test cases which were consolidated for the
    purpose of the hearing. They covered a variety of relationships and
    a verity of categories.   The Plaintiffs consisted of one wife, two
    mothers, two fathers, three sisters, two brothers, two uncles, one
    grandfather, a brother-in-law, a fiance and a friend. Four of the
    test cases involved people who were in the West Stand and saw what
    had happened below, one was in a coach adjacent to Hillsborough, where
there^^is a television in the coach, 9 saw the disaster live on
television at their home, one heard the news on live radio and on
record^ TV and one heard the news in conversation, heard it later on
the rJ^Tio the news item and saw it on recorded TV. In 5 cases the
Plaintiffs visited the temporary mortuary at the Gym to identify the
bodies - in four cases on the night of the tragedy itself and one
later.
The only oral evidence given was that of Dr Morgan O'Connell, the
Consultant Psychiatrist called by the Plaintiffs who gave evidence as
to what post traumatic stress disorder was and how it was sustained
in, these cases.  A note of his evidence and cross examination is at
the Law Library if you wish to read it.
The legal argument dealt with the development of "nervous shock" as
an injury giving rise to compensation and the development of the case
law extending the circumstances - both as to foreseeability and the
relationships concerned in which such injury could be the subject of
compensation.
Both Counsel traced the case law from 1988 to the present day.   Ben
Hytner described the flow of the common law starting from the source
of the stream in 1988 to the deepest and widest stretch of the river
so far (McCloughlan -v- O'Brien 1982) and argued that that stream has
flowed in an inexorably straight direction gradually deepening and
widening the scope of the action for "nervous shock". Bill Woodward
QC for the Defendants, adopting the watery metaphor made great play
of the "flood gates" arguments namely that the current test cases or
some of them were an extension which would open the flood gates to
huge numbers of cases.
It is interesting to note that at the time of the hearing at least
only some 150 cases had been notified out of the millions who vould
have seen the match on television which certainly limits the flood
gates argument.
At the opening of the remoteness cases it was made clear that
whichever side succeeded in any particular case it was likely that
there would be an appeal and in all probability an appeal through the
Court of Appeal to the House of Lords. Once the decision is to hand
we will obviously look very carefully with Counsel at any cases where
the Defendants succeed and obtain full advice on the prospects of
appeal.
Equally the present indications are that in cases in which the
Plaintiff succeeds the Defendants have indicated that they intend to
appealT\ We will of course let you know in the event whether appeals
are lodged and in which categories.
       A

IMPORTjj^T
I woulcl remind you that these cases, as with the cases of those
injured inside the Pens, are covered by the agreement of last
December, which was incorporated in the Order of Steyn J of the 20th
December 1989 and that provided claims are notified by the 18th
December 1990 (subject,of course,to proof and medical evidence) they
will be accepted for payment in full if the argument on remoteness
sucpeeds.
Therefore, if you do have any clients who fall within the categories
covered by the remoteness test cases - i.e. where the MMI have not
yet agreed to pay - it is important that those claims are notified
before the December date so that they can be included for settlement
if the test case which covers the particular claim is found in favour
of the Plaintiffs either initially or following any subsequent
appeal.
Pre-Death Pain and Suffering
Three separate cases were taken in which damages under this head were
to be assessed. Initially we instigated proceedings in the case of
two of those who died, the two Hicks sisters. The two girls were
chosen because they represented in our view different levels of pain
and suffering. There was evidence that the younger girl was in
distress but lost consciousness at a fairly early stage, whereas the
elder girl was holding her sister in her arms for some little time
trying to support her and again obviously in distress.
The Insurance Company wanted a case taking where there was absolutely
no evidence either as to the time the deceased went into the Pen or
where they were in the pen and where no one had seen them in distress
or otherwise in the Pen. They named three appropriate cases and one
of those, Colin Wafer, was taken in addition.
Once again there were statements of witnesses before the Judge and
the only oral evidence was taken from one of the survivors, Ian
Clarke, who gave evidence of his own feelings and physical position
in the crush inside the pens.
Judgment in these cases should be given at the same time as the
remoteness cases and in this case we do not anticipate an appeal.
Wheregs, it is always dangerous to stick your neck out and guess the
way iiffwhich a Judgment will go, I would certainly hope that the
••base /line" of Colin Wafer's case, where there is absolutely no
evidence, would meet or exceed the £1,000 which has been on offer
from the Insurers and those cases where there is some evidence such
as the Hicks girls to be a higher figure.
One member has drawn to my attention some correspondence from the MMI
which would seem to give the impression that the Steering Committee
were recommending that the £1,000 on offer was an appropriate base
figure. That is of course not the case. The reason the test cases
had been taken to Court is to get a proper judicial valuation of this
aspect of the claim.
For those of you   who are acting in fatal cases I would refer you to
the terms of the   letter from the MMI which is contained in Bulletin
14a and that the   £1,000 is currently on offer subject to notification
by any Solicitor   acting in a fatal case that in their view the
circumstances of   the particular case warrant a higher figure.
The MMI put a deadline on this notification of the 31st August 1990.
As we consider it possible that all cases could be worth a higher
figure than £1,000 it would be wise to give that notification
immediately to the MMI if you have not already done so.
Once we have the Judgment then of course it will be simple to
determine (a) whether all cases carry a figure higher than £1,000 or
(b) whether there is additional evidence in the case of your ovn
clients which warrant a higher figure.
Psychiatric Reports
The Portsmouth team of Psychiatrists have been up to Liverpool on a
number of occasions and the backlog of appointments is easing. If
you have not already heard with an appointment for your client then
one should be available in the near future.
As soon as there are any further developments I will of course be in
touch with you.
All good wishes.
Yours sincerely,



MISS E M STEEL
