         HILLSBOROUGH             STEERING              COMMITTEE

                 c/o CastCe Chambers, Coo^Strcet, LiverpoolL2 9SM

                  <TeC: 051 2550628 f a x 051 236 0047 <DX 14100




                                                           10TH NOVEMBER 1989


F.A.O.




 Dear
RE:   HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 10

There have been a number of developments since I last wrote to you
most particularly in relation to the Lead civil actions which have
now been listed for hearing immediately after the Writ recess. The
date was infact incorrectly given in Open Court as the 11th June
1990.   We have now heard from the Court that the correct date is
the 19th June 1990 to tie in with the date the Court resumes.  The
hearing will be at Liverpool.

Conference with Counsel - Thursday the 7th December 1989

There will be a further Conference with Counsel to deal primarily
with civil liability and related matters at the Moot Hall, Faculty
of Law, Liverpool University on the 7th December and all Group
members and their clients who wish to attend will be very welcome.


The    arrangements will be as in the case of the last Conference
namely that we will hold two Conferences on that date: at 6.0 0pm
forSolicitors only and at   7.00pm for Solicitors and clients. Tea
and biscuits willbe available for those clients who arrive early
and,    as before, we will have    a short break between the two
Conferences to enableyou to meet up with your own clients.

If you wish to attend the Conference would you get in touch with
Ronnie Wright, Administrative Secretary, at the Law Library -who
will let you    havethe appropriate tickets for yourself       and
clients. A proforma is enclosed with this Bulletin.
V




    * •




We do not at this stage propose to hold a second Conference
covering the same matters in the South of England but, knowing that
travel may be difficult for some members and clients we will make a
very full note of the Conferences and circulate this with the next
Bulletin.

Civil Liability Lead Cases

At the Directions Hearing on the 26th October before Christopher
Rose J. at Manchester in addition to fixing the date of trial he
gave some additional directions including leave to amend the
Statement of Claim (which has been done) and leave to amend the
Defences. The full pleadings will be lodged in the Law Library and
available for inspection by members.

The Police alone amongst the Defendants were not willing to agree
that Lord Justice Taylor's report should be accepted as findings of
fact save insofar as they were challenged by the Defendants and
therefore the report although a relevant document is not a binding
one. The Judge however directed that the matter should proceed by
way of Notice to Admit facts which is currently underway and we
should shortly know those "facts" which are in dispute.

Counsel for the Police made an application for a stay            of
proceedings but happily that application was refused by the Judge.

Remoteness Cases

We are grateful for the very full response from members to the
remoteness questionnaires. The figures have now been collated and
the various categories of remoteness cases are being discussed with
Counsel and with the Defendants Solicitors to see which categories
are accepted and which categories are appropriate to be taken as
test cases immediately following the liability hearing.

There should be some news on this front shortly and, I hope, by the
time of the Conference with Counsel on the 7th.

Psychological Injury

The   team of Clinical Psychologists have now considered the
questionnaires and other documents submitted by you.   There has
been a meeting between some members of the Steering Committee and
the Local Team.   A Clinical Psychologist in the area where the
client lives has been designated in respect of each client
(thejf^^am have also been liaising with Clinical Psychologists
outside the immediate Merseyside area and specialists have been
allocated and briefed in respect of clients who are outside that
area. If the Psychologist having seen your client feels psychiatric
or neurological reports are required   they will let you know. We
can assist by recommending names if needed.

You will be receiving a separate letter from us giving details of
the Clinical Psychologist assigned to each of your clients.      You
should   contact    them to arrange      a suitable appointment for
examination and report (first appointments are available          in
November) and our letter will deal with the additional information
which they require.   If your client is receiving counselling it may
be helpful to them to let the counsellor know the date of the
appointment.

The fees apparently vary between £100 and £150 per report dependent
upon the work involved and fees should be discharged by return if
possible.   As you know the fee can be reclaimed by way of interim
disbursement from the Insurers once the medical report has been
disclosed to them.

I need hardly say that of course the   normal practice applies. We
are only obliged to disclose those reports on which we intend to
rely and therefore should you get an adverse report on any
particular client obviously that would not be disclosed and equally
that fee could not be reclaimed 1

Hillsborough Trust Fund

As you will know payments are now being made from the Hillsborough
Trust Fund.    In the case of infants any substantial payments are
being made on the basis that the money is placed in Trust for the
child or children in individual trust funds, the form of Trust Seed
having been settled by Counsel       on   instructions   from   the
Hillsborough Trust Fund Solicitors after consultation with us.

Christopher Rose J. although sympathetic to the reasons for the
application would not deal with approval of the Trust Deed as it
were in the abstract at Directions stage.      The Trust Deed as it
stands is in a form which is likely to be approved by the Court for
the receipt of damages save that the infant does not become
automatically entitled to capital at age 18 which would be
►




essential.   This can be covered by a separate Deed of Appointment
made under Clause 11 of the Trust Deed.

The Hillsborough Trustees are instructing Counsel to settle an
appropriate specimen Deed of Appointment to cover that point and I
will write more fully on this point together with a copy of the
specimen Deed once it is to hand - possibly in the next Bulletin.

The other matter which arises as a result of the payments made from
the fund is that in the case of those who are legally aided the
normal legal aid Rules will apply and these payments are of course
matters which your clients will be obliged to report to the legal
Aid Board.
Public Inquiry

We have now completed the written submission to the second part of
Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry compiled from the submissions sent in
by clients and from the Conference.      A copy of that document is
available at the Law Library. There has been no formal date given
for the publication of the final report - we have asked the
Secretary to the Inquiry to let us know when a date is firm.    The
estimated date is rumoured to be sometime in January 1990.

Inquest

The position here is still very fluid. The Coroner has not yet
fixed a date for the Inquest waiting until after the DPP has made a
decision as to any criminal charges following the investigations by
the West Midlands Police. It is not clear at this stage whether
the Inquest will be held before or after the civil proceedings.

There has been a meeting in Sheffield which a member of the
Steering Committee attended with Social Workers, a Coroner and
those who had been involved in the Zeebrugger and Kings Cross
Disasters. The emotional needs of clients at the time of the
Inquest (whenever that may be) are appreciated and arrangements
will be made to ease their trauma as much as possible.

For those of you directly instructed in fatal cases when the
details of the Inquests and Support Services are known we will
write directly with those details including contact telephone
numbers etc.
«




    I lcfels*. forward to seeing those of you who are able to attend the
    Conference at the Conference on the 7th December and will of course
    be in touch as soon as there is anything further to report on any
    particular aspect.

    All good wishes.

    Yours sincerely,




    MISS E M STEEL
                   PROFORMA


CONFERENCE WITH COUNSEL 7th DECEMBER 1989




WE WISH TO ATTEND THE ABOVE CONFERENCE




FIRM:......................... ..........

ADDRESS.(OR.DX),.. ....................



NAME(S ) OF SOLICITORS ATTENDING :




I WILL BE ACCOMPANIED BY THE FOLLOWING
CLIENTS
