         HILLSBOROUGH                  STEERING                COMMITTEE

                 c/o Castk Chambers, CookJ>tTcet, LiverpoolL2 SS9J T>X 14100
                             ref: 051 2SS062S T&K- 051 236 0047


         -A

                                                                  30th May 1989
                                                                  EMS/DW


F.A.O,




Dear

RE:      HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 3

There have been a number of developments on various matters since
the last Bulletin and it is probably simplest if I deal with these
under the separate heads.

Public Inquiry

This is continuing at Sheffield and at the time of writing we are
into the phase of Police evidence.   The transcripts of evidence
are available at the Law Library and where we have noticed that
witnesses are clients of individual Solicitors we have arranged to
let those Solicitors have copies of the particular evidence.

Although no time is being wasted there is still alot of evidence
to be taken and I suspect that the Inquiry may well continue
beyond the middle of June - the date given in the original time
table.   You may well have seen from the Press and certainly from
the transcripts that, largely as a result of Ben Hytner's cross
examination, there were some very useful admissions made by the
Chief Superintendant in charge of the Police operation and a
public apology given by him for the inference that the fans had
caused the deaths.

Conference with Counsel

154 Solicitors and clients (predominantly the relatives of those
who had died) attended the conference with Ben Hytner QC and Tim
King on Wednesday last when they reported on the position todate
and took a large number of questions and comments.

Certain specific matters were raised by clients and Solicitors at
that conference which have been taken up directly by Ben Hytnei
with Andrew Collins QC (Leading Counsel for the Inquiry) and on
others we have liaised with the Treasury Solicitors.

The position in respect of those points is as under :-

1.    A number of relatives were anxious to know precisely when
where and how those who died, died.     The Police enquiries into
this are continuing and this is a matter which will be dealt with
at the Inquests which currently stand adjourned.   We understand
that at the present time they have been able to establish with
certainty the position as far as 50 individuals are concerned and
their enquiries continue.

2. A number of relatives expressed a wish to see the uncut video
footage of the front of the pens to try to recognise individuals
and to satisfy themselves exactly what had happened.

The Treasury have agreed that there should be a showing of the
uncut video footage of the Leppings Lane end of the ground.    This
is for immediate relatives only.   They do give us the warning
that this lasts for many hours (you will appreciate that videos
from many sources were provided) and that it is extremely
harrowing.   The West Midlands police would welcome information
resulting from the identification of individuals on the terraces.

I would be glad if you would confirm with those of your clients
whose relations died whether they do wish to see the video and if
so whether there are any dates within the next two or three weeks
when it would be difficult or impossible for them to attend a
showing at Liverpool.   Please let me have the names and details
of those who would like to attend and we will make the necessary
arrangements.

We would strongly suggest - in view of the warning from the West
Midlands Police as to the nature of this footage - that if anyone
is under medical treatment or in receipt of counselling that they
should seek guidance from the Counsellor/Doctor concerned.

3. Interim death certificates only have been given todate. Full
death certificates are being obtained for the Coroner and
post-mortem reports have been given.   These matters can be and
will be dealt with at the Inquests.

  4. We were told of problems of errors in identification. The
  situation after the tragedy was very confused and it is unlikely
• that individual officers who gave incorrect information can be
  identified.  If there are any particular points on identification
  - which may well be relevant in the Inquiry in relation to the
  organisation generally - I would be glad if people could let me
  have details as soon as possible.

 5. Difficulty in obtaining copies of statements given to the West
 Midlands Police was mentioned by a number of people at the
 meeting.

 We have had an assurance that those statements will now be
 produced. Clients, or Solicitors on their behalf should write
 directly to
           V




»




          A,
                J. Mervyn Jones Esq., M.Sc,
                Assistant Chief Constable,
                West Midlands Police, Police Headquarters,
                Lloyd House,
                Colmore Circus, Queensway,
                Birmingham B4 6NQ.     (tele: 021-236-5000 ext:2025).

    We have been assured that in those cases copies of the statements
    will be supplied. As they may be useful to our Counsel in
    connection with the Inquiry I would be grateful if you could let
    me have copies once they are received.

    6. A number of people had complaints over insenitivity and
    incorrect behaviour of the South Yorkshire Police upto ten hours
    after the tragedy and also and separately complaints against the
    West Yorkshire Police for an insensitive approach when taking
    statements for the Inquiry and a predetermined attitude in respect
    of the Liverpool fans with a large number of questions as to
    drinking habits etc.

    Both of these matters will be dealt with separately from the
    Inquiry and we have been assured that full investigations will be
    made.   We have been asked to provide separate statements in
    respect of these incidents (I appreciate that in some cases
    clients have already included this aspect in their general
    statements about what happened on the day).   The statements
    should deal separately with any complaints against the Sheffield
    Police and with any complaints against the West Midlands Police.

    If your clients wish to make complaints I would be glad if you
    could let me have copies of their statements marked clearly either
    "Sheffield Police complaint" or "West Midlands Police complaint''
    and we will ensure that they are forwarded for investigation.

    7. A number of people were concerned that a limited number of
    supporters/relatives only have been called and that subsequently
    there has been evidence criticising the Liverpool fans.

    The Treasury Solicitors have assured us that they are happy to
    call further evidence at the final stage of the Inquiry from
    additional Liverpool supporters/relatives of the deceased and tiave
    invited us to suggest names.

    Obviously the number of additional witnesses will be limited. We
    have had copies of many statements from individual clients.   If
    there are any additional statements which we should have to
    consider please could you pass these through as soon as possible.

    Further Conference with Counsel
    It is clear from last Wednesday's conference that   it would be
    helpful to have a further conference later in the   Public Inquiiy
    and will be in touch with details as soon as this   has been
    arranged and also with details for those who wish   to attend of the
       I




      A
London Conference with Counsel.   This is unlikely to take place
before the end of the Public Inquiry.

With the intention of ensuring all proper information was given
whilst at the same time keeping the very natural emotions in
control, we suggested that questions should come from Solicitors
only.   In the event this did not happen and many moving and some
very emotional contributions came from clients, some of whom
clearly did not appreciate the nature of the Inquiry.    This has
caused distress to some clients present and it may be better at
the next Conference to restrict this to Solicitors - or certainly
to limit contributions to contributions from Solicitors.

Civil Liability

The Insurance Companies indicated at an early stage that they
would be prepared to meet members of the Steering Committee but
asked that this wait until part way through the Public Inquiry.
We are suggesting meeting in the week of the 7th June when their
attitude towards liability and apportionment of liability can be
determined and also whether in the light of the circumstances of
this tragedy more generous offers than the statutory minima will
be forthcoming and also to deal with such questions as interim
payments and interest.

We will report to you fully once the meeting has taken place and
at that stage give a recommendation as to the issue or otherwise
of proceedings (in the Liverpool District Registry). For the time
being we would recommend that pending that meeting it is not
necessary to issue Writs nor to make applications for legal aid.

We have had a futher meeting with the Legal Aid Board and will
write more fully on this aspect in the next Bulletin.

Psychological Trauma

Members of the Steering Committee have met with a number of
psychologists to discuss the best way of dealing with cases
arising from the Hillsborough Disaster.   The plan that is
envisaged is that clients will be referred to a clinical
psychology department in their own district of the Regional Health
Authority. Some work needs to be done on setting up the structure
of this and Solicitors are requested not to make any referrals or
to obtain reports until such time as the structure has been put in
place.   It is anticipated that this will be done by the end of
June.

It is likely that before going to see the psychologist, the client
will be asked to complete a questionnaire. Also, in certain
cases, it may be necessary to obtain the General Practitioner's
records, school records or other records and consents for these
purposes should be dealt with by the individual Solicitors and not
left to the psychologist to obtain.
              i



*..f




             4U
       The Steering Committee recommends that where a
       psychological/psychiatric assessment is necessary then the
       structure which is being set up should be used.   This will
       provide for some level of uniformity in reports and should, within
       the context of the size of the problem, speed things up as much as
       possible.

       Department of Social Security Treatment of lump sum payments

       The Minister made a statement in the House of Commons last week in
       relation to this.   The situation appears to depend on whether the
       lump sum is received by the client direct or in trust for an
       injured party or in trust for children.

       We are clarifying the position with the Department and will advise
       you further in the near future.

       Contribution towards irrecoverable costs

       A number of members have been asking when we would like the
       contribution of £100 mentioned at the first meeting of the Group
       to be paid.

       Although we trust and expect the vast majority Cif the work done
       both by the Steering Committee and by the Liverpool Law Society
       staff in connection with Hillsborough to be met from other sources
       it appears clear that there will be a proportion which may not be
       recoverable and which properly falls into the Solicitor/Client
       category.

       We would be grateful therefore if those who have not already
       contributed could let us have a cheque made out to the Liverpool
       Law Society where it will be kept on a separate account and if the
       short fall is less than the contributions received repayments will
       be made pro-rata.

       All good wishes.

       Yours sincerely,




       MISS E M STEEL
