\
\
    V
               HILLSBOROUGH                STEERING                 COMMITTEE

                        c/o Castte Chambers, Coof^Street, Liverpool L2 9 S tf

                         <Tel: 051 255 0628 fax: 051236 0047 'DX14100




                                                              26th September 1989
                                                              EMS/JM



        Dear
                                         BULLETIN        9_
        Civil Liability
        The next hearing for directions before Mr Justice Rose will be heard
        on 26th October 1989 and test cases l and 2 (those relating to Pens
        3 and 4) are well underway.
        The defences in the first test case (Pen 3) have now been received -
        save for the defence from the Consulting Engineers which is due today
        - and the defences in the second test case (Pen 4) should be
        delivered as soon as possible.

        As anticipated, the Defendants blame each other for various aspects
        of the disaster and no admissions of liability are made.
        The only controversial element in the Defence appears in that
        delivered by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. Paragraph 12
        states 'on the ground of public policy, this action does not lie
        against the First Defendant for the reaons given in Hill -v- Chief
        Constable of West Yorkshire, 1988, 2 Weekly Law Report 1049'.
        That of course was a House of Lords decision brought by the mother of
        one of the victims of Peter Sutcliffe. The central issue in that
        case was whether or not the police, in the course of their function
        of suppressing and/or investigating crime, owed a duty of care to a
        member of the public who suffered injury through the activities of a
        criminal. The House of Lords considered that on grounds of public
        policy, no such duty arose. That, however, was the second reason
        given by Lord Keith but the main part of the decision was set out by
        him in the following words

        "It has been said almost too frequently to require repetition that
        forseeability of likely harm is not itself a sufficient test of
        liability in negligence. Some further ingredient is invariably
        needed to establish the requisite proximity of relationship between
        the Plaintiff and Defendant and all of the circumstances of the case
must be carefully considered and analysed in order to ascertain
whether such an ingredient is present.11
The        of Lords took the view that there was no general duty of
calre^Swea to individual members of the public by the police to
prevent the escape, recapture or detection of an individual criminal.
It is perhaps interesting that the Defendants in this case have not
taken the course taken in the Hill case of issuing an application to
strike out the claim as disclosing no reasonable cause of action
pursuant to Order 18, Rule 19 before service of their Defence. They
have indicated that they may wish to take it as a preliminary point.
If you would like to read the defences yourself, we have arranged for
copies of the pleadings in each of the test cases to be at the
Liverpool Law Library (with the names of the Plaintiffs and Case
Numbers deleted) for the information of members of the Hillsborough
Solicitors Group only and as and when any new pleading arrives we
will make sure this is added and will not wait for the next
Bulletin!
We are having problems in identifying the ideal test case for the 3rd
test case - i.e. someone who was injured outside the ground as a
result of the crush. According to Lord Justice Taylor's report there
were 36 reported injuries outside the ground although it appears from
our enquiries that most of these people may also have sustained
injury later inside the ground as well.
If there are only a few cases where people have sustained minor
injuries outside the ground and not sustained more serious injuries
inside then it may not be worth taking a 3rd test case although the
solicitors for the police are anxious that liability and any
apportionment of liability should be established for the area outside
the ground.
Counsel thinks it possible that there could have been some injuries
outside the ground - in Leppings Lane, in the area immediately in
front of the perimeter gates. If you have a client who was inj ured
before going through those perimeter gates - whether the injuries are
serious or slight - would you please let me know, if possible, before
the end of the week.
We are therefore making as it were one last call to see whether there
is any client who sustained relatively serious injury in the crush
outside the ground. If you have a client who was for example
rendered unconscious or sustained a fracture as a result of tha-t
crush would you please let me know before the end of this week as we
will have to decide with Counsel whether to proceed with a 3rd "test
case and if the decision is that we will to have proceedings issued
and Statement of Claim delivered before the October Directions.
Applications to the Trust

As you know the Trustees are hoping to distribute the bulk of monies
in the Trust without undue delay and claims are currently being
considered. If any of your clients have not yet submitted claims we
would urge you to encourage them to do so at this stage.

As far as claims for those who were injured are concerned the
Trustees are seeking medical evidence and in some cases we know are
obtaining reports from the client's GP. If you do have on file a
report obtained for the purpose of the claim - particularly a more
derailed one than a report simply from the medical records - it would
obviously be helpful to your clients if that were forwarded with the
claiJp^jj^Mike Reddington for consideration by the Trustees Advisors.
                            Part 2 Enquiry
The Secretary to the enquiry tells us that Lord Justice Taylor hopes
to complete his report about the turn of the year and would find it
helpful if any written material could reach him as soon as possible.
Therefore if any of your clients have any further comments to make
could you please ensure that they are with us before 6th October.
Anything received after that date will be too late for inclusion with
our submissions.
As soon as there is anything further to report I will be in touch.
All good wishes,
Yours sincerely,




MISS E M STEEL
