     National Board of Forensic Medicine
     Department of Forensic Chemistry
     UNKOPING
     SWEDEN                                                             Linkoping 31 January 1998




   Ms Ann Adlington,
   Hillsborough Family Support Group,
   Pioneer Buildings,
   65/67 Dale Street,
   Liverpool, L2 2NS,
   UK

   Dear Ms Adlington,

   I am faxing you a preliminary report containing my review and opinion concerning the forensic
   toxicology results in the Hillsborough disaster. A final report with more graphs and discussion
   will be forwarded to you before the end of March. If this date is too late please let me know. The
   problem is I am scheduled to visit the USA to teach a course for forensic alcohol supervisors at
   Newport Beach, California and also to attend a forensic science conference in San Francisco.
   Accordingly, I will be away from my desk during the first two weeks in February.

   Evidently there are some problems in obtaining copies of the chromatographic traces for review
   to reach an opinion about the identification and quantitative analysis of alcohol, acetaldehyde and
   acetone. Nevertheless, perhaps you could obtain in writing from Dr. Forrest answers to the
   following questions;

    1      How many replicate determinations were made on each blood sample?

    2.     Was an allowance (deduction) made from the raw analytical result to compensate for
           inherent analytical and sampling variations?

    3      How many stationary phases were used for the chromatographic separations needed to
            identify ethanol, acetone, and acetaldehyde?

    4.     What were the names of these stationary phases?

    5.     How were the blood samples treated prior to analysis? What was the dilution ratio with
           internal standard and was a salting-out step included.

    6.     What was the chromatographic conditions used for analysis of acetone and acetaldehyde?
           Evidently these substances were analysed in a separate run under different conditions
           than used for alcohol.

    7.     Can the method distinguish between formaldehyde and acetaldehyde?

    8.     Was the equilibrium temperature 65°C as for analysis of ethanol?



Address:                                        Telephone:                              Telefax:
Department of Forensic Chemistry                + 46 13 12 98 80                        + 46 13 10 48 75
University Hospital
S-581 85 LinkOping
SWEDEN
                                                                                               2

9.     How was the quantitative analysis of acetaldehyde made and how were the acetaldehyde
       standards prepared? Where these made in water or a biological matrix?

10.    Have any of the analytical procedures been published and therefore subjected to peer-
       review?

Perhaps Dr. Forrest would be kind enough to provide answers to these questions before I make
my final report. Also it might be worthwhile to enquire whether or not Dr. Forrest’s laboratory
was accredited for post-mortem alcohol analysis or is currently accredited for this kind of work.

With best wishes,
Yours sincerely,



A.W. Jones, PhD,
Head of Alcohol Toxicology
Professor in Experimental Alcohol Research
                                                                    Linkoping 31 January 1998




Ms Ann Adlington,
Hillsborough Family Support Group,
Pioneer Buildings,
65/67 Dale Street,
Liverpool, L2 2NS,
UK




                             Review and Opinion
                                      Preliminary Report

                                               by

                               Professor A.W. Jones, PhD, DSc.

          Concerning Forensic Toxicology Results in the Hillsborough Disaster


I have reviewed various materials relevant to the inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster including
autopsy reports for many of the victims, transcript of evidence given by a statistician (Mr. J.P.
Nichols), various statements made by a toxicologist (Dr. A.R.M Forrest), a table listing the
concentrations of ethanol, acetone, and acetaldehyde determined in 94 autopsy blood samples
from the victims, a letter from Dr. Forrest to C.P. Dorries (H.M. Coroner) dated 2 December
1997, a letter from Dr. Forrest to Ann Adlington dated 16 January 1998.
        The key question that needs to be answered is whether the concentrations of alcohol
(ethyl alcohol), acetone, and acetaldehyde given in the toxicology report actually reflect the
antemortem concentrations of these substances in the victims or instead whether they might
reflect postmortem or analytical artefacts of some kind.

Findings
According to the autopsy reports blood samples were retained for toxicological analysis.
However, the site used to obtain the blood sample, the mode of sampling, and the volume taken
and the condition of the specimen were not stated in the reports. According to Dr. Forrest s letter
to H.M. Coroner dated 2 December, 1997, the blood was sent to his laboratory in sample tubes
 containing fluoride-oxalate (the volume of the tubes, the volume of specimen, and amount of
 chemical preservative in each are not mentioned). On page 2454 of a statement by Dr. Forrest,
 he noticed that the blood samples were contained “in plastic 5 milliliter containers usually used
for blood samples takenfor blood glucose analysis. This poses o f itself a number ofproblems.
 I agree with this standpoint for several reasons besides those given by Dr. Forrest.
                                                                                                   2


       First, the amount of fluoride in blood-glucose tubes is normally 20 mg per 5 mL tube
       (0.4%). This is not enough for preserving non-sterile autopsy blood samples and instead
       1-2% fluoride should be used or 50-100 mg per 5 mL tube should be used. The amount
       of fluoride present in blood-glucose tubes might not be sufficient to inhibit the action of
       microorganisms and yeasts likely to be present in postmortem blood. It cannot be
       excluded therefore that small amounts of ethanol might have been produced in these
       tubes after the autopsy during the storage period of several days before they were
       analysed.

       Second, plastic tubes and sometimes also the stoppers used on them are known to liberate
       volatiles into blood samples and this can interfere with the toxicological analysis of some
       compounds.

        Third, the risk of loss of alcohol into the air space above closed tubes is exaggerated
        because at room temperature the blood/air partition coefficient of ethanol is very strongly
        in favour of the liquid phase by a factor of several thousand to one.

        Fourth, it would be useful to document who was responsible for transfer of blood into
        these plastic tubes, evidently it was not the pathologists.

In two of the autopsy reports for Andrew Brooks and Gordon Horn, it states that blood was
 “taken form the heart for alcohol estimation. ” This is the worst possible source of blood for
alcohol determination because of the risk of postmortem diffusion of any traces of alcohol that
might remain in the stomach or by aspiration of vomit that might contain traces of alcohol (see
Pounder and Yonemitsu, Postmortem absorption of drugs and ethanol from aspirated vomitus -
an experimental model, published in Forensic Science International, Vol.51,1991, pp 189-195.
Furthermore, the close anatomic proximity of the heart to the gut facilitates the influx of
gastrointestinal bacteria to the inner organs such as the heart and its blood supply. For
determination of ethanol in autopsy work, blood from the femoral vein is recommended
whenever this is possible. Because the other autopsy reports fail to specify the source of blood
submitted for toxicological analysis, it cannot be exclude that these were also obtained from
the heart. I am not a pathologist and therefore refrain from making any other comments about
the autopsy reports except to state that evidently no other body fluids were taken for alcohol
analysis, e.g. bladder urine or vitreous fluids from the eyes.
         From the transcripts it is clear that resuscitation attempts were made on the victims
presumably starting at the football ground and continuing at the emergency service and intensive
 care departments of the general hospital. Whether any drugs were administered it start the heart
 beating and how these drugs were prepared, e.g. if they were dissolved in organic solvents is an
 important consideration. Furthermore, administration of intravenous fluids can sometimes cause
 problems with later toxicological analysis of alcohol and other volatiles. In short the therapeutic
 treatment and attempts at resuscitation and how this might have differed among the victims might
 be significant in helping to interpret the results of toxicological analysis. Finally, were there any
 open bottles or containers with organic solvents (e.g. formaldehyde) during the autopsy
 procedures in the large temporary mortuary at the ground, because the risk of contaminating
 biological specimens with extraneous solvents is often underestimated.
                                                                                                   3


Toxicological analysis of blood samples
         According to the transcripts of Dr. Forrest’s evidence and his letter to H.M. Coroner dated
2 December 1997, the blood samples were analyzed by headspace gas chromatography. I confirm
that this method of analysis is used worldwide in forensic and toxicology laboratories for the
qualitative and quantitative analysis of volatile substances (alcohol, acetone etc.) in biological
samples from living persons and from dead bodies. However, the analytical procedures differ
widely from laboratory to laboratory in terms of method of sample preparation, e.g. dilution with
internal standard (volume and kind of standard), chromatographic operating parameters,
equilibrium temperatures, method to eliminate matrix effects (e.g. salting-out), and method of
standardization of detector response. The choice of an alcohol calibration standard at such a high
concentration as 200 mg/dL to make a quantitative analysis of very low concentrations (10-20
mg/dL) as in this material is baffling. Moreover only a single-point calibration seems to have
been performed. Not enough details of Dr. Forrest’s particular method are available to me to
make a detailed assessment - saying that his method is similar to the one used at the UK Home
Office laboratories is no validation of the analytical procedures used by him. I presume that Dr.
Forrest’s laboratory is accredited for performing postmortem toxicology and in particular
blood-alcohol analysis. Information such as accuracy, precision, limits of detection and
quantitation and inherent specificity of the method used to analyse blood from victims in the
Hillsborough disaster cannot be adequately reviewed and have apparently not been published in
 a peer-reviewed scientific journal. Citing a method coefficient of variation of 2.8% is not so
 informative - is this derived from analyzing water-standards or blood-standards or actual case
 blood specimens? A key piece of information is the magnitude of differences in results for
 duplicate determinations on each of the 94 blood samples in this case. Without making duplicate
 determinations one cannot exclude a gross error or blunder in the single assay. Hence the number
 of determinations made on each blood specimen is important to ascertain.
          In his letter to H.M. Coroner dated 2 December 1998, Dr. Forrest states that his technique
  “is specific for measurement o f ethanol (ethyl alcohol) in the sample. ” Unfortunately, he does
 not enlarge on how this specificity was guaranteed, that is, the number of different
 chromatographic systems used to analyze the blood samples for alcohol. Good laboratory
 practice in postmortem toxicology requires that autopsy specimens are analysed with at least two
 different methodologies or by one methodology such as gas chromatography but using two
 different materials to pack the columns (stationary phases). This furnish two different retention
 times for ethanol and helps to ensure correct identity of the particular substance being analyzed.
 Analyzing blood-ethanol in autopsy materials with only one column packing material is not
  a recommended practice because of the limited selectivity obtained and risk for
  interferences. The way the blood samples were treatment prior to analysis, that is amount of
  dilution with internal standard is not mentioned. The use of n-propanol, the internal standard,
  is commonly seen when blood from living subjects is analyzed, although this is less appropriate
  for autopsy work because this straight chain 3-carbon alcohol might be formed in putrefied
  tissues or decomposed bodies thus complicating the analysis.
           The reliable quantitative analysis of acetaldehyde in blood is not easy and the preparation
  and validation of the known strength standard solutions needed to calibrate the instrument is
  difficult. I cannot accept that the high concentrations of blood-acetaldehyde in the report reflect
  in any way the concentrations in-vivo during life. It is my opinion that these acetaldehyde
  levels reflect some kind of postmortem or analytical artefact. Another possibility is that
                                                                                                 4

acetaldehyde is produced as a consequence of the mode of death - suffocation and crushing -
which might have facilitated the spread of bacteria from the colon. Some recent research
indicates that colonic bacteria are a rich source of acetaldehyde even in living subjects.
         Finally the chain of custody of the blood specimens, the storage conditions after sampling
and the time delay form autopsy to when they were analyzed needs to be carefully investigated
and documented. Without more details of the analytical procedures used by Dr. Forrest to arrive
at the results - just to state by headspace gas chromatograph - is not satisfactory and his results
must therefore be taken at face value. Alcohol (ethyl alcohol) was not determined in any other
postmortem specimens and no independent markers of recent drinking were investigated such
as ethyl glucuronide a specific metabolite of ethanol. In my opinion the absence of corroborating
evidence of antemortem ingestion of alcohol such as presence and concentration in urine or
vitreous humor makes the forensic toxicology results questionable. The blood-alcohol
concentration alone might be satisfactory in clinical medicine when dealing with specimens from
living subjects, but this is not the case in postmortem toxicology.

Blood-alcohol concentrations
Figure 1 shows a frequency distribution of blood-alcohol concentrations in the victims of the




                 50-1                                                         -50
                 45    -
                                                                              -45
                 40    -
                                                                              -40
                 35    -
                                                                              -35
                 30    -
                                                                              -30
               8 25
                 "     -
                                                                              -25
               £ 20 -                                                         -20
                     15-
                                                                              -15
                     10:                                                      -10


                                              100          150         200
                                      Blood-Alcohol, mg/dL
              Figure 1: Frequency distribution of blood-alcohol concentration in
              victims of the Hillsborough disaster

Hillsborough disaster. This graph was drawn from the results sent to me as a data file. Shown in
this way, one sees immediately that the vast majority of the victims (N = 50 or 53%) have a
blood-alcohol content of zero or less than 10 mg/dL and 4 others are less than 20 mg/dL. These
concentrations are so low that in autopsy work they should be considered negligible. These
results provide no tangible evidence of ingestion of alcohol before death. I strongly disagree with
Dr. Forrest’s statement that 10 mg/dL “is the sort o f thing that one might get if one had a couple
o f pints the night before. ” This statement has no basis of fact because the alcohol from drinking
a couple of pints the night before would have been completely cleared form the blood in the early
                                                                                                   5

hours of the morning - the accident occurred 10-12 hours later, that is, early afternoon. Although
these low concentrations (10 and 20 mg/dL) are measurable in blood by headspace gas
chromatography, it is my opinion that without corroborating evidence provided by presence of
alcohol in an independent biological specimens, such as urine or vitreous, these low levels lack
any medicolegal significance. The problems and pitfalls of trying to interpret low autopsy blood-
alcohol concentrations was highlighted in a recent paper by Levine et al. (Interpretation of low
postmortem concentrations of ethanol, which was published in Journal of Forensic Sciences, Vol
38, 1993, pp 663-667). These authors are of the opinion that interpreting levels less than 50
mg/dL can be complicated by postmortem ethanol formation. The blood-alcohol results below
this threshold in victims of the Hillsborough disaster should be interpreted with great caution
without the supporting evidence provided by analysis of vitreous humor or urine. In short low
concentrations could easily reflect postmortem formation of ethanol.
          Bladder urine and vitreous humor are body fluids widely used in postmortem toxicology
as specimens for the analysis of alcohol because of the considerably lower risk of postmortem
 synthesis of ethanol in these specimens. The lack of a substrate (glucose) in urine in healthy
individuals and the remoteness of the eyes from influx of bacteria from the gut makes it less
 likely that alcohol can be synthesized in urine or vitreous after death. It is important to note that
 a corpse does not have to be decomposed and putrefied for small amounts of ethanol to be
 synthesized postmortem - a combination of time, temperature, availability of substrate, and mode
 of death are important variables. On the other hand, finding a close agreement between the
 alcohol concentrations in blood, urine, and/or vitreous would validate beyond a reasonable doubt
 that the blood alcohol in excess of 20 mg/dL indicate antemortem ingestion and not postmortem
 formation. Without corroborative evidence, it is my opinion that those fatalities with a
 blood-alcohol concentration below 20 mg/dL should be considered alcohol-free. Those cases
 with blood-alcohol between 20-50 mg/dL should be interpreted with great caution and the
 victims can be given the benefit of the doubt, i.e. that alcohol had not been consumed
 before the accident.
          Also of note is that only 15 Individuals (16%) had blood-alcohol concentrations above
 80 mg/dL, which corresponds to the statutory limit in UK for driving a motor vehicle. The two
 highest blood-alcohol concentrations were 172 mg/dL (a man aged 21) and 177 mg/dL (a man
 aged 29) and I must admit that even without corroborating evidence it seems likely that these
 individuals had consumed alcohol before the disaster. Seven of the victims aged from 17-34 y
 had blood-alcohol concentrations over 100 mg/dL. Again it seems likely that these individuals
  might have been drinking before the disaster. Eight other individuals had blood-alcohol
  concentrations between 90 and 99 mg/dL and their ages ranged from 18-45 y.
          Information is not available whether or not the spectators at the football match were
  searched for concealed alcoholic drinks before they entered the ground. This might be important
  because drinking from a can of lager (4% v/v alcohol or 3160 mg/dL alcohol) or taking a sip of
  whisky (40% v/v alcohol or 31600 mg/dL alcohol) just before the accident would produce a high
  concentration of alcohol in the stomach contents. Thus aspiration of vomitus, which is not
  unusual in deaths from traumatic asphyxia, (see Professor Usher’s statement) if this contains high
  concentrations of alcohol from the stomach might be expected to facilitate postmortem diffusion
  of alcohol from the lungs to the heart. The positioning of the body after death and the mode of
  handling and transport are also important things to consider when post-mortem diffusion of
  alcohol and other drugs become an issue.
                                                                                                6

Blood acetaldehyde concentrations.
Figure 2 shows a frequency distribution of blood-acetaldehyde concentrations in the specimens
from the Hillsborough victims. Trace amounts of acetaldehyde are normally present in body
fluids in living subjects and this substance is also produced by numerous strains of bacteria and
microbes. Moreover, acetaldehyde is produced when alcohol (ethyl alcohol) is metabolized in
the body. Acetaldehyde is a highly toxic and chemically reactive agent and binds to proteins and
other endogenous substances. Studies have shown that the concentrations of free-acetaldehyde
in blood during the metabolism of ethanol are so low that they are close to the limits of detection
by the available methods of analysis (< 1 |imol/L or 0.044 mg/L). It is also known that
acetaldehyde can disappear from blood and also be produced in blood after sampling the net
effect is however a post-sampling production of acetaldehyde especially if ethanol is present in
the blood sample. The commonly accepted mechanism for this in-vitro production of
acetaldehyde is through nonenzymatic oxidation of some of the ethanol content as outlined by
 Dr. Forrest.                                                                                     .
          All analytical toxicologists know that interpreting the concentrations of acetaldehyde in
 samples of whole blood submitted for analysis whether from living or dead subjects and
 especially if the specimens are stored for some time before analysis is not easy. Accordingly, it
 is difficult to know what the results in figure 2 actually mean in terms of antemortem blood-
 acetaldehyde levels. Most concentrations were zero or below 5 mg/L (113 |amol/L) but even 5
 mg/L is astonishingly high compared with those concentrations generally accepted to exist in-
 vivo during ethanol metabolism. This leads me to conclude that the concentrations of blood
 acetaldehyde in victims of the Hillsborough disaster represent some artifactual source, either
 analytical or postmortem or both. The blood-ethanol and blood-acetaldehyde concentrations were
 positively correlated, Pearson's r = 0.57 (N = 94) and although this figure was statistically
 significant it is a rather weak association with only 32% of the variance shared between the two
 variables. When all cases with zero blood-ethanol were removed from the material the correlation
 was much less (r = 0.30, r2 = 0.09, N = 53). When all blood-ethanol concentrations below 10


                    55-                                                        55
                    5 0 -1
                    45-                                                        45
                                                                               40
               x    4° :
               £    35-                                                        35
               ^    SO­
               S’   25-                                                        25
                                                                               20




                                    20     30    40    50   60               70
                                    BIood-Acetaldehyde mg/L
              Figure 2: Frequency distribution of blood-acetaldehyde concentrations
              in victims of the Hillsborough disaster.
                                                                                              7

mg/dL were eliminated the correlation between blood-ethanol and blood-acetaldehyde was even
lower (r = 0.155, r2 = 0.024, N = 44). This reinforces my opinion that something must be
radically wrong with the blood-acetaldehyde results because one would expect a strong positive
association between these two variables if acetaldehyde was derived from ethanol in the blood.
The reason why Dr. Forrest has chosen to use non-parametric rank correlation methods
to assess correlations between quantitative variables is not clear to me. Moreover, at blood-
alcohol concentrations above 10 mg/dL, insignificant correlations for ethanol vs age (r = 0.18),
and acetaldehyde vs age (r=0.007) were found. Also the acetone vs age correlation for the whole
material (N = 94) had a Pearson’s r = 0.014, again being close to zero.

Blood-acetone concentrations
Figure 3 shows the frequency distribution of blood-acetone concentrations in victims of the
Hillsborough disaster. Acetone is a well known product of metabolism and is one of the three
ketone bodies (acetoacetate, B-hydroxybutyrate, and acetone), and acetone is produced by
decarboxylation of acetoacetate. Acetone is present in blood of normal healthy individuals at a
mean concentration of about 1.6 mg/L, median 1.3 mg/L (N = 288) and the levels might range
from 0.15 to 15 mg/L (see Jones et al. Concentrations of acetone in venous blood samples from
drunk driver, type-1 diabetic outpatients and healthy blood donors, Journal of Analytical
Toxicology, Vol. 17,1993, pp 182-185).
        Most of the concentrations of acetone in figure 3 are very much higher than the highest
observed in 288 healthy blood donors which was 15 mg/L. Prolonged fasting, hyperglycemia in
poorly treated diabetes mellitus, vomiting, as well as strenuous exercise and stress are well
known conditions that cause an increase in the concentration of circulating ketone bodies and
high blood-acetone concentrations. In emergency situations the body turns to the catabolism of
lipids as an additional source of energy. I consider therefore that the elevated blood acetone
concentrations in victims of the Hillsborough disaster reflect the manner and mode of death
- the profound panic and stress reaction caused by suffocation, the fight to survive, the
drive for oxygen, and the fear of being crushed to death.
         If the blood-acetone concentrations reported are correct this information would be
worthwhile to publish in a medical journal to illustrate the range of blood-acetone in such


                    1 5 -f                                                  15



                                                                            10



                                                                            5
                i


                                                                          0
                      ~0         20        40        60        80       100
                                      Blood-Acetone, mg/L
                Figure 3: Frequency distribution of blood-acetone concentrations
                in victims of the Hillsborough disaster.
                                                                                                 8

extreme pathological situations. Only by publishing results of new findings in open peer-
reviewed scientific journals can we hope to spread information to our colleagues.

Conclusions
The most contentious issue in the toxicology report from the Hillsborough disaster seems to be
the results of the blood-alcohol concentration. In particular, whether these reflect pre-accident
ingestion of alcohol and the likelihood of alcohol-induced impairment of body functioning. I
have reached the following preliminary conclusions about the toxicological analysis until more
information is made available about the procedures used to analyse alcohol, acetone, and
acetaldehyde in post-mortem blood samples.

1.     Taking the blood specimens for determination of alcohol from the heart instead of a
       peripheral vein was an unfortunate decision.

2.     Failure to obtain specimens of bladder urine or vitreous humor or both for alcohol
       analysis was an obvious mistake if the results of blood-alcohol analysis were to be given
        evidential value as indicative of antemortem ingestion of alcohol and impaired
       performance.

3.     Interpreting low postmortem blood-alcohol concentrations (< 20 mg/dL) and perhaps
        even those as high as 50 mg/dL as reflecting the concentration in the body at the time of
        death is unjustified without corroborating and supporting evidence provided by analysis
        of vitreous or urine.

4.     Calculating the amount of alcohol in the body at the time of death and the amount
        ingested is not a recommended practice especially at low blood-alcohol concentrations
        observed in most of the victims of the Hillsborough disaster.

5.     Inteipreting the blood-acetone concentrations without knowledge of the concentration of
        other ketone bodies e.g. acetoacetate and B-hydroxybutyrate is not easy. However
        metabolic disturbances and ketoacidosis seems likely as a consequence of the panic
        reaction prior to death resulting in stress and adrenaline-induced lipolysis. Ketone bodies
        are products of fat catabolism.

6.     The abnormally high blood-acetaldehyde concentrations are difficult to rationalize and
       probably reflect some postmortem or analytical artifact. One explanation might be an
       increased production of acetaldehyde in the gut owing to the manner of death through
       lack of oxygen and the state of anoxia. Also possible contamination of blood specimens
       with solvents should be considered.

7.     Throughout all transcripts sent to me, much too much emphasis has been placed on the
       results of blood-alcohol analysis and either directly or indirectly what these mean in
       terms of impairment of performance and behaviour. Attempts to translate these blood-
        alcohol concentrations into pre-accident drinking practices of the victims are seriously
        flawed. The relationship between blood-alcohol concentration, amount of alcohol
        consumed, and the associated impairment of body functioning shows great individual
                                                                                                      9

              variation. The insinuation that many of the victims were drunk (BAC > 80 mg/dL) at the
              time of the disaster and thus too impaired through drink to respond to a novel situation
              and that this played some role in their death is unjustified. Without supporting evidence
              provided by analysis of vitreous humor or bladder urine, in my opinion correct
              interpretation of the blood-alcohol concentrations in victims of the Hillsborough disaster
              is a difficult task.

V   a i i w




A.W. Jones, PhD, DSc.,
Head of Alcohol Toxicology
Professor in Experimental Alcohol Research
