f




                                                                                     9 B U C K IN G H A M GATE

                                                                                       LONDON      SW1E 6JP



    071-828 1558



     Mrs Ann Williams


      Merseyside

                                                                                        20 March 1996




        JL»_r
      The Attorney General has asked me to examine in detail your application made under section
      13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for authority to apply to the High Court for an order directing
      a fresh inquest in relation to your son, Kevin. This is in accordance with s.l(l)(c) of the Law
      Officers Act 1944.


      May I extend my deepest sympathy at your tragic loss which has caused so much anguish.
      As a parent myself I understand only too well how you feel.


      Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 applies when an inquest has been held and "by reason
      o f fraud, rejection o f evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f enquiry, the
      discovery o f new facts or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable in the interests o f justice that
      another inquest should be held".


      I have given careful consideration to your application including the material submitted with
      your Memorial and the representations made in your letter. However, I regret that I have
      come to the conclusion that there is nothing in the new evidence submitted which would
      justify the authorising of any further application to the High Court for a new inquest. I have
      made my decision on the grounds that the application would have no reasonable prospect of
                     !
      establishing that it was necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh inquest to
      be held. I recognise and admire your relentless and persistent search for the truth, and I took
into account, and recognise the importance of, your wish to have the fullest possible
information about the precise circumstances of Kevin’s death.    I must, however, consider
these matters in the context of the statutory framework within which coroners are required
to work and the questions which the law requires to be answered. An application cannot be
authorised under s. 13 in the hope that further information may be elicited unless it could
possibly have a bearing on the legal issues to be considered by any further inquest.   I fear
that I have reached the conclusion that the new evidence you have submitted will not have
such a bearing on the legal issues.


I realise that this decision will be extremely disappointing to you but I can assure you that
your request has been considered with the greatest of care.
