                                                        For information Oflty

      ROTHERHAM           GENERAL        HOSPITALS


                                                                 .:
                                                                  '«



              Department of Histopathology
           Rotherham District General Hospital
                     Moorgate Road    <V ;
                  ROTHERHAM S60 2UD U.K. ■

                           Tel: Rotherham (01709) 820000 Ext 5246
                           Fax: 01709 - 824019


Consultant Histopathologist & Cytopathologist
DR. D.N. SLATER BMedSci MBChB FRCPath
DITS/OK
17th July 1995

Mr. C.P. Dorries,
HM Coroner,
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD S3 7ET


Dear Mr. Dorries,
Re:   Kevin WILLIAMS (Deceased)

Many thanks for your recent telephone   call     relating   to         your
letter of the 2nd June 1995.

I note that your letter deals with two queries placed by Mrs.
Ana   Williams in relation to the Coroners After Inquest
Certificate.

The queries, in essence, centre around two areas.
1. Part of the body injured.
I sympathise with your comment that there may be some argument
as to where the chest begins and the neck ends. Certa^-rfly,
however, the 'thoracic inlets— is_vzell defined in terms of the
first rib. For this reason, TT~ftriiy. support Mrs. Ann Williams'
comment that the most appropriate designation for the part of
the body injured is 'neck' rather than 'chest1.
2. Type of injury.
You will be appreciative frommy autopsy report on Kevin that I
used the word 'compression'. The differences between the word
'crush' and 'compression' are difficult to be definitive about
and both,    without doubt, lie on a spectrum depending on the
force involved. Accordingly, accuracy with regard to the type
of injury suffered is clearly more equivocal. For this reason,
v£do / n 6 t fegard - t h ^ r w o r d V 'crush1 as wholly inappropriate.
 Sleaf ^ : however, ;if the word 'chest' is being altered, it may
 be 'that there would be leniency to                 alter  'crush'   to
 'compression' to lessen the distress that Mrs. Williams clearly
 experienced in relation to this point.

If I can be of any further help in relation           to   this,   then
pleased do not hesitate to contact me.
   ►

Kind regards,
Yours sincerely,




D.N. SLATER
Consultant Histopathologist
