          ILLSBOROUGH                      STEERING              COMMITTEE

                      c /o   Castk Chambers, CoofiStrcet, LiverpoolL2 9S0<

                        leC: 05l 2550628 Jo*: 051236 0047 (DX14100

                                                                      30th November 1989
                                                                      EMS/DW



F.A.O.




Dear
RE:      HILLSBOROUGH GROUP - BULLETIN 11

There has      been          a   very     important        development       since   our last
Bulletin.

Following a without prejudice approach from the South Yorkshire
Police Authority and their Insurers last week we have today
received a letter formally putting forward proposals to settle the
vast majority of civil claims arising out of the Hillsborough
tragedy.

The proposals are put forward on behalf of the First Defendants
only and without agreement having been reached between the
respective Defendants as to liability and as to any apportionment
of liability.

Bor that reason and because the First Defendants (the Police)
specifically wish to reserve their right to pursue a claim for
recovery    against the other Defendants they make no formal
admission of liability.   The claims however will be settled on a
full liability basis and, if terms are agreed, then the spas
accepted will be accepted in full and final settlement of each
individual client’s claims arising as a result of the Hillsborough
Disaster and they will assign any claim against other Defendants
to the Chief Constable to enable the claims between Defendants to
be pursued.
-r y*
Their*\roposal is that they would settle on a full liability basis
all injury claims sustained by those in Pens 3 or 4.

They would also settle on a full liability basis all nervous shock
cases within the categories on our questionnaire l to 4 (but in
the case of categories 3 and 4 only in respect of spouses and
children) and category 15.

In all those cases the principles of settlement would be as in any
other case namely on consideration of the medical evidence and
proof of loss. In addition to the damages jinterest in accordance
with the normal principles would be paid,plus interest on general
damages (as previously agreed) back to the 15th April 1989 or - in
the case of clients joining the Group after the 31st July - back
to the date of so joining.   Costs and disbursements would be paid
in addition.

If claims are capable of quantification at        this     stage^ and
settlement is agreed early payment can be made.

In appropriate cases application can be made for interim     payments
which will be considered as in any other case.

If agreement cannot be reached in any particular case then a
procedure should be agreed for early assessment of damages either
by Court or by arbitration.

In respect of all nervous shock cases other than those     specified
above the First Defendants would not seek to pursue any    arguments
on liability as far as the Plaintiffs are concerned but    currently
contend that the claims are too remote and any argument    would be
solely on that point.

They state that in any case where they are satisfied that the
clients claim is nottoo remote they would meet those claims on a
full liability basis  as setout above.

We are seeking to      agree in any event the most appropriate and
expeditious way of bringing the remoteness cases before the  Court
for an early decision as to which categories are within scope and
which are too remote.

We will be sending out further questionnaires in those cases which
fall in the disputed categories within the next few days and would
be glad of an urgent reply so that the most appropriate cases   can
be chosen as test cases and pursued vigorously.

Counsel is considering this aspect and we will have further
discussion on the most appropriate way of dealing with this and
will be able to report to you more fully at the Conference fixed
for the 7th.
As far as the two current Lead Actions are concerned the First
Defendants and their Insurers have confirmed that these claims
will of course be met in full and that they will pay the costs
including an indemnity in respect of any order for costs against
the Plaintiff in respect of the remaining Defendants should such
an order be sought and be made.

The only clients who are not covered by the proposals are those
individuals who suffered injury outside the ground - i.e. inside
the perimeter gates but before reaching the terraces or stands.
From our enquiries it seems that there are relatively few such
claims but if your client falls into this category then the claim
should be immediately and separately dealt with through the
Municipal Mutual who, if they agree that there would be liability
on someone, will pay the claim on a full liability basis and on
the same conditions as above.

Whereas we, and Counsel, will be in a position to discuss these
proposals further with you at the Conference on the 7th I wanted
you to have this information as soon as possible.

Subject to ensuring that any loose ends are well and truely tied
and to agreeing a speedy procedure for dealing with the remoteness
claims it seems that these proposals should lead to early and
proper settlement of your clients claims and we are making
application to Steyn J as soon as possible to notify him, to
retain the fixed dates 19th June to deal with the outstanding
remoteness cases and to obtain approval of the Hillsborough Trust
Fund Trust Deed where appropriate.

If you are unable to come to the meeting and wish to let me have
your views in writing or have any queries on which you require
further information do please get in touch with me as soon    as
possible and, if possible, by Monday the 4th December 1989.

Every good wish.

Yours sincerely,




MISS E M STEEL




                      /
