                        L S B O R O U G H       S T E E R I N G        C O M M I T T E E
/          >v



                              c/o Castle Chambers, CookJ>treet, LiverpoolL2 9S9{
                %               Tel: 051 255 0628 Ja^: 051 236 0047 <DX14100




                                                                             16TH JANUARY 1990
                                                                             EMS/DW

          -----                                                                    -M«mo
    F .A .O .       n




    Dear


    RE;             HTT.T.qROHOTJGH GROUP -     RTTT.T.TCTTW 1 3

    Further to the Bulletin of the 29th December there have been one
    or two developments since that time. I also write to ask those of
    you who are acting for clients whose claims are not automatically
    covered under the current agreement and therefore where settlement
    will depend upon the outcome of the "remoteness test cases" to let
    us have certain information as soon as possible so that the time
    table laid down by the Judge can be met.
    Extension of Categories of Claim accepted bv the Defendant
    I am pleased to say that since the original Agreement the
    Municipal Mutual Insurance have now agreed to include for payment
    those cases where nervous shock was suffered by a child who was
    present at Hillsborough in another part of the ground and whose
    parent suffered death or injury in Pen^3^or^4^
    Legal Aid

    We have now had confirmation from the Legal Aid Board that all
    payments made from the Hillsborough Trust Fund are to be
    disregarded in assessing eligibility for legal aid. This will
    particularly affect those clients whose claims have not yet been
    accepted for payment under the Agreement.
Payments made in Trust

As you know in certain cases - those of infants, the disabled and
in the case of certain adults - payments are being made by the
Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal to be placed in trust
and Solicitors acting in such cases have been supplied by the
Trustees with a copy of the appropriate Trust Deed which has been
settled by Counsel, Mr Robert Ham.
As far as the civil claims are concerned the Court has authority
to approve payment of damages in to a Trust in the case of infants
(but not in the case of the disabled) and therefore, as you lenow,
there is a hearing in one of the test cases before Steyn J on the
22nd instant for approval of the draft trust deed in conjunction
with a Deed of Appointment as an appropriate Trust for the receipt
of damages in an infants case. At that hearing Mr Ham and Mr
Hytner will both be attending.
As far as all the Trusts are concerned it is recommended that the
Trustees of each individual trust should appropriately include a
member of the family and also a Solicitor.   The Trustees and we
are well aware that many of us whose practice is substantially or
exclusively in litigation may not be experienced in trust matters.
In such cases a fellow partner who has the necessary experience
should be appointed or alternatively the partner dealing with the
matter be appointed as one of the trustees but that an additional
trustee - possibly an accountant with experience of administering
small trusts - should be included as a trustee.

The other matter which has concerned the Hillsborough trustees is
that in the case of some of the less substantial trusts
administration costs could represent a high proportion of income
unless special steps are taken to avoid this and they consider
that costs could be minimised by the trustees of the new trusts
investing in a limited range of safe investments giving a suitable
spread of risk.

Unless your firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of
investment business (and I note that some of the firms in our
Group are not) then you are not of course able to give advice on
investment.
The Trustees of the Disaster Appeal are offering assistance to the
                                                \




   %

Trustees of these individual trusts in connection with the initial
investment in two separate ways :-


1.    The Trustees have obtained favourable terms for investments
in any of the funds managed by M & G Fund Managers.   The effect
of this would be to eliminate any initial charge or commission
effectively giving a discount of three and a half percent on the
total invested. Any handling fees to meet actual administration
costs would be met for the initial investment by the Fund.

2.   The Trustees have also made arrangements for advice on the
initial investment to be provided to the Trustees of the
individual trusts at the Funds expense.

If any of the Trustees want to take advantage of these provisions
then they should get in touch with Hike Reddington, the Trus-t Fund
Manager directly at P.O. Box 220 Liverpool L69 2PN.
I should stress that the advice funded by the Trust Fund relates
of course to the initial investment only. That will be given in
relation to the size of the Fund as it then stands - i.e. the
amount paid to the individual Trust from the Disaster Appeal. If
the payment of damages in due course substantially increases the
amount in the individual trust fund then it would of course be
wise to review the investments and seek appropriate advice then.
Payments made direct - not immediately into the Trust

As mentioned in earlier Bulletins they may be certain cases where
a client is in receipt of DSS benefit and also receives money by
way of damages or by way of payment from the Hillsborough Disaster
Appeal where it would be to their advantage to place that money
immediately upon Trust.

The advantages are spelt out in the DSS circular ID 4754 N/DB (a
copy of which was included with Bulletin 4).

Whether in any particular case the relief applies is of course a
matter for the decision of the independent adjudication authority
in each individual case but the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal
Trustees have been in touch with the DSS London who have given
guidance on the matter as detailed in the copy letter enclosed.




                             3-
Alth6ugh they stress that this is for guidance only it is clearly
very influential guidance and happily the position appears to be
that the mere receipt of money by the individual which is then
placed immediately into trust does not debar that Trust from being
effective.
Remoteness Claims

The "time table" for dealing with the remoteness claims - so that
the test cases can be heard on the 19th June 1990 - means that
before the end of February we have to identify the appropriate
lead actions for each category and to agree with the Insurance
Company that these individual cases are appropriate test actions
and to agree the class or categories of cases which each
individual Plaintiff will cover.

We have had a very good response from some members who have
returned the second more detailed questionnaire sent out by Kike
Humphreys. If you are amongst those who have not yet returned
that questionnaire I would urge you please to do so by return of
post.

If the original questionnaire has gone astray then Ronnie Wright
at the Law Library can supply copies on payment of copying
charges.

In particular we urgently need returns from anyone who is in the
old category 3 or 4 and not currently covered by the agreement: to
pay i.e.

Category 3   -   The claimant was in another part of the ground and
                 saw a relative other than spouse, child or parent,
                 injured or killed.
Category 4   -   The claimant was in another part of the ground and
                 knowing or believing a relative other than spouse,
                 child or parent to be in Pen 3 or 4 later found
                 them injured or dead.

In that case we need to know

         (a) the name of the client
         (b) the relationship involved - e.g. brother/sister/
             cousin/grandchild etc
         (c) the name of the deceased/injured

In order to clear with the Defendants that the test cases properly
represent the categories concerned we need authority from you to
release details of your client on a without prejudice basis and
that such details are not to be used in any Court proceedings with
regard to the following matters

          (a) the name of your client
          (b) the relationship of your client to the deceased/
              injured individual
          (c) the circumstances of the claim as set out in the
              returned questionnaire.

We will supply this information on the above basis to the
Defendants Insurers from the information already supplied by you
and all that is therefore necessary is your authority to include
your client in order to place him/her in the appropriate category.

We will not be releasing in that context any details of injury or
other details included on the form.
We are already able to pick out a number of suitable test cases
and the final selection will be made in conjunction with Counsel.
If your client is on what I might call "the final short list" for
selection as a test case - and I will be in touch directly with
the Solicitors concerned within the next two or three weeks -
would you please obtain your clients authority to reveal to the
Committee and Counsel the clinical psychologists report so that we
can ensure the right cases are taken.

Clinical Psychologists Appointments

All the questionnaires (which are still coming in) are being
forwarded to the Clinical Psychology Team and individual
Solicitors notified of the Clinical Psychologists allocated.     I




                                                          \
                                                                  1




    V

real^Re from letters I am receiving that there is an element of
delay which is due to t le numbers concerned.

We have a meeting with the Co-Ordinator of the Clinical Psychology
Team on Thursday and if Ithere are any firm guidelines as to times
following that meeting we will let you know.

In the meantime a numbe* of people have been asking for additional
copies of the Clinical psychologists questionnaire. Again those
are available from Ronnie Wright at the Law Library on payment of
copying charges.        '
                        [                                   .


I will keep you in touch with all developments.
Every good wish.
Yours sincerely,




MISS E M STEEL




                          -to-
          Department of                Social Security
          New Court Carey Street London WC2A 2LS                              p p f i a r p rcv.n.rEEn'

DHSS)                                                                             22 d ec WW
                                  Telephone 01-831 6111 ex
                                                             fel49
                                                                               tTLrivOTi -J w   —




  Mr C M Reddington                                          Your reference
  Trust Fund Manager
  Hi11sbjtepugh Disaster Appeal                              Our reference
  PO   Bo*f*ko
  Liverpool                                                  Date
  L69 2PH
                                                              /? December 1989




  Dear Mr Reddington

  Some weeks ago you sent to me copies of four draft trusts and invited comments
  about their effect/ if any, on people's entitlement to income-related
  benefits, namely/ Income Support, Housing Benefit and Family Credit. I am
  sorry that other pressures have prevented me from writing to you sooner
  although we have discussed these and other issues by telephone.

  I can confirm that/ as drafted, none of the capital held on any of the trusts
  would be taken into account.  In the case of the minors the capital would, of
  course, be due to them on reaching age 25 years but this is some way off. Any
  capital that is paid out at the discretion of the trustees would be taken into
  account in the normal way and only affect benefit if any payment, together
  with any other capital they had, exceeded £3000. I enclose a further copy «f
  the fact sheet which explains the way capital can affect benefit.

  As to the income from the trust funds, only the trust for the inexperienced
  adult provides a life interest to income. This income, when paid, would be
  taken fully into account and reduce the benefit otherwise payable. In all the
  other trusts, the trustees have discretion to pay the trust income - although
  the trust for the "disabled" suggests that at least half of the income would
  be released. Any income paid at the discretion of the trustees is payable oa
  a voluntary basis and as such the first £5 a week is disregarded (except where
  the claimant has a War Pension or student covenant which already uses up this
  disregard).

  I am sure you will appreciate that the above advice is dependent upon the
  final wording of the trusts. In any event, all decisions about entitlement to
  benefit are matters for independent adjudication officers and, in the case of
  Housing Benefit, local authorities. That apart, I have no reason to think
  they would reach a different conclusion to what I have said above.

  We also discussed how the current rules might help those less seriously
  injured people who are due, or have received, payments. I explained that
  everyone who received a payment due to a personal injury could place the money
  on trust - while retaining an absolute interest in it, if they wished - and
  that capital would not affect their benefit. The value of the trust fund
  would be ignored for at least 2 years for adults and throughout dependency for
  children (which could be until age 19 years). The children would be entitled
to the further 2 years disregard if they claimed benefit in their own right.
Any payments made by the trustees for such trusts would be taken into account
as income or capital as I have set out above and depending on the terms of the
trust.

I hopeVhat this is helpful but if you have any questions please give me or my
colleague, Annette Warrick on extension 2672, a ring.

                                                Yours sincerely
TO:   Sheffield City Council
      Town Hall
      Surrey Street
      SHJ^FIELD SI 2HH

      Ths^Chief Constable
      So®mh Yorkshire Police
      Headquarters
      Swigg Hill
      SHEFFIELD S3 8LY

      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic
      R/0 Hillsborough
      SHEFFIELD S6 1SW




Dear Sirs,
We have been instructed on behalf of [
of                                   who sustained injury/the
personal representatives and dependents of
                     who died] as a result <Jf the incident at the
Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough ground on the 15th April 1989.
From the information in our possession it would appear that the
incident was caused or contributed to by the. negligence of your
servants or agents and/or by a breach of duty on your part and we
shall be glad to hear from you that you are prepared to compensate
our client for his/her loss and injury.
May we respectfully suggest you pass this letter through to your
Insurance Company.
Yours faithfully,
                  TERMS OF REFERENCE



To consider the general issues and potential areas of claim
and inform Group members accordingly.

              4

To co-ordinate Solicitors who have been instructed by
clients seeking to bring claims following the Hillsborough
Disaster.

To act as a clearing house for information and sources
of expertise for such claims.

To co-ordinate negotiations with the Legal Aid
Authorities.

To identify likely Defendants and notify them of the
intention of the Committees and the Group it represents.

To co-opt such members to remove such members and to
appoint such sub-committees as it may time to time decide.

To make such amendments to these terms of reference as it
may from time to time decide.

To arrange representation by Solicitor and Counsel of the
Group's clients at the Public Inquiry.

Obtain details of fund and trust; how administered.
    j

H
