 I

■V.   f ,        *n        •   «   »                   >                                       *




      Hi         l l s b o r o u g h               s t e e r in g          c o m m it t e e

                                   Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                                    Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 D X 14100




                                                                               19th November 1990
                                                                               EMS/DW


            F.A.O.                                                              2 0 NOV 1990




            Dear

            RE:       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BULLETIN 19
            The last day for appeals against the Judgment of Hidden J was Triday
            last the 9th instant so I have waited to send out this Bulletin until
            that time had expired. It may not suprise you to learn that by fax
            on Thursday the 8th we received notice of appeal from the Defendants!
            I will deal with the appeals and other current matters in ordex.
            1.                     Hidden J's Note of Judgment
            Although the Judgment was given in July last and we immediately
            applied for a copy of the Transcript this is not yet available. I
            understand that the Judgment has been transcribed and is still with
            the Judge for approval and we are told that it should be available
            very shortly.
            As soon as we have the copy Judgment I will arrange for one copy to
            be kept at the Law Library and available for members to read.    Some
            people have already asked us for copies and those requests received
            todate will be dealt with but I would be grateful if anyone else
            could wait until the Judgment is at the Law Library and then deal
            with it through Ronnie Wright at the Library.
            2.                     Appeals in the Remoteness cases

            Notice of Appeal has been lodged on behalf of the six unsuccessful
            Plaintiffs and, as I indicated earlier at the end of last week we
received Notice of Appeal by the Defendants in nine of the ten cases
in wtjy^h we were successful.
The tenth case is that of the father who saw events on the TV when he
was in a coach close to the ground and X understand that the
Defendants are not appealling in that case because they are satisfied
that his proximity to events and the fact that he came to the ground
shortly after seeing the beginning of the tragedy on TV in their view
brings him within the McCloughlin decision on "aftermath".
Counsel is instructed to settle cross appeals in some of the cases in
which we were successful to raise and clarify the alternative grounds
on which the cases were fought (and on which no specific decision has
as yet been made) of the impact of searching for lost relatives and
identification at the Mortuary.
The Defendant's Notice of Appeal deals both with questions of
remoteness and in certain particular instances causation which will
enable all these matters to be argued before the Court of Appeal.
Copies of the Notices of Appeal both in the remoteness cases and the
pre-death pain and suffering appeal will be kept at the Law Library
for your information.
As far as the timing is concerned the remoteness appeals are set down
in the list commencing the 14th January.   Documents have to be
lodged by the 28th January and we hope with the consent of the
Defendants to seek an early listing on the grounds that this is a
matter of public concern on which a large number of cases depend and
indeed it appears likely that the Court of Appeal may not be tJie
eventual resting place ! The Defendants agree to that approach and
will write in support - but not until the transcript of Hidden J's
judgment is available.
X am hopeful that we will be able to obtain a relatively early
hearing.    As soon as we have any firm information I will of course
let you know but it looks as if the earliest date will be the Spring
of next year.
3.            Pre-Death Pain and Suffering Appeal
As mentioned in the previous Bulletin the Notice of Appeal has been
lodged and served and that appeal is in the list commencing on the
7th January.
Obvidnsly if the remoteness appeals are going to be heard relatively
soon«-t is sensible for the two appeals to follow one another and we
w i l l ^ r y to arrange that.
4-            The position re: Claims pending Court of Appeal Hearing
As far as the pre-death pain and suffering appeal is concerned the
position is as set out in the last Bulletin. Fatal claims can be
settled on the basis that the figures agreed cover all heads of
damage except pre-death pain and suffering which will then have to be
raised again with the Insurers within 28 days of the Court of \ppeal
decision.
The remoteness claims pending   the hearing of the appeals revertto
the original position - i.e. claims which will be accepted
automatically by the MMI are limited to those injured (either
physically, psychologically or both) who were in Pens 3 or 4,
involved in the rescue attempts or, being the spouse or parent or
child of someone in Pens 3 or 4, were present in another part of the
ground.
All TV claims and claims from   friends and other more distant
relatives are effectively "on   ice". Such claims should continue to
be notified to the MMI and work can continue on medical reports etc
but there is of course no guarantee of payment as this will depend
upon the appeals.
If you have a client in that category who is eligible for legal aid
it would certainly be prudent to apply for legal aid to cover "the
position.
5.            Notification of Claims

I would respectfully remind you of the terms of the letter of
agreement which formed the schedule to the order to stay and was sent
out to you with Bulletin 12. The automatic agreement to pay claims
which either fall within the categories then agreed or which are
payable after the remoteness test cases extends only to cases which
are notified on or before the 15th December 1990.

After that date and within the normal limitation period cases will be
looked at on their merits but may be scrutinised more closely.
Therefore if you are consulted by clients who are in the categories
currently under dispute it is still esssential that a letter before
acticto should be sent to South Yorkshire Police with a copy and
noti,J®teation of claim to Ken Holmes at the MMI Bradford address
          Municipal Mutual Insurance
          Park House
          57-59 Well Street
          BRADFORD   BD1 5SN
You should also notify us so that the claim can be logged on the
computer so that interest can be paid from the date of notification.
6.           Inter-Defendant proceedings
Most people will have heard through the Media or otherwise that the
inter-Defendant issues were listed for trial at Manchester Crown
Court on the 2nd October. The case started but following
negotiations terms of settlement were reached and the case stayed the
following Monday.   The terms of settlement are unknown but they do
apparently cover all issues between the Defendants. The mechanics of
dealings with future claims are that these should be notified to the
MMI (as detailed above) who will deal with all matters.
7.           Damages
Although a number of claims have been settled on satisfactory "terms I
know that there are quite a large number of cases where there is
still a difference on quantum of damage and which will fall to be
dealt with by the Courts.
I would remind you of the procedure which has been agreed with the
MMI to ensure speedy hearing namely that the proceedings should be
taken under the agreement and that by consent an application is then
made for trial without pleadings under the provision of Order IB Rule
21   .
The Writ, in the usual form, should be issued against the single
Defendant, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police. The
endorsement on the Writ should refer to the Order of Steyn J and I
would suggest wording similar to the following

"The Plaintiffs claim is for damages for personal injuries sustained
at Hillsborough Stadium Sheffield on the 15th April 1989 and payable
by the Def endant under the terms of the Schedule to the Order of Mr
Justice Steyn dated the 20th December 1989 in the case of Chapiaan -v-
the Defendants and Ors".
Upon Jftie application for trial without pleadings the documents
appropriate to the particular case can be dealt with - either a
Statement of Facts and injuries or, if the Defendants are in your
particular case making any allegations of fraud (e.g. the Plaintiff
did not sustain the injuries he said) then a Direction that those
allegations should be particularised by the Defendants in a document
to be before the Court. This should cover the point that if any
party is going to allege fraud in any proceedings then that must be
pleaded.
I do get asked from time to time by members whether there are any
reported cases where assessment of damages have taken place. If your
clients agree and if the matters have been dealt with in open Court
it would be helpful to have details of awards for the assistance of
other members of the Group.
Some members who are acting for clients who have sustained serious
injuries which affect their ability to go out into the Community and
indeed to cope at home have found it useful to get a report from
either a Private Nursing Agency or Occupational Therapist as to the
limitations on their client's lifestyle, additional expenses, and
ways of alleviating their clients problems. If you have such a
client then I would recommend this step and if you have difficulty
finding a suitable expert we may be able to supply a name.
8•           Psychological Assessments

Nickie Harrison has been arranging appointments for examination and
reports.   Morgan O'Connell and his team are on stand by for tlie Gulf
- and some have actually gone out there - so sometimes appointments
have to be given at relatively short notice.
I am sure members appreciate this.
Some people seem to be under the misapprehension that review
appointments are automatically given. That is not the case. If your
first report suggests a review after a particular period of tine
please would you write in to us asking for a review appointment to be
given. This will not be triggered automatically.

9.           Inquests

As mentioned in the last Bulletin the Inquests resume at Sheffield on
the 19th November.   These will deal with the question "why" the
8




deat     occurred.    Witnesses will give evidence and the current
esti   :.ed length of hearing is 8 weeks.
Representation has been arranged for the Group of families who wish
to be represented at that Inquest and we will be dealing with that
aspect directly with those individuals.
10              Claims which are settled
A number of people have been kind enough to notify us when particular
client's claims have been settled. This is helpful as it enabLes us
to keep the computer record upto date and also, if all clients of a
particular Solicitor have now had their claims settled, to save
administrative costs on the Bulletin.  I would be grateful if you
could let me know in due course as and when claims are finalised.
11.             Copy Statements made to West Midlands Police
Whilst the West Midlands Police were responsible to the DPP and were
investigating the possibility of criminal charges the previous
arrangement whereby they would supply upon request copies of
statements made by clients to them was stopped.
Now that matters are back under the control of the Coroner I wrote to
him asking whether we could again have copies of statements. Be has
replied that he has no objection to copies of statements made l>y
Solicitors own clients or copies of statements made by witnesses
(provided the witness gives written and signed authority for tlieir
release) being made available by the West Midlands Police to the
Solicitor concerned.
You should make application in the same way as previously.
He does however comment that at the particular moment they are
extremely busy because of the Inquests and therefore I ass tome that
there may be some delay.
Every good wish.
Yours sincerely,

       sIa-X.

MISS E M STEEL
WS**


       \         HILLSBOROUGH                        STEERING                COMMITTEE

                                  c/o CastCc CfamBcrs, Coo^Strcct, Liverpoo(L2 3 S 0{
                                    TeC: 051 2 5 5 0 6 2 8 JtOQ 051 236 0047 D X 14100




                                                     Our ref:      DRF/SB/SOL.2 / 75 ,

                                                     Your ref:

                                                     Date: 4th April 1990

                                                                   !& 9 APR 1990




           Dear Sirs



           We understand that you have just received from H.M.                 Coroner the summary         to
           which we referred in our letter of the 9th March.

           If you have not received our letter please let us know                   immediately    and     we
           will let you have a copy.

           Please ensure that you acknowledge receipt ofthe summary                      to Supt.Beechey
           as requested if you have not already done so.

           As soon as you have been through the summary with yourclient and you                       have
           instructions would you please let us know as a matter of urgency

                       (1)   Whether your client will be travelling to Sheffield
                             to hear the summary presented.

                       (2)   Will he      or she be accompanied by members ofthe
                             family, friends, a social worker or member of the
                             clergy etc and if so how many people are expected to
                             be with your client.

                       (3)   If your client has any questions arising from  the
                             summary will you please notify H.M. Coroner of the
                             questions immediately using the form provided with
                             our letter of the 9th March and copy the form and
                             any accompaning letter to us for information.

           The purpose of asking for questions in advance is quite simple, if a
           question is put to the presenting Officer in Sheffield it is very unlikely
           that he will have the answer available but if advance notice has been given
           and the question is then put in open Court he will have had an opportunity
           to try and find the information and if it is available and relevant we have
           no doubt that it will be given.
                                    -   2   -


We ft|ve not yet seen the timetable for the order of the Inquests, we
understand that it has not yet been completed. You may rest assured that as
soon * as the date and time upon which your client's Inquest is to be held is
known to us you will be notified.

Thatjlting you in anticipation of your continued    co-operation   with   this
difficult task of co-ordinating the Inquests.

Yours faithfully   f   .



       sM-
