                                                             Mrs Anne Williams.


                                                             Merseyside.


                                                            l b 1*

Dear Dr Slater,
                 My name is Anne Williams I lost my 15 year old son Kevin Daniel
at Hillsborough, I know you will be aware of Kevin's case, and that you carried out
the autopsy on my son.

I spoke to your secretary a number of weeks ago and she informed me that if I
wrote to you you would be kind enough to answer some questions about Kevin's
injuries for me.

Dr Slater I have been to two forensic pathologists and had Kevin's injuries
explained to me, the two forensic doctors reject your conclusion that Kevin died
from traumatic asphyxia. Both docters have seen the autopsy photographs of my
son and they do not indicate the classic signs of traumatic asphyxia, there is no
swelling of the face although there is some cyanosis. I have been led to believe
that in cases of traumatic asphyxia is compression of the chest and abdomen
resulting in direct compression over the superior vena cava, there by causing a
sudden and dramatic rise in the pressure within the superior vena cava resulting,
in engorgement of the blood vessels in the head and neck. It is this displacement
of blood into the superior vena cava and the failure to drain blood from the
superior vena cava which accounts for the swelling of the facial features and the
gross petechial haemorrhages so regularily seen in the face, neck and chest
above the level of constriction.

Dr Slater the question I would like to ask is why you conclude that death was due
to traumatic asphyxia.

Kevin sustained a neck injury, I have been told that was the primary cause of
death was damage to poor Kevin's neck which would not have been inevitably
rapidly fatal.

Also I have been told that coning present in the brain can be seen in someone
dying within a minute or so of having spoken, Kevin could not have been brain
 dead, if he had been brain dead he v/ould not have been able to open his eyes or
 have spoken the word "Mum" that part of the brain would have been dead.

 In the autopsy report you say "There were no signs of violence" please could you
 explain what you mean?

Dr Slater since the Inquests on my son I decided to track down the witnesses
who helped my son that day, you may have been aware of the t.v. programme
The Cook Report, the programme highlighted what happened to Kevin that day.

Dr Slater Kevin was lifted out of pen 3 by pc. Craighill at 3.28.pm. the South
yorkshire police will not let me have a copy of pc Craig hills statement,
I have seen visual evidence of Kevin being lifted out by a police officer at
3.28.pm.

I have a timed photograph of Kevin being run across the pitch on an advertising
board the timing 3.32.pm by 4 fans and two police officers. I can not have the
statements of the police officers but I have spoken to two of the fans that carried
Kevin.
Both the fans say Kevin was alive, one fan said Kevin was opening and closing
his mouth when they were running up the pitch with him.

At 3.32.pm p.c. Bruder says, he saw Kevin lying on the ground in front of the
north stand either convulsing or twitching certainly Kevin's head was moving.
He went down from the stand to go to attend to Kevin, he found a pulse and tried
to stop an ambulance which was passing him at 3.37.pm. to put Kevin in it but it
would not stop. Mr Bruder says there was a friend of the casualty at the scene, I
have found the fan who was there he was not a friend of Kevin but he went to get
the St. Johns ambulance man because he said Kevin did not look like some of
the people he had seen round the area of the goal Kevin was not blue like the
others and his cloths were not soiled. The fan remembers Mr Bruder saying I
have got a pulse and the ambulance that passed at 3.37.pm. the fan was going to
try and stop the ambulance but the St Johns ambulance man went instead. The
ambulance would not stop. I have found the ambulance on video and the Cook
report found the assistant to the driver of the ambulance, he confirms that he
would have passed Kevin at 3.37.pm. that day and the reason he did not stop for
Kevin was because he had orders to go straight to the Lepping lane end of the
ground as there were fatalities.
The fan stayed with Kevin and helped put him on a stretcher when S.W.P.C.
Martin came to take Kevin to the gym.

Miss Martin says that she was told to stay with Kevin and carry out heart
massage and resuscitation, which she did , Kevin started to breath again his ribs
were moving that when she picked him up in her arms, Kevin opened his eyes he
did not look at the police lady he moved his mouth and murmmured the word
"Mum" then he closed his eyes, flopped back in Miss Martins arms and died ,
Miss Martin says Kevin then went grey and then turned blue.

After tracking all the people down that attended to Kevin that day I believe that
Kevin was alive up to 4.oo. pm. that day. Dr Slater I know you did not have the
evidence of these witnesses at the time of the inquest on Kevin would this
evidence help you conclude what Kevin died from and how Kevin died ?




                                Yours Sincerley.
                                                   Uu!i£-_
    ROTHERHAM               GEN'^^AL               HOS 3
                                                       ?XTA.H.S

                      inihe s    n: •: t.^s r r

             Department of Hi.rtopathblogy
          Rotherham District General Hospital
                    Moorgate Road
                 ROTHERHAM  S60 2UD U.K.

                                Tel: Rotherham (01709) 820000 Ext 5246
                                Fa::: 01709 - 824019


Consultant Histopathologist 8 Cytopathologist
                                   .


DR. D.N. SLATER BMedSci   LiEChE FRCPath

DNS/OK

26th April 1996

Mrs. A. Williams,
4 Whitehouse Avenue,
Formby,
Merseyside L37 3LR
     %

Dear Mrs. Williams,

Many thanks for your recent letter           (undated).

As I have said previously, I am extremely   sympathetic   to  the
queries   that you have raised surrounding Kevin's death. I am
prepared to assist   you   in this,  by   making  the   following
comments in writing. However, I must be honest, and say that it
will  not   be my  intention  to make   additional    reciprocal
responses by correspondence.

As a consequence of your letter,          the     following   points   appear
relevant.

1. I myself saw   the programme   put  forward   by Robin   Cook.
However,  viewing myself    as a 'reasonable' pathologist (meant
primarily with regard to temperament and   personality),   I was
extremely saddened to hear that two expert forensic pathologist
opinions had been sought behind my back.   I have    no problems
with  second   opinions  being sought. However, the way this was
undertaken was   unprofessional  towards  myself   and  naturally
produces barriers in trust.

2. As recorded in my report, the appearances  at autopsy   were
florid  and  vivid.  Unfortunately,  such changes can be poorly
represented in photographic representations.      r

3. I accept your comments with regard to       'classical traumatic
asphyxia'.  Kevin's   case,  however,    as   you will be aware was
complicated  by  neck   compression   as    well   as upper   chest
compression.   Accordingly,  although  used  by myself  as  an
appropriate  term for   the  cause  of  death,  the underlying
mechanisms were slightly different.

4. My comments in my   report  with  regard  to an   absence  of
violence  relate   to an   absence  of  evidence of    malicious
involvement   (such as murder) - as qualified in my conclusions.
This appeared relevant in view of the neck injuries.

5. I note with interest that  the  second  opinions   feel  that
Kevin   did  not die   from  traumatic  asphyxia.   I would   be
interested to have heard their own preferred cause of death.

6. I note with interest your detailed   listings of   the  times
given with regard to Kevin's possible survival and death. This,
of course, came over very strongly   on  the  Cook report.   The
timing  of  death and   rapidity   cf events leading up to death
should always be interpreted by pathologists in   the  light  of
all general   evidence  available from all sources.

I am appreciative that there are varying, claims .and opinions
relating    to  the general evidence connected with the timing of
Kevin's    death.  Unfortunately, I can     provide no      help     or
inform ation w ith' regard     to what was the__correct sequence ,_of
timecPevents leading to KeviTT^S"deairir. This must ^depend     on   an
interplay    between  yourself,    the police  and ether involved
parties .'            ""   '---- -  “  '     '        --- ------— —--— •-

7. My comments in paragraph  6 with   regard  to the    possible
timing  and rapidity of death do not, however, alter ray opinion
on how and from what   Kevin  died.  I remain   happy   with the
contents of my original autopsy report to KM Coroner.



Yours sincerely,




D.N. SLATER
Consultant Histopathologist
