(         -*




HILLSBOROUGH                           STEERING               COMMITTEE
                      Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                       Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




                                                               25th July 1991
                                                               EMS/DW

F.A.O
                                                                 2 9 JUL 1991




    Dear

    RE:        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BULLETIN 24

    As you know the remoteness cases are listed for hearing in the
    House of Lords starting on the 7th October.
    Before the original hearing at Liverpool we made an application,
    for an Order requiring the BBC to produce the original tape of
    what was transmitted from Hillsborough on the afternoon of the
    15th April 1989.

    As you will appreciate in the television cases what is important
    is not the video footage which was shot (of which we have copies)
    but which the viewer at home actually saw.
    The BBC were unable to produce that tape.     They submitted an
    affidavit to say that in the case of live coverage only one tape
    is made to show what actually went out and that particular tape
    had been lost or inadvertantly destroyed.
    Although we made some enquiries amongst those who were believed
    to have taped the Grandstand Programme, none was found and the
    original case was heard on the basis of statements only and
    without the use of a video.

    At the beginning of the case Mr Justice Hidden stated openly that
    he had been watching the television that afternoon and had seen
    part at least of the coverage.
    Therefore the Judge at first instance tried the cases with
i




      \

knowledge of at least some of what the people at home had seen.
The Court of Appeal did not.
Even if at this late stage a tape is available the House of Lords
may not give leave to adduce this in evidence - it is essentially
a matter of additional evidence.
However I would be grateful if you would make enquiries of your'
clients and if any of them have retained a tape of the BBC
coverage could you please let me have that a.s.a.p.     We will
take great care of it and confirm that it will of course be
returned to you as soon as we can.

All good wishes.
Yours sincerely,


MISS E M STEEL
