 NOTES OF A MEETING AT OLD TRAFFORD ON SUNDAY,     7TH MAY AT 9. 00 A. M.


Present :   Manchester United - Ken Merrett

            The Football Association -

            Freshfields - John Dyson (Leading Counsel)
                          Julian Gibson-Watt (Junior Counsel)
                                     (Solicitors)
                                          (Solicitors)


Ken Merrett provided an excellent picture of the role of a Club
organising a Semi-Final, highlighting the areas which were being
given special attention for the Semi-Final to be played that day,
taking account of the Hillsborough tragedy.  The meeting lasted for
some 50 minutes and was followed by a tour of the ground, which
again lasted about an hour.

Ken Merrett provided the attached plan which showed the areas to be
occupied by Liverpool and Nottingham Forest supporters.

The total capacity for the match could be just over 50, 000, but in
fact the actual attendance was in the region of 38,000.

The standing areas had been reduced by approximately 15%, as a
courtesy to the supporters in these special circumstances, but it
was not considered that the original standing capacities were too
hi gh.

When Old Trafford had originally been planned for the Semi-Final
replay, to be played on I believe 19th April, it had been thought
that most of the Liverpool supporters would travel by train and
therefore the police had originally allocated the areas the other
way round.    However, as the semi-final was now to be played on a
Sunday and the train service would not be used to the same extent,
the police had switched the areas to be occupied by the two groups
of supporters.

Manchester United colour code their tickets for the whole ground,
not just for the two different teams.

Whilst the fencing was to remain, the gates of the fencing would be
left open and would be manned by Police.

Manchester United had also increased the emergency personnel to bs
present on the day.

The car park opposite the ground, normally used to accommodate some
300 cars, would for the semi-final occupy approximately 100 cars
with the remaining area being used for police vehicles or for any
supporters who turned up without tickets.    The match had been
agreed an all-ticket match.

                                         Contd/,
Ken Merrett did say that one of the historic problems was that if a
match was all-ticket but not a sell-out often supporters did
arrive on the day hoping to gain admittance and the police
invariably did allow them into the ground.      His personal view was
that h a d this been discouraged from the start, supporters would not
be so likely to travel to a fixture if it was an all-ticket fixture
and if they did not have a ticket.

Various other matters arose during the discussion which I am
following up separately on behalf of Freshfields.

Ken Merrett repeated that the main additional aspects in connection
with t h e Old Trafford semi-final, taking account of the Hillsborough
tragedy were as follows:-

1.   Reducing of standing capacity by 15%.

2.   Opening of the gates in the fences.

3.   An increase i n emergency personnel.

4.   Changing use of the car par k as referred to in the notes above.




c, c. Mr. R. H. G.   y
      Freshfields
                                                                                Lll/g^foOL




                                                                    ,             .
                                                                        i «•
                                  U mW    RoJl MddtJc                    w\i
                                                                       » v
                                                                « • .-•'•.i-s•>
                                                                  •■* v.
                                                                          v-V-.*.*•
                                                                               :

                                                                   uC .
                                                                      ’’ •* ,*‘3
                                                                        i.:<k -...

                                                                jru .
                                                                k m r-.




              *Sft»
                             .   PtfMctecki^ A f e W g j                       &f>v#
ir5*VA*raWW*»#* ■ - *.




      •«•• £•''   wi     •




                                                           «»
