SELECTION OF SEMI-FINAL GROUNDS
                                                         21/04/89

The selection of Grounds for semi-final ties are normally decided
upon by taking into consideration the geographical location of the
competing Clubs. To ensure that the best appointed Grounds are
selected to stage semi-final ties, certain Clubs are approached
by the FA in February, to ascertain their availability and also check
upon their capacities. Clubs are asked to provide details on
spectator segregation, present capacity, numbers of seats and standing
places, and indicating if safety fencing is provided around the pitch.


Once the draw is known, Members of the Challenge Cup Committee,
together with the Chairman of the Match & Grounds Committee, considers
the choice of venue for each tie, by taking into consideration the
above details. As soon as the selections are made by the Committee,
the staging and competing Clubs are contacted by telephone prior to
releasing the grounds chosen, to the media.


When staging Clubs are selected and notified, they take over the
running of the game, i.e., ticket printing and allocating, meeting
the Police and transport authorities, catering, stewards, press box
etc., only referring any problems or disputes to the FA, which very
rarely occurs. The staging Clubs are entitled to a payment of 107«
of the gross receipts, less VAT.


Competing Clubs in semi-final ties receive 507. each of the tickets
for sale. The staging Club technically should not be allocated any
tickets, but retains a very small number for Directors and Club
Officials. The FA usually takes an allocation of tickets for each
tie as follows:-
                    All Directors Box Tickets (number depends
                                               on size of box)
                    350 Complimentaries
                    850 Purchase


These tickets are allocated to Council Members, County Associations,
Members of Staff, other Football League Clubs, and organisations
connected with the FA.

A Member of the FA Staff attends each match, and in recent Seasons
this has generally been Glen Kirton,            or Adrian Titcombe.
His duties are to return spare tickets, and to generally supervise
the protocol arrangements at the match, and to resolve any queries
that may arise, in direct relation to the playing side. He would also
be on hand to pass on tickets for any replay, and to note any queries
in this connection.

As a matter of courtesy the Club Secretary often informs this Member
of Staff if any problems have arisen in connection with ticketing or
policing arrangements. This might also include any request by the
police to delay the kick-off, and the Member of Staff may be the
person to pass this information on to the Referee. However, if he
was occupied on some other business, such urgent decisions would be
transmitted by the police or an Official of the staging Club. (Club
Secretary)
MONDAY 20 MARCH


 7.45   Draw made


10.00   Call from Liverpool, Peter Robinson, regarding the possibl
        venue at Hillsborough, and their request to be allocated
        the Penistone Lane end of the Ground, and not the Leppings
        Lane as was allocated for the previous Season's semi-final


10.05   Spoke to Graham Mackrell at Sheffield Wednesday to seek
        police views on the likely allocation of tickets, if
        Hillsborough was selected for the Liverpool tie.


10.45   Call from Graham Mackrell to advise that if Hillsborough
        chosen for Liverpool tie, then the Police would allocate
        the Leppings Lane to Liverpool, as per last Season's
        arrangements, due to avoiding a clash of supporters
        approaching the Ground.


11.00   Challenge Cup Committee Meeting commences.


12.30   Meeting ends.



13.00   Sheffield Wednesday asked to stage the Liverpool versus
        Nottingham Forest tie, and to go ahead with the usual
        arrangements, and to contact the Police re segregation of
        supporters, and ticket details.


13.15   Liverpool informed that Hillsborough has been selected for
        their semi-final tie.




TUESDAY 21 MARCH


AM      Call from Peter Robinson, to inform FA that Liverpool
        would make public their disapproval of the choice of
        venue of Hillsborough, as they would be receiving less
        tickets than Nottingham Forest, due to segregation as a
        result of the Police allocating the Leppings Lane end to
        Liverpool. At no time was it mentioned by Peter Robinson
        that he was requesting the FA to reconsider the choice of
        venue. The call was more in the region of a general
        discussion to put the FA in the picture that we may be
        receiving telephone calls or letters from Liverpool
        supporters unable to get tickets.




S R CLARK
COMPETITIONS SECRETARY
FA CUP SEMI-FINAL. VENUES - IAST TWENTY YEARS



1989   -   Hillsborough, Villa Park
1988   -   Hillsborough, White Hart*Lane
1987   -   Hillsborough, Villa Park
1986   -   Villa Park, White Hart Lane
1985   -   Villa Park, Goodison Park (Maine Road)
1984   -   Villa Park, Highbury
1983   -   Villa Park, Highbury
1982   -   Villa Park, Highbury
1981   -   Villa Park, Hillsborough (Highbury)
1980   -   Villa Park (Elland Road), Hillsborough (Villa Park,
           Villa Park, Highfield Road)
1979   -   Villa Park, Maine Road (Goodiscn Park)
1978   -   Highbury, Stamford Bridge
1977   -   Hillsborough, Maine Road (Maine Road)
1976   -   Stamford Bridge, Hillsborough
1975   -   Villa Park (Stamford Bridge), Hillsborough (Maine Road)
1974   -   Old Trafford (Villa Park), Hillsborough
1973   -   Hillsborough, Maine Road
1972   -   Hillsborough, Villa Park (Goodison Park)
1971   -   Hillsborough (Villa Park), Old Trafford
1970   -   White Hart Lane, Hillsborough (Villa Park, Bumden Park)
1969   -   Villa Park, Hillsborough


Sunmary of previous twenty years:

Original Choice as semi-final venue = Hillsborouqh 13 times,
Villa Park 12, Highbury 4, Maine Road 3, White Hart Lane 3, Old Trafford 2,
Stamford Bridge 2, Goodison Park I
