                                         2 February 1990'




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

 We discussed the        report. He would send me a copy and
 also the League handbook. He wondered whether there was
 anything in the report which altered our advice on Rule 24
 ie should the FA set up an inspectorate.  I said I had not
 read a full copy of the report but from what I had read in
 the press and heard on the media^Taylor had been critical of
 the leadership of the FA. He had however accepted in his
 interim report that it was not the function of the FA to
 involve itself from a technical standpoint in matters
relating to crowd safety.   If they, however, thought it was
within their ambit to sponsor an advisory design council
 into ground safety I could see that was an area they could
easily get involved in. For instance projtgtional activities
was something that had traditionally been" in their ambit.
In other words subj ect to reading the report I could not see
that the FA should really involve itself in acting as an
inspectorate as to whether the safety matters recommended in
the reports were being implemented.   The Football League
were carrying out their own surveyS- Local authorities had
their own powers and duties. The Act expressly delegated
the safety of football grounds to the local authorities as
supervised by the Home Secretary.   In my view it would
necessitate setting up a whole new department at the FA to
properly supervise the implementation of the corrective
measures. They had not done that since Hillsborough and I
could see no valid reason in those circumstances to tamper
with rule 24 so as to bring a disciplinary charge (as
defined as misconduct) against a club for failing to
implement. We had tinkered with the wording of Rule 24 to
incorporate get-out clauses for people complying with safety
requirements and in addition had sent out Taylor's reports
and summarised the recommendations in the notes to Football
League clubs on crowd management/fSat went out in September.

On a connected matter the West Midlands police had requested
details of the semi-final arrangements for Hillsborough from
the FA in connection with potential criminal charges against
the officers concerned.0 Would there be a difficulty in
supplying the materials.  I said we had freely supplied the
material to the various parties at he inquiry so they could
easily get it from the South Yorkshire police. However all
West Midlands police enquiries would be directed to
Freshfields so that we could deal with the matter.

Engaged 30 minutes including dictation
