   WEMBLEY MATCHES ENTERTAINMENT The Committee confirmed the Chairman's
     action in agreeing to the engagement of the following Bands

     26.3.85     England v. Republic of Ireland - Staff Band
                  Royal Army1 Ordnance Corps

     27.4.85     F.A. Challenge Vase Final - Thj Band of The
                  Metropolitan Police
     11.5.85.    F.A. Challenge Trophy Final - Band of The
                  Honourable Artillery Company

     25.5.85     England v. Scotland - Band   of The Royal Corps
                   of Transport

     10.8.85     F.A. Charity Shield - Band   of .The Honourable
                   Artillery Company

     11-9.85     England v. Rumania - Staff Band of The Corps of
                   Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers.


   ENGLAND v. REPUBLIC OF IRELAND - ’UNDER 21 INTERNATIONAL MATCH
       25.3.85 The Chairman's action in agreeing that the game be played
      on the ground of Portsmouth Football Club and that the prices of
<^ ^ ^a dm is si o n be as follows, was agreed:-

     Seats:       £3.00
     Standing:    £1.50   (Juveniles and Senior Citizens £1.00)

    Mr. Millichip said that he would like consideration to be given
    to Juniors and Senior Cicizens being admitted into sv;h matches
    free of charge to encourage a bigger attendance.   The Committee
    felt that this suggestion had merit and it was agreed to consult
    with Portsmouth Football Club in this respect.   It was further
    agreed that a similar arrangement should be applied to schoolboys
    and that the local English Schools' Football Association branch
    should be consulted with this in mind.


  F.A. CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAL TIES

     (a)   The following Minute of the Challenge Cup Committee Meeting
           held on 28th January, 1985, was received and n o t e d :-

        "The Committee agreed with Minutes 17 (b) and 28, of the Match
    i_ and Grounds Committee, but could not support the views contained
« ^ i n the last sentence of the second paragraph of Minute 17 (b)
 ^ ^ r e g a r d i n g the playing of a Semi-Final at Wembley Stadium if no
        suitable venue was available in London as this would create an
        unfair advantage for the Final Tie."

     (b)   The Chairman advised members that he had attended the Challenge
           Cup Committee Meeting earlier in the day to assist with the
           selection of venues for the Semi-Final Ties of the Competition
           for the current season and he reported the following venues
           had been s el ec t ed :-

           Luton Town or Millwall v Everton or Ipswich Town


           If Everton the match will be played at Aston Villa F.C.
If Ipswich Town the match will be played at Tottenham
Hotspur F.C.

Possible Replay venue to be decided.

Manchester United v. Liverpool


This match will be played at Everton F.C., with the
possible replay being played at Manchester City F.C.
