                                         27 April 1989



FA/Hillsborough

Consultation with John Dvson ("JP"). Julian Gibson-Watt
("JGW"), JPJR and

1.   Wider issues

JD expressed a wish to meet the client asap. He felt it was
necessary to find out their stance on the wider issues,

JGW felt the disaster itself would not be difficult.  The
problem was the line the FA were going to take on the wider
issues,

JD believed the enquiry would start in the middle of May,
There was immense pressure on Lord Justice Taylor to produce
an interim report of recommendations.    Therefore, it was
necessary to know the F A ’s policy on ID cards, perimeter
fences * and all-seater stadiums,

2,   Difference between running of Semi-final and Final

JPJR mentioned that the FA played a much greater part in
organising the Cup Final as opposed to the Semi-Final, She
felt the FA may be criticised for not being more involved in
the Semi-Final.

JGW believed there was no problem in handing over the
management of the Semi-Final to local independent
contractors,

3,   Claim letters

JPJR pointed out that a number of claim letters had already
been written by two firms in Liverpool.

Writs had been issued alleging negligence and breach of
statutory duty but none, as yet, against the FA.

JPJR pointed out that Herbert Smith were acting for the
Insurers of the FA.

4.   Preliminary hearing on Friday

JD believed that Friday's meeting was very important.
Procedural matters, documentation, and the timing of the
enquiry would be discussed.   JD felt he should be present on
Friday so as to obtain a general feel for the enquiry.
Edwin Glasgow,, in the same Chambers was instructed for the
Club.
 5„   Problem areas

    felt the postponement of the kick off and the part
played generally by the FA at the game were problem areas,

JGW did not see this as a problem as the FA were there to
help if asked to do so. JD felt this would depend on what
Sheffield Wednesday had to say.

JPJR believed this to be a sensitive area. Graham Kelly was
new to the job and the FA had given him no instructions.

The ticket allocation and the choice of ground were seen as
further problems. There may be a problem concerning Peter
Robinson's demand for more tickets to be allocated to LFC.

JGW thought the line we should take was that these are all
well tried procedures.

JPJR felt it was clear that the FA had not over exerted
themselves in organising the Semi-Final.

6.    Contractual Term

Apart from a claim in negligence and breach of statutory
duty there may be a contractual claim for every ticket
holder.

7.    Evidence and procedural matters

JPJR believed it would be wise to ask Lord Justice Taylor
for an extension of time to prepare the witness statements.
She said the statements could probably be ready by 15 May.

JGW and JPJR both thought that it would be sensible to start
the enquiry at the end of May. There would also be a
problem with discovery.  It was decided that a copy of all
the files we have received should be made available to the
Treasury Solicitor, barring anything privileged or created
ex post facto, therefore enabling the other parties to
inspect the files.

With regard to witnesses, JPJR thought we should be taking
statements from Mr Titcombe and Mr Clark.   Graham Kelly and
the Chairman would obviously be needed.   JD felt that as
Lord Justice Taylor was under time pressure he would not
want masses of witnesses.

8.    Daily transcripts and funding

It was discussed whether daily transcripts would be an
advantage.
JPJR felt that they would cut down representation costs and
it would be easier for members of the FA to follow the
enquiry.

The question of funding arose and whether it would be
possible for the FA to obtain public funds.

JPJR said she would ask the Treasury Solicitor but it was
highly unlikely.

9.   General

JPJR believed that the FA should make themselves available
and it was important they were not seen to be obstructive.

JD  believed a visit to Hillsborough would be a   good idea.
JGW mentioned a number of points.

     (a)   The   files should be numbered?

     (b)   The reasons for the FA's choice of ground should
           be investigated?

     (c)   It was important to show that some action had been
           taken on the FSA's complaints after the Cup Final
           of 19 86;

     (d)   He pointed out his rough draft of what Graham
           Kelly should say?

     (e)   There should be one file for enquiries and another
           file for guidelines, memoranda and acts.

JD wanted to know what line the clients would take on the
behaviour of the Liverpool supporters.

JGW thought it was important to know how the tickets were
printed and then distributed.

It was felt that after Friday it would be easier to proceed.
There would be a need for several conferences before the
enquiry starts.  The wider policy issues may be dealt with
by written submissions.

Time engaged; 2 hours including travelling and dictation.
