                                                        16th April, 19S9.

Dear Sir,

                 Nottingham Forest v Liverpool - 1 5 . ^ 9

           Yesterday it was my misfortune to attend the Notts Forest v Liverpool
F.A. Cup Semi-Final in Sheffield and the events I witnessed there, what I have
subsequently read in newspapers, and what I have seer* on T.7* has prompted me ts
write to you.

           I an not a supporter of either Club but over the last 30 years I must
have attended over 1,000 Football matches in over 50 grounds. I drove to Sheffield
with mv lB year ole son who had purchased two tickets in Nottingham arriving or. the
City side of -lillsboro-jgh shortly before 1.30pm. It was a lovely day. We had lunch
on grass by the car before setting out in what was a carnival atmosphere at 1.^*5?®*
I have been to Hillsborough on many occasions before but never have I seen sc much
drinking in the streets before the game. Crowds, all Nottingham Forest supporters,
had gathered outside rubs drinking from glasses, cans, or bottles they were
carrying with them. Many empty cans, bottles, and glasses littered the floor. I
suspect the same applied to Liverpool supporters at the other end.

           On arriving at the ground at 2.00pm we went straight inside to stand at
the very back of the Spion       Kop - can I say at this stage if I had not gota ticket
I would have not gone to Sheffield at all. I was suprised at this early time to see
the centre of the terraces at the opposite end of the ground tightly packed with
swaying supporters whist the wings were almost deserted. Even at kick-off time the
wings at the Liverpool    end   were not full which       was most supprising as allticket
had been sold. We were    not   aware of the mayhemoutside the ground at kick-off time
which was obviously caused by a) Ticket holders arriving late, and b) Many people
arriving without tickets at all. Could not the kick-off have been delayed or did
no one inside realise what was happening outside? Those on the terraces at 2.03pr
were obviously ticket holders. They were well behaved, patient, and not like those
who arrived at the last minute - worse for drink.

           wfaat happened at 3«0?pm and subsequently is now history but it was
obvious that the Liverpool terraces had suddenly filled to full and overflowing
very quickly.

           3eing aware that football supporters from the City of Liverpool have no
regard for authority or the need to purchase tickets in advance it comes as no
suprise that many thousands turned up at the turnstiles without tickets. I suspect
the common purpose was to gain admission for everyone especially as press reports
since the draw was made had made great play on the 'unfairness' to the 'loyal'
Liverpool supporters. Was there no Folice intelligence from Liverpool with rpg?.rd
to numbers travelling without tickets? As yet I have heard no condemnation of the
thousands who intended to gain illegal entry into the ground and my sympathy lies
with the Police commander who was faced with a riot outside the ground or risk a
crush inaide. In retrospect I am sure he/she will agree that it was wrong to open
the gates but I am also sure that had he/she not done so the supporters with and
without tickets would have broken down gates and gained admission.


                                                               Contd
                 The truth of the matter is that the hooligan element have won again.
    They have escaped criticism and at the same time as killing 100 true Liverpool
    supporters who had sufficient foresight to arrive early and properly they have
    managed to point an accusing finger at the Police.

                 This is not to say that the Police are free from criticisn. No one
    seemed to be in charge. Many of those officers who were rushed into the ground, like
    me, did not appear to know what was going on or what to do. The least that could
    have been expected was swift and truthful loudspeaker annoucements and appeals -
    there was none. Whether the maniacs pushing in at the back      would have backedoff we
    shall never know but it would have been worth      a try.

                 Where does this all leave us for      the future? I have heard criesfor
    all seater stadiums, and it looks as:though identity cards will be introduced.
    Neither would have prevented the horrors of yesterday as those who intended to gain
    entry would have done so. In fact matters may have been worse.

                  I am sorry to be so negative but      I just don't know what to suggest.
    I do make   the following recommendations which     may help:-

    1. The building of a new and second National Stadium in the north so it and/or
       Wembley can both be used for big matches.

    2. The use of more video cameras to monitor crowd movements in streets up to 200
       yards away from grounds.
s
i   3. Perimeter fencing consisting of hugh swinging type gates which when unlocked
       and ooened can allow easy access to the pitch (keep the small gates for the
       Police and stewards to enter the terraces).

    k. Audible and efficient loudspeaker systems are essential both inside and outside
       all grounds no matter how small.

    5. Better medical and first aid facilities are required by law.

    6. Ground stewards and Police should be issued with personal radios on a ratio of
       1 radio to two persons so they all can be made aware at an early stage of what
       is required rather than passing messages by word of mouth.

                  Thank.vou for taking the time to read my letter.



                                             Yours faithfully,




     Copies to:-
     Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
     Chief Constable, West Midlands
     Colin KOYNIHAN M.P.
     The Football Association.
