 RAJ PARKER                              4 May 1989




 FA/HILLSBOROUGH

 I telephoned Mr Brummel at the Treasury Solicitors.

We had a general discussion as to last Friday's hearing and
Brumxnel emphasised that Andrew Collins QC wanted to keep a
firm control on the evidence that was going to be given. He
agreed that overall control would be kept by the judge.   It
would be useful for the Treasury Solicitor to have copies of
any relevant witness statements for witnesses that the FA
proposed to call in advance.

I said I imagined that our Counsel would be examining them.
He said the intention was that Andrew Collins would be
examining most of the eye witnesses but he was making an
exemption for the South Yorkshire police and Andrew Collins
may well be sympathetically inclined to our Counsel
examining our own witnesses.  I thought that most of the
statement could be read anyway and it was the
cross-examination material that would be given orally. He
agreed.

He had received about 40 thick statements from the West
Midlands police concentrating on events that happened
between 2.30 pm and 3.15 pm on 15 April.  Ideally Mr Collins
wanted to start with Sheffield Wednesday's ground safety
certificate and the organisation at the ground itself moving
on to the choice of venue and the ticket allocation.
However it looked like it would be much more narrowly
confined factually to what happened.

If Superindent DJ Baker who was running the West Midland
police enqiry was doing the more important statements and
vtfould be interviewing some FA officials next week. I said
we thought this was a bit of a waste of time as we were
preparing much fuller statements. He wondered about
impartiality.    I said we were dealing with purely factual
matters and and he would discover when he saw the statements
that wa were being completely full and frank. Thera were no
slants.

He was expecting 350 more witness statements by Saturday
sorning.   I asked how Collins QC was going to go through all
those looking for conflicts in avidence. He said he did not
’enow. He thought it might be a mad scramble at the last
■.Tiinute.
I mentioned the daily transcripts.  I understood that JPJR
and our QC John Dyson had asked for a transcript to be sent
out to the parties the same day. If that were not to be
done there would be little point in having a daily
transcript. He said he had mention that to his bosses and
he would see what he could. He wondered whether the FA
would bear the costs of producing it in the evening of the
same day if that more than producing it the next day. I
said I was sure that our clients would share in any
transcript taking costs which were involved in the
additional speed. He would liaise with the Home Office on
that.

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation


I telephoned       and booked John Dyson for Monday at 3pm,
Tuesday 11 am and Wednesday at 11 am of next week. I
confirmed tickets for Sunday would be coming down to him.

I explained that we would be going through Mr Kelly's
evidence and also be watching video tapes. The whole team
would be there.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


Subsequently telephoning Gibson-Watt's clerk and booking him
for Monday afternoon. He was in court and then had a
 conference with          on Tuesday and was likewise fairly
booked up on Wednesday. I suggested that as we were down
there he should come when he could. The clerk said he would
gat back to me to see if he could move anything. He also
said he would ask Julian to ring me.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation

Subsequently I spoke to JGW about Herbert Smith's position
and the slightly more hands on attitude they were taking.
JGW agreed with us that we could not object to sending them
documents nor could we really object to passing documents to
them for their comments. However, their comments would be
noted only. We agreed that we were certainly not bound by
them. Julian suggested that we say to Herbert Smith in a
nice way that we will take comments on board provided they
were immediate.  In other words we would not be holding
things up for their comments.

I mentioned that Reston would be attending at the hearing
and he said we could not object to that but he thought it
■/ould be an idea that the fact solicitors to the public
liability insurers were there should not be made known.   I
=aid that was a good point but I doubted whether Reston
would be happy to join the Freshfields team!   JGW agreed and
said he would be playing no part up there.

He would be endeavouring to turn up on Tuesday and Wednesday
of next week as he could. Monday was OK



Subequently phoning John Dyson's cleric and was told he had
an immoveable con on Friday the day before the weekend
before the Inquiry ie 12 May which he had already moved once
for our convenience. He just thought he warned me that he
would not be around on Monday morning. I said I was
grateful for that.

Subsequently Pat Smith telephoned me back. She was sending
round the air tickets tomorrow and she had been to a meeting
with the Football League who were going to support the views
put forward by the FA on the policy issues. She said she
would send me a note of the meeting.

I mentioned the letter to Herbert Smith which I would send
her a copy.

I also mentioned the barristers' involvement next week which
she was entirely happy with.

We also discussed a video showing of the 12 hours of tapes
next week. Pat said she would arrange that. She had a
meeting concerning this year's FA Cup Final on Tuesday
afternoon but other than that she would jiggle the times to
suit everyone's convenience. I said there may be people
coming in and out to the meetings because the barristers had
some availability problems.

I said that having spoken to JPJR it was very important that
Graham Kelly turned up for the first day of the inquiry on
15 May. He may not be giving evidence that way but it was
very important for him to get a feel of the thing and also
because there was likely to be lots of points he needed to
be aware of.

With regard to Sunday JPJR said she was quite happy to come
along if Pat thought it was necessary for her to be there.
Pat thought it was not really necessary unless Jo
particularly wanted to. I said I did not think she
particularly want to unless specifically asked.

With regard to the policy statement that we would be
drafting for Kally next week if it was to come from the FA
’
"7Q would probably need it to be sanctioned by the Coun^l.
The counfid1 were meeting on 25 May. I thought it would be
very difficult to get the pacer through all the council
members who would all have differing views. Would it be
possible to have an executive committee appointed? She said
she would see what she could do. I thought it would not be
much use having Kelly's personal views as it ought to be the
views of the FA therefore ratified in executive committee.

We had completed the first draft of Kelly's statement which
would go out to her tomorrow and had also weeded out the 25
or so lever arch files into 7 relevant lever arch files.

Graham Kelly had mentioned to her that he thought this whole
process was likely to be very costly.  I said I thought the
matter was ofsuch importance to the FA that we should not
scrimp on anything that ought to be covered. Pat said that
was entirely her views and also Graham's and he was getting
provision made from the FA Cup Final for legal fees. |ae
thought that was entirely sensible.

I asked to speak to          about insurance arrangements
and was put on to him. I asked what sort of notification
had been given to Jardines. He said Jardines had phoned him
aarly on Monday morning to tell him they thought there may
be a claim under the policy.      had agreed and they had
said they would make the notifications to the insurers on
the FA's behalf.  I said we needed details of that and we
should get them in writing from Jardines. He said he would
phone up his contact there.

I said I would copy him in with the letter we had sent to
Herbert Smith and in addition I noticed there was a clause
in relation to legal expenses which the FA may be able to
claim under. The brokers had told him that Freshfields'
costs for the Inquiry would not be met but perhaps any
ensuing litigation would be met.  I said he should obtain
clarification of that in a letter from Jardines as well. We
aareed to speak soon.

Engaged 40 minutes including dictation
