                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


                        CHALLENGE CUP COMMITTEE


                      MEETING TO BE HELD
             at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2 3LW
            on Wednesday 24th May, 1989 at 11,30am


                          A G E N D A
                           •k-k-k-k-k-k-k-k-k-k-k


MINUTES To confirm the Minutes of the Meetings held on 20th
  March 1989. (Section A)

SEMI-FINAL TIES       To receive the following reports:-

  a)   That Everton had beaten Norwich City 1-0 at Aston Villa
       FC, on Saturday 15 April, 1989. Had a replay been
       necessary, it would have been played at Aston Villa FC,
       on Wednesday 19th April, 1989, kick off 7,45pm.

  b)   That the tie between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest played
       at Sheffield Wednesday FC, on Saturday 15 April 1989,
       had been abandoned after six minutes, due to crowd problems,
       which had resulted in 95 people being crushed to death.

  c)   That the tie had been re-arranged for Sunday 7 May, 1989,
       at Manchester United FC, kick-off 1,00pm, and that Liverpool
       had beaten Nottingham Forest 3-1, and that the tie had been
       televised live on BBC Television.

  d)   That if the re-arranged tie at Manchester United had resulted
       in a draw after extra time, then it would have been decided
       by the taking of kicks from the penalty mark.

FINAL TIE   To receive the following reports:-

  a)   That Everton had played Liverpool at Wembley Stadium on
       Saturday 20 May 1989.

  b)   That the Players and Match Officials had been presented to
       their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of Kent, prior
       to the start of the match and that Her Royal Highness The
       Duchess of Kent had presented the Cup to the Captain of
       the winning team and medals to the players of the winning
       and losing teams, including the substitutes and the Match
       Officials, at the conclusion of the match.

  c)   That the following         Match Officials had been appointed:-

       Referee    -           J B Worrall           (Cheshire FA)

       Linesmen               M G Peck              (Westmorland FA)
                               A W Smith             (Worcestershire FA)

       Reserve                J T Winter            (North Riding FA)
       Official

FINAL TIE - POSSIBLE REPLAY

  a)   To confirm the action of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman in
       agreeing that the date previously agreed for a possible
       replay, Thursday 25 May, 1989, be altered to Thursday
       8 June, 1989, kick-off 7,30pm.
       b)   To confirm the action of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman
            in agreeing that should the Final Replay end in a draw
            after extra time, the winners would be decided by kicks
            from the penalty mark.

5.   REFEREES’ MARKS To receive a report of the marks from Clubs
       and Assessors awarded to Referees officiating in the Sixth
       Round Proper and Semi-Final Ties.  (Section B)

6.   ARTIFICIAL PITCHES To receive the following Minute of the
       Executive Committee Meeting held on 25 April, 1989:-

       "The Committee agreed a recommendation of the Challenge Cup
       Committee that a survey be commissioned to ascertain
       spectator opinion on the subject of artificial pitches, at a
       cost of approximately £4,000” .

7.   SEASON 1989-90

       a)   To receive a list of 566 Clubs applying to enter (Section C)

       b)   To consider applications from the following Clubs to
            play ties on artificial pitches:-

            Feltham                 Oldham Athletic
            Hyde United             Preston North End
            Luton Town

       c)   To receive a report of the Sub-Committee meeting held
            on 22 May 1989 concerning the entries to reject or
            accept, (available at meeting)

       d)   To receive the following list of 15 Welsh Clubs
            applying to enter:-

            Bangor City                  Maesteg Park
            Barry Town                   Merthyr Tydfil
            Bridgend Town                Newport County
            Caernarfon Town              Rhyl
            Cardiff City                 Swansea City
            Colwyn Bay                   Ton Pentre
            Cwmbran Town                 Wrexham
            Llanelli

       e)   To decide the exemptions to the following rounds:-

              (i)   Third Round Proper

             (ii)   First Round Proper

            (iii)   Fourth Round Qualifying

            (Section D contains suggested non-Football League Exemptions)


8.   ANY OTHER BUSINESS
