                                 It h e f o o t b a l l a s s o c i a t i o n

                                 MATCl AND GROUNDS COMMITTEE
                                                                       t
                                   m :.n u t e s o f a m e e t i n g
                       held at 16, Lancaster Gate, London, W.2.,
                             on Wednesday, 17th October, 1984


 Present:       Messrs. J.F. Wiseman (in the Chair), K.W. Bates, A. Everiss,
                D.R. Goodchild, A.D., McMullen, F.A. Millichip, Dr. J. O'Hara,*
                J.R. Plumbe, S. Seymour* and H.R. Smith.

                Messrs. E.A. Croker (Secretary), H.N. Bird, M. McNamara,
                G. Kirton and Miss J. Smith.

                * D r . J. O'Hara and Mr. S. Seymour attended for Items 16 and 17   (a)
                only, owing to a Meeting of the Conference of Counties.

 Apologies for absence were received from Messrs. H.W. Alcock, W.S.G.
   Needham, Sir Arthur South and P.J. Swales.


|16.    MINUTES     The Minutes of the Meeting held on 1st July, 1984, were
          c on fi rm ed .


 17.    MATTERS ARISING

          (a)     MINUTE 5 - SEASON TICKETS AT WEMBLEY MATCHES The Committee
                  again considered the proposal that Season Tickets should be
                  issued for all matches under the control of The Football
                  Association played at Wembley Stadium.  It was agreed, after
                  careful consideration and after a frank exchange of views
                  by members, that there was some merit in the proposal but
                  that it was unlikely that the Report as it stood would receive
                  the backing of Council.  It was agreed, therefore, that the
                  Office would submit a fresh proposal to the Committee on the
                  basis of the issue of say 10,000 Season Tickets being offered
                  to the public.

          (b)     MINUTE 14 - SEMI-FINAL TIES - F.A. CHALLENGE CUP The Committee
                  considered financial returns in respect of the Semi-Final
                  Ties in the 1983/84 Challenge Cup Competition.    Following a
                  lengthy discussion it was agreed to recommend that the
                  payment to the staging club for such matches be reduced from
                  157« to 107« and that an Agreement be drawn up by the Office
                  setting out the exact terms of the hire of the Stadium.

                  The Committee again considered venues for Semi-Final Ties
                  but reiterated its view that the current system was preferable
                  to any alternative which had been put forward.  While
                  it was felt that playing both Semi-Final Ties at Wembley

                  Stadium would affect the unique appeal of the F.A. Cup
                  Competition, it was agreed that the possibility of playing
                  one Semi-Final Tie at Wembley if other suitable venues in the
                  London area could not be found  should not be discounted.


- 18.   WEMBLEY MATCHES  It was decided to recommend the following
          times of kick-ff and admission prices for matches to be
*         played at Wembley Stadium in Season 1984/85:-


                                                  (1 )
