RETORT OF A MINISTERS' WORKING GROUP MEETING HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 5TII AUGUST,
1987.


          D. Hogg (Minister of State, Hone Affairs) reported on developments
and progress during 1986/87. Ho specifically referred to the introduction
of Kxcluston Orders. Attendances were up as were ejection and arrest figures.
!!e referred to the efforts of the police and suggested that the 1986/37 season
hud seen tut overall improvement on the previous year. Hr. Milliohip poinled
cut that the figure* were considerably down on 198ft.

      A progreaa report on the implementation of measures agreed at the Fcln'uai’y
:aeeffng was given by Mr. P.O. Carter. He enlarged on the written report which
had bven submitted to the Minister for Sport, specifically referring to:-

     -   Local plans
     -   >icTnber3hip schemcs
     -   Iteoipx*ocal Maubex'ship study
     -   C.C.T.V.
     -   All ticket aatches

        The future role of the Leaguo's new security consultant cspocini’y in
':u:::ieclion with Local plans and membership schemes was highlJgtit.ed. Mi*. Carter
c.uphaaised thal the League now had a eapaciLy fox* following up ori the xrwundwox-k
already established. Improvements would be ongoing.

       Mi-. C. Moynihan, whiiat geriei-ally welcoming the effox’ta lo dale, fell
U.u'. ihu results still Tell short of what hud been agreed. HI a undcfstundiMg
or. -nenbsrship schemes was that attemps should have been made to achicvc at
  cast       of ground capacity. Based on ’home* capacity 51 clubs had r.ot acricvc
*.■ nii ilmum target. He suggested tlmt a club by club review should be cudc.'Uuhc
to nrccrtain more precisely why clubs had failed.

      M l*. Carter referred to the fundamental difference of opinion on what was
bcinc; attempted but Kr. R. Jones agreed that the D.o.E. had known that the
proposals were being based on 'home' capacity.

      .
      v!r. J.D. Pnillips (A.C.KO.) explained the misgivings of Lhe police.
■Iround configuration and financial implication were major cuuSidorntiuns.
ur.ere were no objections of yx-iaciplu.

     Hr. Carter said that Clubs had always understood they were looking at
tfe issue on a voluntary basis. With the exception of three clubs all
rcconnendations had been accepted ant! he could not accept that insufficient
bad been done.

     It was agreed to work towards a review in eight weeks.

     On international issues Mr. Mil 11 chip indicated that Iherc had been no
rcporis of any problems at over 100 pre-season matches abroad.

     Both the Football Association and the Foreign Office were concerned ihaL
Uvcrton and Liverpool would be visiting Madrid on successive days later in
the month. The matter was still under consideration by the Football Association

     Arrangements for England’3 match in West Germany on 9th September were
discussed.

     Kr. Moynihan pledged his full support towards getting English dubs back
into Europe.


                                                                 14th August. 1987.
.T.D. Dent
