                                              13 July 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH
Attending at a consultation with John Dyson, Julian Gibson
Watt and               on the above and discussing tactics
for the oral submissions tomorrow. Dyson thought that Mr
          's submissions on behalf of the bereaved and
injured were outrageous given that he had not put any of the
substantive allegations to the FA witnesses. Perhaps the
way to deal with them was to complain about them not having
been put but not give the opportunity for the judge to call
Kelly who was likely to turn up tomorrow. We would give our
answer to them which was that it was not our practice to get
into the detailed technical security aspect* of choosing a
ground, a matter we left entirely to bodies more suited to
that purpose. If people were saying we ought to have done
that it was a pretty far fetched allegation.

We went through the other submissions. The points which
arose were as follows:-
(i)   the South Yorkshire police's submission was incredibly
      poor. It was bad tacticly and in substance. They had
      helped Sheffield Wednesday's position by being so
      hopeless. Sheffield Wenesday's was pretty good but
      much too complicated by references to the evidence.
      They had actually got wrong the purpose of Ken Evans'
      visit to Hillsborough last year which should be
      corrected.
H&LlXtiJCMr “for the bereaved and injured listed the*«
particulars of negligence against the FA in that they failed
to inspect all licences or look at thfturnstiles when no
criticism was levelled at Kelly for not having done so in
the witness box. We could not see how that was causative in
any sense.
We agreed that we ought to adopt the submissions of the
Treasury Solicitor.         agifeod thafe h e d i J a a toijllr Kelly
had put forward no good reason why Old Trafford was not just
as good as Hillsborough and we could not resile from that.
We agreed that it was somewhat unfair to have Hillsborough
for the second year running and unfortunately the complaint
was not put to the committee and agreedthat Manchester
United was just as good but none of those factors were
causative. It was certainly true that Liverpool would have
the smaller ticket allocation and further to travel but
there was no indication that non-ticket holders got in to
cause problems -

We discussed the FSA's submissions and we agreed that it was
pretty confused as to where they were coming from. They
said that the element of unfairness in choice of venue and
allocation of ends was not a contributing factor. They said
that however it was forseeable that there would be
non-ticket holders and an entry of people who were otherwise
going to the Kop end. They also said there was a failure
considers turnstiles and there was too much weight placed on
Evans7 report outweighing other considerations. They also
complained about the Liverpool representations not being
put.

We would have to explain that the FA did not get involved in
safety matters for very good reason and that it may be that
we should refer him to what we say inour Phase 2 submission.
The Football League would also probably have something to
say about matters if that were a role given to the FA.

John Dyson was going to do some more work on the submissions
tonight and he would give us his final view on the train up
tomorrow but for the moment he thought one ought to (i)
adopt the Treasury Solicitor's view of the events and (ii)
belittle the families' submissions put forward by
QC on the basis that they could not really be serious^*
submissions against the FA on the face of them.

Engaged 1 hour 30 minutes including dictation
