                                         25 April 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

I telephoned Mr Dyson Q C 's clerk and confirmed his
conversation with        |on Friday.  I said he should take it
that Mr Dyson would be needed on Friday but I would get back
to him with confirmation later on this morning.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


Subsequently attending Mr Brummell on          the Treasury
Solicitor and asking whether he had more information
concerning Friday.

He was waiting for a secretary at the Home Office to come
back who had been in Sheffield with Lord Justice Taylor.   He
thought it would be a 10 am start on Friday and obviously it
would be too much to expect that the parties swap the huge
amount of documentary material by then.  He understood that
the intention was to get on and do it as quickly as possible
and normally the Treasury Solicitor's role would be
interviewing witnesses but he understood that the West
Midland police force was going to do this.  He was going to
see Andrew Collins QC tomorrow morning to work out strategy.
He said we did not have much time if Lord Justice Taylor
intended to open the hearing on 15 May.  We agreed to speak
later on today once he had further information.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


I booked John Dyson for a con on Wednesday 26 April at 5 pm.
Dyson's clerk said he would let Julian Gibson WattO clerk
know.  We said we were still considering whether we would
need Mr Dyson on Friday.   I expected that Collins QC was
going up because they were solicitors to the inquiry as it
were ie Treasury Solicitor.   We thought it may be more
sensible just to have the junior there.   We would be
discussing that with them on Wednesday.   He would be
receiving papers throughout the course of the day in a
rather piecemeal fashion.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
          telephoned.  She was referring to the extra set of
papers that I had just received.  She said the Department of
Environment letter ought to be responded to by Friday.

In addition there was a report as to why the security
liaison officer at  the FA did not go to Hillsborough this
year.  There was a   report of last year's    semi-final which we
ought to consider as a particularly relevant document.   I
said we were liaising closely with the Treasury Solicitors
at the moment and I would give her some more news as to when
the actual hearing was likely to take place soon.   It may be
as soon as 15 May lasting to 23 June.

We were going down   to see Counsel having    read the papers on
Wednesday afternoon.   I would inform her of the outcome of
what was happening at the match on Wednesday night.

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation
