                                                    19th April, 1989


        ’               THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
The day was Saturday 15th April, 1989, F.A. Cup Semi Final Day.      I
had never been to a Semi Final before. I set off with three members
of my family, one was my thirteen year old son.     He thought we were
going to have a great day.    Two of us were Forrest Fans and two were
Liverpool Fans.   Two would come back happy and two would be a little
bit dissappointed. That was far from the truth.

What we encountered we had no idea.   We set off in plenty of time for
Sheffield arriving at 12.30p.m. the match did not start until 3.00p.m.
We had a bite to eat after we had parked about 15 minutes from the
ground.  As we walked towards the ground we were pestered by supporters
asking if we had any spare tickets.     I would not dream of going to
a football match which was all ticket if I did not have a ticket.

We approached the ground, there was a barrier across one side with
Police patrolling.    We asked the Police which was our entrance, they
pointed about 10 yards beyond but because the barrier was up they would
not let us through, we had to walk all the way round. Never mind the
exercise will do us good.

We got into the ground and took our seats, it was a magnificent stadium.
The crowd was beginning to build up, our seats were in the South Stand
near the Leppings Lane end, just in line with the by line.        To our
left, high up, was a Police Observation Post.        Three Officers were
situated with short wave radios and TV monitors. The camaras positioned
around the ground and outside the ground.       All the time monitoring
the crowd behaviour.   At the Leppings Lane end, this section was split
into four in the standing area. The centre two sections were quite
full at 2.30p.m. with the end two sections very sparse of spectators.
At 2.50p.m. we observed that there was quite a lot of swaying in those
two centre sections but the outer two were filling up very very slowly
indeed.    The game started with all spectators oblivious to what was
happening.   After a short time we noticed one or two Police running
along the touch line to the goal at the Leppins Lane end. It was obvious
that they thought that there was trouble as spectators were trying
to get out onto the pitch.     The Police at first appeared to try to
deter them from doing this but then the spectators swung quite
dramatically and started to climb up into the main stand and the
spectators there were trying to pull them free.    They were also trying
to climb over the divisional partitions into the outer two sections.
By this time, in between watching the match and observing the Leppings
Lane end the situation became out of hand and eventually the Police
started to help the spectators over the barrier which was quite high
and difficult to get over. At this point nobody knew what was happening
or the scale of the problem behind the barriers. The spectators helped
each other over the barrier onto the pitch and eventually there must
have been about 500 spectators who were on the cinder track behind
the pitch and there was so many in fact they started to go onto the
pitch but tried to keep close to the by line.     At this point in time
a Senior Officer raced across the field trying to catch the eye of
the Referee.   Play was still going on but obviously it was at the far
end of the pitch.    The referee turned and saw the Police Officer, went
towards him, made conversation and the referee, decided to take the
players off the field.    Once the players were off the field, at least
a hundred Police Officers came into the ground from the far side, from
the Spoin Kop. Totally unaware of what was going on they thought clearly,
that there was going to be a riot so they formed a barrier the full
width of the field along the centre line. Still the fans were coming
over the barrier, by this time they had Managed to break free one of
the gates.    The spectators started bringing numerous casualties out
onto the green turf and laying them out. Some of them immediately sat
up, others laid motionless on the ground.

At this point in time it oust be noted that it was only the Liverpool
supporters who were actually carrying the spectators and helping them
to get free from the pressure on the Terrace.         The casualties were
laid on the floor and the spectators started on a number of casualties
to try to resuscitate them, obviously they were unconscious.         There
were two young girls near the corner flag, they tried to revive them
for a long long time and eventually they put a coat over their heads.
There was one boy who was as old as my youngest son ; 10, he was brought
right near the touch line, there was a young Police Cadet and a Lady
Police Officer assisting with mouth to mouth resuscitation. They tried
for about ten minutes without any success.       Spectators in the stand
where I was, and in the terrace below watched helplessly. A big spectator
ran over, said something to the Police Officers and they moved out
of the way, he obviously must have been a First Aider or a Doctor or
somebody with Medical knowledge.       He tried frantically for another
five minutes or it seemed that long to me, eventually all the people
crowding round let out a great cheer, he had started to breathe.       All
in the grand stand and in the terraces below started to cheer and applaud,
our jubilance was short lived, within a minute the big fellow was down,
mouth to mouth resuscitation again, the little boy had stopped breathing.
He eventually started breathing again, they turned him into the recovery
position, four spectators around this boy ran for a stretcher.        They
tried to pull away a notice board around the perimeter.       Four Police
Officers went across, and at first it looked as if they were trying
to hinder, but after a few words they started to assist and pulled
this notice board away, it was then taken over to the boy, he was put
on and was transported right across to the far side.       While this was
going on an ambulance had turned up behind the goal. A number of bodies
were put inside.     It was still not clear at this point in time what
the casualty situation was but it was obvious that there was a number
of fatalities.   Spectators in the front row of the West Stand, started
to dismantle all the notice boards which were beneath them, hand them
down carefully and eventually they found their way onto the pitch.
They were taken to each casualty and then transferred right across
the ground to waiting ambulances that could not really get into the
ground for the situation.

Whilst this was going on the hundred or so Police Officers still on
the centre line, still waiting for trouble, still waiting for a riot,
at this point a number of Nottingham Forrest fans climbed over the
fence at the Spoint Kop and started to dismantle the sign boards behind
their goal and carry them to where they were needed. They then joined
with the Liverpool fans in conveying the bodies across to the far side.
There were only a few Police Officers helping to carry the stretcher
bound casualties across and help them in reviving the injured spectators.
The control by the Police during this operation was absolutely negative.
No one seemed to be in charge at all, and it was the Liverpool fans
who took the initiative in dealing with the emergency situation.
Eventually a full half of the playing area was covered with distraught
Liverpool fans.   The Manager of Liverpool Football Club, Kenny Dalglish
came to the public address system, appealed for calm, there was no
need, they were completely calm, he asked them to move off the field,
those who were not in need of medical attention, they moved to the
side waiting for further instructions.    It is true there were a couple
of incidents, one involving a News Reporter trying to take photographs
of dead bodies.     Distraught and angry fans seized him.     The Police
protected him and separated him by escorting him away.       They should
have taken his camara away, I would have.

Another incident involving some of the fans near the players tunnel,
 they congregated round the BBC Camara as you could see from the News
Report, they were not causing problems. They were voicing their opinion
 at the lack of control, why did it happen, who's fault was it, why was
 it not averted?    After a very long time when most of the bodies had
been taken across to the waiting amulances and the terraces were nearly
empty it became evident of the horror of the incident. Steel barriers
capable of withstanding 50 tons pressure were flattened, it was only
then that the injuries became apparent.      As the fans left the ground
the Police in the centre began to disperse slowly.       Behind the goal
all the personal belongings, shoes, boots, coats, scarves were gathered
in one big heap. Ve left the ground at about 4.30p.m. passing spectators
in silence. The Police outside the ground tried to make their prescence
felt by stopping cars, asking them where they were going, stopping
groups of people, single people, asking them where they were going.
  Still they were looking for trouble.      There was no trouble, people
were too upset by the situation to think about causing trouble.        It
was not until I got back to the car and switched the radio on that
I heard the horrific number of fatalities, 74.       That must have been
everybody who was carried across the full length of the field.         As
the reasons for this disaster unfold, the responsibility of crowd
observation and crowd control lies fairly and squarely with the Police.
  As they were situated in that control tower using the close circuit
monitors and using radios for giving instructions, it was obvious that
opening a gate and letting fans in would result in them getting into
the ground and seeing the game as quickly as possible. With the centre
two sections of the Leppings Lane end being overfull it would have
been an easy instruction to deploy some of the Police Officers to the
tunnels leading into those two sections and directing the fans into
the end two sections.     Outside the ground at that particular end the
crowd was building up, two Police Horses appeared to be doing very
little to try to relieve the pressure. I believe those Police Officers
failed in their duty to ensure the safety of those fans in that situation
outside the Leppings Lane end.        I also feel that the observation
controller, overriding and overseeing every action and activity around
the ground failed to recognise the problem in the centre two sections,
and deal with it accordingly by averting fans into the end two sections.
The horrific irony is that we had a situation that the Police had no
idea how to control.      They are just clearly trained in controlling
riot and violence and they were totally unable to control human tragedy.
By being First Aid Trained, they would have been able to make some
contribution to the situation. Very few did.

Because this gate was opened,   many who did not have tickets, gained
entry and contributed to the    problem unintentionally. I have been
to many    football matches in my life and by being all ticket it is far
quicker    to gain entry into the ground thanit is being paying cash.
Ve now look at the consequences of having Membership cards. In a situation
like the 15th April, 1989 entry to the ground would have been much
slower causing terrific build up outside.      It is easy to say that by
being a member and having a membership card you must try to get to
the ground a littlebit earlier.      We did because we travelled a long
way.   Not everybody thinks the same way as we do.      People get delayed
in traffic which contributes to late arrivals.     If this game had been
by Membership Card the same situation could have happened, spectators
outside without Membership cars, waiting to get in, the pressure builds
up, the   gates are opened to relieve what is anticipated as a dangerous
situation and fans who have had their cards taken away from them gain
entry and cause great problems.

The Government must realise the tragedy caused at Hillsborough on Saturday
15th april, 1989 is due to interference by Government, Local Authority
and Police, in trying to restrict members of the public as spectators
from moving freely and safely around our grounds.       If the divisional
fences and the perimeter fences were not present today this tragedy
would never have arisen, as the spectators would have merely moved
to one side to avert the pressure. Penning in of spectators is a serious
breach of the Health and Safety at Work Act as far as Safe Access and
Safe Egress is concerned, in an emergency evacuation situation. Football
clubs must be left to manage their own business without interference
from outside bodies unless they request specialist advice and assistence.
It will be interesting to seehow the Officer in charge of survelance
and deployment of his force will allay the blame for        this tragedy.
95 passionate fans do not know the cause. Thousands do.



Yours faithfully,
