                         THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                       LIMITED
                                                       Founded 1863
                                       Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                     President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                            Chairman: F. A. M il l ic h i p

   Chief Executive:                                                                      Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G.    K e l l y f c is                                                                    Telex: 261110
                                                                                           Facsimile: 01-402 0486


                               16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 Our Ref:                                           Your Ref:



                                                                                         18th May 1989




To Members of the Council




Dear Sir,

      In view of the intense speculation about football's
response to last Saturday's incidents at Crystal Palace and
elsewhere, I have today made public a discussion document that
will be put before the F. A. Council next Thursday, 25th May.

      I believe this paper could form the basis of The Football
Association's evidence in relation to part 2 of Lord Justice
Taylor's enquiry and the blue-print for the lead the Association
will take in dealing with the complex - and often contradictory -
issues of hooliganism and crowd safety.




                                                                                 Yours faithfully




Enc.




                                   Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                                   Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
                 DISCUSSION DOCUMENT FOR F. A. COUNCIL

                               25TH MAY 1989




1.   INTRODUCTI ON



     1.      1   The Times reported on 17th May,   "Everyone wants a

simple,    easy solution to the ills of English football.      There is

none.     The solution must address a complex combination of social

and political issues and those of the game itself".



     1.      2   The game has been beset by the twin problems of

hooliganism and outdated facilities.       It has attempted to tackle

both.



     1.      3    Hooliganism has been contained by the deployment of

huge resources,      both in terms of manpower and finances.    Better

intelligence,     closed circuit television surveillance and blanket

policing,    backed by public order legislation in general and

alcohol legislation in particular,      have drastically reduced the

number of incidents inside grounds.



     1.4 • Clubs have spent an estimated £50 million on safety

measures since the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 led to the

establishment of The Football Grounds Improvement Trust.         But

safety work did not enhance amenities and in latter years clubs

have begun to receive grants for ground improvements generally.
     1.       5     Yet still the impression given to the outside world is,

in the words of one critic,       of a slum sport,   inhabited by slum

people.     Fences and cages do not make for an inviting environment.



     1. 6     Football needs a dynamic approach towards regenerating

its image.        The game enjoys a vast fund of goodwill.    The period

since 1986 has seen more people playing and watching the game.

An increase in the length of suspensions has led to a reduction

in player misconduct in The Football League.          We must capitalise

on this base in the wake of Hillsborough.        Yet again we have been

propelled into the national and international limelight and the

glare is uncomfortable.



2.   SEATING AND FACILITIES



     2. 1    First,   we need to get more seats into our major grounds.

The First Division is 38% seated.        Experience at Aberdeen and

Glasgow Rangers has shown that,       if supporters are treated well,

they react well.        Seated customers are more safely controlled and

the tendency to taunt and gesture is gradually lessened.          Grounds

become better places to visit.        Spectators can stand and watch in

safety,     but the ratio of seats to standing accommodation must be

altered so that there is a preponderance of seats.



     2.       2 • Second,   we need to improve our facilities at grounds.

There is little incentive for the fan, particularly the

travelling supporter,       to forego the pub unless the ground can

offer reasonably-priced,       wholesome refreshment.    The Football

Association can put resources into a drive for better amenities.
    2.        3   Action is needed therefore to allow our existing major

stad-ia to become safer,     more wholesome arenas.       They enjoy

permanent bases of support and ancillary activities and do not in

general,     need to consider moving or sharing.



    2.        4   To supplement these existing stadia we need,         however,

new multi-purpose grounds,        on green field sites,    ready and

willing to host major international tournaments,           such as the

F. I.F.A.     World Cup, which requires a number of all-seater

stadia.



    2.        5   There are many clubs that would welcome the opportunity

of moving to areas that provide better communications,             better

parking,     perhaps shared use of facilities.       Many spring to mind

as candidates:     The Bristol clubs,    one of whom has no current

home,     Fulham and Brentford,    Blackburn and Preston,    Bolton and

Bury,     Rochdale and Oldham,    Leeds and Bradford,   Chester and

Wrexham,     Stoke City and Port Vale,    Huddersfield Town and

Halifax,     Watford and Luton Town,    Enfield and Barnet.



     2.       6   As a first phase,   The Football Association should look

again at the feasibility study carried out in 1983 based on a

ground sharing proposal.         The brief:   to provide a model

multi-purpose,      two-club stadium,   on a green field site.       The

finance- would not necessarily be out of the question,          given

willing partners from the areas of contruction,           property

development,      local authority and finance.      Public money, might be

made available to the consortium,        both U. K. and E. E. C. to support

this private invitiative.



     2.       7   To provide the necessary stimulus for these improvements

there is a strong case for the reduction in the pool betting tax
from 42.5% to 40%.       This would release £16million per annum which

the Pool Promoters might be persuaded to allocate for ground

improvements,      thereby putting the game in receipt of over £30

million per year from pools sources.          There is no need to create

a Football Levy Board,      as proposed by the Rothschild Commission

in 1977 when it recommended a reduction of duty to 37%,           because

the Football Trust/Football Grounds Improvement Trust already

acts as a suitable vehicle with proven track record.



     2. 8   There is also the need for ready access to expertise in .

the area of modernisation and construction of football stadia.

The Football Association is investigating ways of providing a

consultancy service.



3.   CROWD CONTROL



     3. 1   The confrontation between supporters needs to be

eliminated.       This can be achieved not by embracing the National

Membership Scheme,      which threatens the very existence of the game

by detering the casual supporter,        costing millions of pounds and

alienating the true fan,      but by going down a different road

whereby the away fan must belong to the away club's membership

scheme.     The tribal aspects of football support would be

eliminated and the element of friendly rivalry would come back to

the game.



     3.       2   These plans need the wholehearted backing of the police

and the clubs.       The police,   A. C. P. O. , have already endorsed the

"partial home,      100% away" membership scheme,     although it will

require rigorous policing in the early stages          (and, incidentally,

early filtering and exchange of information about travelling

people) to prevent away non-members gaining access to home
non-members areas.     It may be necessary to bolster the scheme by

selective all-ticket matches for a short period.



    3.       3   There is a need for the football authorities to

establish a common policy on delaying kick-offs.       Perhaps the

safety and security of spectators is the only criterion,        but I

raise the point because The Football League had,      until

Hillsborough,    been adopting a harder line on late kick-offs,

fearful not only of encouraging supporters to arrive later but

also,    in the latter stages of the season,   of contrived endings.



    3.       4   Fencing will continue to be required for the foreseeable

future,    given that there is insufficient space for moats.      The

ideal pitch protection affords ready access to the playing area

in cases of emergency.      The Football Association is arranging, a

visit to France to inspect the latest design,      in conjunction with

representatives of the local authorities who,      of course,   are

responsible for licensing.



    3.       5   There is a number of Lord Popplewell' s important

recommendations that have not yet been implemented.       For

instance,    the police should be given the unfettered right to

search those entering football graounds.



    3.       6   There is a simple common law which works excellently in

Scotland - breach of the peace - which in practice covers any act

likely to provoke disorder.      The law there is flexible,     but in

England and Wales the Government have not acted upon Popplewell's

admirable recommendations.
4.   MEDICAL PROVISION




     4. 1   The Football Association has a very active Medical

Committee,    concerned primarily with the safety and well-being of

players.     It would be possible,     through this Committee,   to draw

up a schedule of minimum medical facilities which should be

incorporated into the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.



5.   SUPPORTER RELATIONS



     5. 1    There is undoubtedly a need for better communication

with those who support our game.         The Football Association is

consulting organisations with relevant experience in the area of

customer relations.        The Association should consider employing a

customer relations liaison officer.



6.   OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS



     6. 1   The Football Association is looking to invest resources

in strengthening our activities across the board and so the next

phase will be to conduct a major,        national survey,   of the leisure

needs of our towns and cities.         There are plenty of people who

still want to play football.         The game is booming.    There are not

as many people interested in refereeing the- game and so we need

to put say,      £100, 000 p. a. into a programme for recruitment,

training and incentives for match officials.



     6.      2    But,   more importantly,   facilities and services are being

squeezed to the extent that the pitches will not be available

unless we take steps to ascertain and meet the likely demand.
     6.      3   The organisation of women's football would benefit from

investment in coaches and facilities.     Schools and voluntary

organisations likewise.     The County Associations can be helped to

meet the demand for football by The Football Association's

instigating a comprehensive programme of staff training and

comput eri s at i on.



7.   SUMMARY



     1.1    I had not wished to pre-empt a general dicussion at

Council,    but there has been immense pressure upon the Association

this week to demonstrate that it is capable of giving a clear

lead to football.




18th May 1989                                   Graham Kelly

                                                Chief Executive
