     IF IR IE g iM IF ! lE IL IID S                                 Walden House 17-24 Cathedral Place
                                                                    London EC4M 71A
                                                                    Telephone 01-606 6677
     Fax Transmittal Form                                           Telex 263396


     m                                                              n    +         08.06.89
     To:               ----------------------------                 Date:                           1 v r> . ^

     Company:          st George Swallow Hotel                     Time:

     Country:          Sheffield u k                               Fax N o :

     From:                           ^                              No. o f pages (including this page): [ 4

     Direct fax lines:

         you do not receive all the pages, please telephone or telex immediately
»

           For

           Hillsborough

           R eg a r d i n g p a r a g r a p h ^ .41 to 2.44 of Mr Justice Popplewell's final
           r e p or t I have obtained two large files covering the matter which
           I am going through for relevant material.

           I will send a copy of the report itself which contains the
           " b l u e p r i n t ” as soon as it is copied.

           For the time being I attach

           1.     the average home gates of Liverpool Manchester United and
                  N ot t i n g h a m Forest with the breakdown you requested.

           2.     The Rules of the Association for 1984/85 and 1985/86 for the
                  changes.

           3.    FA crowd control letter of 17 August 1983 with enclosed
                 memorandum.

          4.     FA crowd control letter of 9 December 1985 with enclosed
                 memorandum.

                tells me that Sheffield Wednesday plans are with our papers
         a l t hough the only one I can remember is the one attached to the
         letter agreeing to host the semi-final.           I will search through
         the other files.     I do not recall s e e in g ■»which were endorsed by
         the F A .

         Regards.                                 P 'C *■      I             (htu/f’ p                   ISM


                                                      4     -OXvkS                       .iff' *.
                                                          I h i ^ e XKdUU,                          Cf
    A list o f p a rtn e rs ’ nam es is available at the above address
     ©

    (!)



LIVERPOOL


Average home gate 1988-89:    38,574
Capacity:  21,427 seated and 24,100 standing
Average away gate 1988-89:   27,700



MANCHESTER UNITED


Average home gate 1988-89:   36,493
Capacity: 25,764 seated and 30,699 standing
Average away gate 1988-89:   23,640




NOTTINGHAM FOREST


Average home gate 1988-89:   20,784
Capacity:  15,149 seated and 20,268 standing
Average away gate 1988-89:   21,044
                  RULES OF THE ASSOCIATION


Responsibility of Asswiiations and Clubs
31. (a) Reasonable Precautions to be Taken
   (i) Every Association and Club is responsible to the
   Council for the conduct of its Players, Officials, Spectators
   and Supporters. The visiting Club shall be responsible to
  the Council for the conduct of its Supporters.
  (ii) Clubs on whose grounds a match is played shall take
  all reasonable precautions to prevent Supporters and
  Spectators from encroaching onto the pitch and/or
  throwing missiles on to the pitch and/or threatening Match
  Officials and other Officials or Players before, during or
  after matches.
  (iii) Associations and Clubs are required to prevent betting
  and the use of objectionable language by Officials, Staff,
  Players and Supporters.
  (b) Failure to fulffil adequately the above responsibilities
could lead to a charge of misconduct.
    (c) Misconduct— Betting and Bribery
    An Official of an Association or Club, Referee, Linesman
 or Playershallnotbetonany Football match, and a breach of
 this condition is misconduct. It is misconduct for any
 Associaton or Club, or for any Official, Member or Player of
 any Association or Club, Referee or Linesman to offer or
 attempt to offer, either directly or indirectly, any
 consideration whatever to another Association or Club or to
 any Official, Member or Player of any other Association or
 Club, or to any Referee or Linesman with a view to
 influencing the result of any match.
    It is misconduct for any Association or Club, or any
Official, Member or Player of any Association or Club, or
any Referee or Linesman to accept any such consideration.
    It is misconduct for any Official, Member or Player of any
Association or Club, or any Referee or Linesman to take part
in Coupon Football Betting except authorised and registered
Football Pools.
  (d) Breach o f Rule 31 (a)— Removalfrom Ground
   In addition to any other punishment that may be imposed
for a breach of this Rule, any Player, Official or spectator
may be removed from any ground, and such force used as
may be necessary for the purpose of effecting such removal.
I E ASSOCIATION                                                RULES OF THE ASSOCIATION                  55


id e r tw e lv e ( 12 ) y e a r s ;          and (without good and sufficient cause) refusing to comply
5 u n d e r thirteen ( 1 3 ) y e a r s;      with the arrangements of the Council for playing the match,
s u n d e r fo u r te en ( 1 4 ) y e a r s   or failing to attend such match, may be a d ju d g e d by the
n ^ e!!Ven(11)         during the            Council to have been guilty of misconduct, and any Club or
            the‘hirty-first (31st)           Official who may be deemed to have encouraged or instigated
X ? Centre of Excellence for                 such Player to commit a breach of instruction or rule, shall
j ..be a breach of the Rule for              be deemed guilty of a similar offence.
3 o S s eTheC                                   (c) Inter-County Matches
aoiooys. The ?aCh?rtrainb°ys
             licensing authority                In Inter-county Association matches a Player must be a
Representatives each of The                  bona fide Member of a Club belonging to The Association for
-ague Limited and The English                which he plays, but a Player shall always be eligibleto.play
                                             for the County of his birth. A Player shall not be eligible to
                                             play for more than one (1) County Association in the same
 o f l ^ AAssociation employing              season in Inter-County Competition matches.

* ”  J    egister any boy as an
          season
          s       provided such
          *®s receiving full-time
  the Education Acts and the
                                                  JURISDICTION OF THE ASSOCIATION OVER
                                                    OFFICIALS, PLAYERS AND SPECTATORS
                                             Rules and Regulations o f The Association
P jlas negotiated and agreed                 23. Players, Officials and spectators are only allowed to
he Enghsh Schools’ Football                  take part in or attend matches on condition that they observe
le wgMtemg of Associated                     the Rules and Regulations of The Association, and every
           *5
                                             affiliated Association or Club is required to observe and
fl! ,!f.      marked “L” (or                 enforce such Rules and Regulations.
. t . s c h e d u l e annexed
btamed from the League in                     Responsibility of Associations and Clubs
                                              24. (i) Every Association and Club shall be responsible
                                              for ensuring;
?onv > n f 0 r a n y ? ,Ub0r C,“ b
                                                 (a) that its directors, players, officials, employees, spec­
2 £ J 2 ! 501,001 for ,lK                     tators and all persons purporting to be its supporters or
Matches                                       followers conduct themselves in an orderly fashion and
                                              refrain from violent, threatening, abusive, obscene or
                                              Drovocative behaviour, conduct or language whilst attend­
country by virtue of his birth                ing at a match in which it is involved, whether on its own
her or by the law of that
naturalisation is qualified to                ground or elsewhere;
esentative teams for that                        (b) that no spectators or unauthorised persons are per­
                                              mitted to encroach on to the pitch area or to throw missiles,
                                              bottles or other potentially harmful or dangerous objects at
    t                                         or on to the pitch. Clubs are expected to provide a private
   .      International or                    way for players and officials from playing ground to dres­
ociation or to tour abroad                    sing room wherever this is practicable.
        ^                        RULES OF THE ASSOCIATION




    ^       H       S       :        “           ,       «        r         s        £        S

    S S K S .i" r S - f '““' =
   ; : ~ ~ K .“" - - C                                        t a ; c ; '5 3
   b flS lU “           a S d r S S ^ 7 h ; ! ' T t e A ! f >Cf               t a n m ''s t l > » e
  e x p u l s i o n a n y p e r s o n w h o is g u n t y ^ f L u l t i n ^ r T m n
  c o n d u c t t o w a r d s a M a tc h O f f ic ia l                   g or lmProper

  fieldTph^wlluSw”                                                                    from tte
  c o m m it t e d o n t h e f ie ld L in e s m a n {,          k 0       n Pe h a s b e e n
  t h e fie ld o f p la y lik e l y to brin p T h p        °                in c id e n t s o n
  i f such in r iH « it c k            b r in g t h e g a m e i n t o d is r e p u t e m u s t




 f i s c o nfd u c t iw a s o p
 m                                    S re
                              f a n a tu         g        gl « e ^ gu n c US th a t *s u c h
 r e g is t r a t io n m a y b e S       r   a       w        n       m v e s t i Sa t i ° " > h is




 Reporting of Misconduct

Q ubs^nd R e f e S t o reporttoTh   C° Unci1’ 0fficiaIs of
misconduct likefcto brina /h .    Association all cases of
O f f ic i a ls o f i S         m u ™ ^ M 8r ? - h' r / ,^ P “ te - a " d
in f r in g e m e n t o f R u l e s w it h o u t d e la y A sso cIa “ ° n any

d ir e c ‘S r a J A          S    S      J   r   ^       1"                 sh a"         “ »

JK&JaaSE^s^raSffi
                                         ^I'UU           I 1) A l, L / V W U ' - i AVI t u n
                                                                      IIM II I-II
                                                 /•(///V)//.    l l l . l t MA.II-.SI Y   I III-: (.H II I N
                                              f u s t , 1,111    II N i l     I Ml    I K IK I-' (H- K I N I
                                                         Ch'iinittiri        I A     M I I I.K 'I III*


                                                                                                               l- U O T H A I.I . ASS OC IA TI ON , L O N D O N . W2 J L W
    ( i l l H ’l l l l A «'f i c i m y
                                                                                                                           I'lronc: 01-262 45 42/ 40 2 7151
         I-A.CitoKl-'K
                                                                                                                                    Telex: 2 6 1 1 10



                                         I(. I . A N C A S T L K C A T I - . L O N (JON W2 JLW

        Our Re/.                                                            Ytitir Rej:                                     17th A u g u s t , 1983




            TO:               S E C R E T A RIES OF FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS




            D ea r Sirs

                                                                CROWD CO NTROL

                      A joint Liaison Group consisting of members of The
            Football Association, the Football League and the Ministry
            of Sport,, r e p r e s e n t i n g H.M. Government, has recently been
            e x a mi ni ng the recommendations of the Ministerial Working
            Party of 19 74/75 in relation to crowd control matters
            w it h a view to bring i n g them up to date in the light of
            present day problems now facing Clubs.

                       The Safety of Sports Grounds Act of 1975 requires
             desi gnated Clubs to comply w i t h cert a i n _regulations such
             as the instal lation of segregation barriers and walkway
             systems and these undoubtedly play their part in con­
             tributing towards better c rowd behaviour.                 There are
             o t h e r aspects of crowd control however, w h i c h it is
             felt, if applied, can make a major contribution towards
             good'crowd b e h a v i o u r and it has therefore been agreed
             by The Football Association and the Football League
             that the e n c l o s e d M e m o r a n d u m be circulated to all
             Football League Clubs.
L
                       Needless to say, in the event of spectator m i s ­
            be h a v i o u r o c c urring at a match, due consideration would
            be given to the extent to w hich the Club involved had
             applied the points referred to in the Memorandum.
            We appreciate that in accordance with the Recommendations
             sent out in 1975, a good many Clubs will have already
             implemented many of the ideas set out in the enclosed
             Memorandum but we trust that it will be understood that
             the prime object of issuing this directive is to help _
            -Clubs in their efforts to ensure good behaviour at their
              mat c h e s .
                           _   2    -




         Should there be any other points that are not included
in the    Memorandum that you feel would be advantageous to
adopt,    perhaps you would be kind enough to send them to
me for    consideration by the Association and the Football
League    with a view to their being passed on to other Clubs.


                                   Yours   faithfully,




                                   E .A. Croker,
                                   General Secretary.




ENC.
                            THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

     MEMORANDUM T O FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS REGARDING CROWD CONTROL

•   CLUBS ONLY

    MANDATORY

    (a)    Make adequate arrangements       for segregation of rival
           su pp o rt e rs .

    (b)    Detailed prior planning can solve many problems experienced
           both inside and outside of grounds.  Clubs must, therefore,
           undertake detailed liaison with the Police, opposing Club,
           rail and coach operators and Supporters' Travel Clubs at
           least 10 days before a match to determine movement of
           spectators and arrangements.  In the case of F.A. or
           League Cup Matches due consideration must be g i v e n , at
           the time of the draw, to possible replay arrangements.

    (c)   Ensure that the terraces are kept free of objects that can
           be used as missiles.

     d)   Arrange where p r a c t i c a b l e , for visiting supporters to use

#   (e)
           turnstiles nearest to the coach parks.

          Avoid all-night queues      for tickets.

    Strongly Recommended

    (f)   Install double barriers and walkway systems to afford
           quick access to terraces should the need arise.
           (MANDATORY F OR DESIGNATED CLUBS).

    (g)   Take legal steps to ban known trouble-makers           from the
           ground.

    (h)   Co-operate as closely as possible with          Magistrates.

    (i)   Arrange for appeals for good behaviour to be made ~
           possibly by leading players/Officials in programmes
           and over the public address system.

. IN RELATION TO A L C O H O L

    MANDATORY

    (a)   Ensure that drinks are sold in plastic          containers.

    Strongly Recommended

    (b)   Liaise with the Police to obtain the co-operation of
          publicans, off-licence propietors and all licence holders
           f o r sale of alcohol near the ground to close at appropriate
          time on match days.

    (c)   Restrict or, on occasion, ban the sale of alcoholic
          drink within the stadium, excep t in approved areas.
CLUBS WITH THE POLICE

M ANDATORY

 (a)   Liaise with the Police to ensure proper deployment of
        stewards within grounds.  Stewards should be properly
        trained and regularly briefed to ensure they are
        capable of working closely with Police.  Stewards
        must be conspicuously dressed and easily identifiable.

(b)    Liaise with Police to arrange for the escort of visiting
        supporters from stations and coach parks to the ground
        and return.  (See also Mandatory Recommendation 1(b)).

(c)    Arrange for Police surveillance at the turnstiles to
       prevent missiles and alcoholic drinks being taken into
       the ground.

Strong l y Recommended

(d)    Liaise with Police over visits to motorway service areas
       by football supporters travelling to away matches.

(e)    Consider, in liaison with the Police, making potential
       p rob l em games "all ticket" and give maximum publicity
       to the fact.that tickets will not be available for
       purchase on the day of the match.

CLUBS AND SUPPORTERS'         CLUBS

S t r o n g l y Recommended

(a)    Arrange with of f icial Supporters' Club and Travel Clubs
       that charter coaches and trains only carry non-alcoholic
       drinks

(b)    Develop and ma i nt a in close relationship with Supporters'
       Club.

(c)    Examine from time to time the arrangements made for
       the sale of tickets by Supporters' and Travel Clubs.

(d)    Encourage supporters to travel to away matches in
       c hartered stewarded, responsible groups.

(e)    C on sider w it h Supporters'   Clubs the issue of combined
       travel and match tickets.




E.A. Croker
General Secretary



17th August,     1983.
                          THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                      LIMITED
                                   Patron: HER MAJESTYTlIE QufiEN
                                  President: H.R.H. THE DUKE OF KENT
                                         Chairman: F.A. MlLLICHIP

     General Secretary:                                                                  Plmne: frl -262 4542/4(12 7151
      E.A.CROKF.R                                                                               Telex: 26UK)




                            16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

     O ur Ref:              jr / 675            Your Ref:

                                                                         9th December-          IS85




      T02__Secretaries_of_Football_League_Clubs



      Dear Sir,

     Following lengthy discussions between The Football Association
     and The Football League, we are now able to send you, over our
     joint signatures, a revised Memorandum on Crowd Management.

     This document sets out to amplify and clarify the responsibilities
     of Clubs in relation to this most difficult problem.  Both our
     bodies are fully aware of the enormous amount of time, money and
     energy expended by our Clubs in ensuring that the public can
     attend matches in safety.   With the eyes of the world on us,
     however, we cannot afford to relax for one moment.

j:    We ask you to study the Memorandum in great detail.  Failure to
 {    act on any of the recommendations may be taken into  account should
b     a Club subsequently be charged with misconduct under Football
 *    Association Rules 23 and 24.

                                                              Yours faithfully,


                                                          r
                        E. A. CROKER                                                     R.H.G. KELLY
                      General Secretary                                                 General Secretary
                    Football Association                                                 Football League




     Enc,



                             Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Cate, L o ndon W 2 J L W
                             Incorporated in Ltm don     Registration N um ber 77797
MEMORANDUM TO FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS ON CROWD MANAGEMENT


SEASON 1985/1986 AND UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE


A.   ADMISSION OF SPECTATORS


      1. Clubs must, in consultation with the Police and visiting Club, considei
         whether any match should be made ’’all ticket” .

        a. If a match is made "all ticket" the home Club shall decide, in
           consultation with the Police and visiting Club, how many tickets,
           if any, shall be allocated to the visiting Club.

        b. Under no circumstances should tickets be sold on the day of the
           match. Maximum publicity should be given to this fact, in the
           areas of both Clubs.

        c. Clubs are entirely responsible for the distribution of tickets
           allocated to them and must take all possible steps to ensure that
           tickets are not sold to supporters of the opposing team.

        d. Ticket sales should be restricted to two per person.


     2. Clubs must give serious consideration to restricting admission to
        part of their ground to "members only".

     3. The Football Association may order any match to be "all ticket" or
        "members only" and restrict the distribution of tickets in any way
        it deems appropriate.

B.   PRIOR PLANNING   .


     1. Clubs must, in addition to the above, undertake detailed liason with
        the Police, opposing Club, rail and coach operators and supporters'
        Travel Clubs at least 10 days before a match to determine the likely
        movements of spectators and any other relevent matters. In the cases
        of Cup ties, due consideration must be given, at the time of the
        Draw, to possible replay arrangements.

     2. The number of Police and Stewards to operate at each match must be
        agreed with the Police

     3. Clubs should consider, in the interests of control at particular
        matches, reducing capacity, even when agreed with the competent
        authority under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, either for the
        ground as a whole, or for a particular section.

     4. Clubs should consider, if necessary, closing a particular section
        or sections of the ground.

     5. Clubs should consider in full consultation with Police, The Football
        Association and The Football League varying the kick-off times or
        even requesting permission to change the day of the match.

     6. The Football Association may close a section or sections of a ground
        for a particular match, or order it to be played without spectators.
     SEGREGATION


     1. Clubs must make adequate arrangements for the segregation of rival
        supporters.

     2. To ensure segregation, it will be necessary to reserve a
        section or sections in the stadium for visiting supporters.
        It is essential in this process that adequate information
        on the likely movements of visiting supporters is obtained
        by the Home Club in consultation with the visiting Club and
        the bodies listed in Bl.

     3. If the match is not "all ticket” , maximum publicity must
        be given to the location of the visitors’ section or sections.
        Such areas must be clearly sign-posted at the Stadium.

    4. As far as possible, the arrangements for the transport of
       visiting supporters should ensure that they do not come into
       contact with home supporters when making their way to and
       from the ground.

     5. Contingency plans must be made to move supporters situated


•   6.
       in the wrong section to the area or areas allocated for them,
       or else to be expelled from the Stadium.

          Wherever possible, segregation should be effected by permanent
         structures such as wall, barriers or fences. Only in
         exceptional circumstances should Police be called upon
         to form a ’’human’1 barrier.

    7. Double barriers and walkway systems should be installed to
       allow the Police to reinforce segregation and to gain access
       to terracing or seating should the need arise.

    8.    Spectators must not be able to circulate freely between
         sections of the Stadium.


    PROTECTION OF PLAYING AREA

m
         An adequate number of Police and Stewards must be available
         to restrict access to the Field of Play.

    2. Clubs must protect the playing field by means of a fence,
       moat, double-barrier, wall or other system capable of
       denying access to spectators. Any form of protection must
       incorporate an adequate number of exits, manned at all times,
       to allow access to the Field of Play in emergencies.

    3. The Football Association may instruct a Club to install such
       a fence, moat, or barrier, subject to any Designation order
       under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act which may be in force
       at the Club.

    4. Clubs must provide adequate protection for players and officials
       entering and leaving the Field.
 OTHER MEASURES AT THE GROUND


 1. A sufficient number of Police and adequately trained Stewards
    must be on duty before, during and after the game.

 2. Steps must be taken to ensure spectators do not bring objects
    into the ground that may be used in acts of violence.

 3. The ground itself must be kept clear of all objects which
    might be used as weapons or missiles.

 4. Refreshments must be sold in plastic containers or dispensed
    into plastic cups.

 5. Sufficient steps must be taken to exclude, in accordance
    with Government legislation, any spectator under the influence
    of alcohol.

 6. Clubs should also reserve the right to exclude,, and be capable
    of excluding, any person under the influence of drugs, any
    person known to them as a trouble-maker, or suspected of
    being a potential trouble-maker.

 7. During the entire time of presence of spectators in the Stadiums
    all door and gates must be sufficiently staffed to control
    entry or exit.

 8. Clubs must take active steps to install electronic and other
    surveillance systems to allow Police to direct personnel
    to problem areas and to assist in the identification and
    conviction of offenders, in accordance with the programme
    being implemented by the Football Trust.

 9. All efforts should be made to provide spectators with
    pre-match or half-time entertainment.

10. Adequate rooms and facilities should be provided in the Stadium
    for the Police and emergency services.

J.1. An effective public address system must be in operation before,
     during and after the game, manned by personnel trained in
     crowd control techniques.

12. Clubs should take whatever steps are necessary to ensure
    the comfort of the spectators before, during and after the
    game.


 FURTHER PRECAUTIONS


 1. Clubs should take active steps to prevent the operation of
    ticket touts.

 2. Clubs should take active steps to prevent ticket forgeries.

 3. Clubs should, as far as possible, record the names and addresses
    of the recipients of tickets.

 4. Clubs must ensure all members, directors, staff and players
    are aware of the provisions of this Memorandum.
   5» Clubs must ensure that players are aware of their responsibility
      to refrain from actions, words or gestures likely to produce
      a violent, aggressive or antagonistic reaction among spectators.

   6. Clubs should take all possible steps,to ensure the best possible
      conduct at all times by members, directors. staff and players.
      In particular, criticism should not be voiced publicly either
      of referees or of players, managers or other persons or bodies
      connected with the game.

   7. Clubs should seriously consider concerted campaigns involving
      leading players or other individuals likely to command respect
      to insure the best possible behaviour among supporters.

   8. Clubs must designate a liaison officer to co-ordinate security
      measures between Clubs and with the public authorities and
      to survey the observations of these measures.

   9. Clubs should take active steps to co-operate with Supporters’
      Clubs and similar organisations.


^^0.   Clubs should liaise with the Police to obtain the co-operation
       of publicans, off-licence proprietors and all licence holders,
       to restrict the sale of alcohol near to the ground at appropriate
       times on match d a y s .

 11. The Security Liaison Officers of The Football Association
     are available to help Clubs on request.


  MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED BY THE AWAY CLUB


  1. Clubs should take active steps to co-ordinate and control
     the movement of their supporters away from home.

  2. Clubs should voluntarily, if in any doubt as to their ability
     to control their supporters, decide not to take tickets for matches.

  3. Clubs should appoint Stewards to help manage and inform spectators


•    at matches and to accompany parties of supporters travelling away.

  4. Clubs must ensure that insofar as is practical alcohol is not
     made available to travelling supporters.

  5. Clubs should consider arranging close circuit transmissions
     of away matches to discourage travelling supporters.

  6. Travel should be co-ordinated so that supporters arrive as near
     to kick-off as possible and depart immediately afterwards.

  7. Clubs should liaise with Police over visits to motorway service
     areas by supporters travelling to away matches.

  8.   It is the responsibility of the away Club to advise the home Club
       of the recent behaviour of their supporters at away matches,
       irrespective of whether the behaviour has resulted in disciplinary
       action by The Football Association or not.

  S.    The visiting club with experience of their supporters travelling
       to away matches should co-operate in every way with the home club
       in matters of security, even physically checking segregation areas,
       vehicle parking areas, etc. Such assistance would not affect the
  shared responsibility of the home club.


CLUBS TRAVELLING ABROAD


1. Clubs may not for the time being play matches in Europe or against
   foreign teams in England. This includes professional sides from
   Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, other than Canon League,
   F.A. Cup or Milk Cup matches.

2. Clubs should not take tickets for matches abroad unless they and
   the competent authorities are absolutely satisfied that problems
   will not arise.

3. Clubs should liaise with the home club to ensure that tickets
   are not sold to English Nationals.

4. If supporters are expected to travel, Clubs must take active steps
   to ensure that the movements of such supporters is organised and
   controlled. They should liaise with the Overseas Security Officer
   of The Football Association and the authorities referred to in
  ■B1 and to Ferry Operators and Air Lines to ensure that the maximum
   information is obtained concerning the number travelling, their
   method of transport and accommodation. Whenever feasible, a Club
   Club representative should make an initial visit to the area where
   the match is to be played and discuss arrangements. Unless the Club
   is satisfied with the response from the host Club, the fixture should
   not be fulfilled.

5. Clubs should appoint properly trained Stewards to supervise
   travelling supporters. The local Police should be advised of their
   presence.

6. Clubs should request information concerning Police arrangement
   for visiting supporters. If the Club concerned is not totally
   satisfied with the response, the match should not be played.

7. Clubs should check   the credentials of any travel operator
   proposing to carry   supporters and ensure that thay are aware
   of the contents of   this Memorandum. Clubs in the First and Second
   Divisions must use   accredited UEFA Agents.

8. Clubs must ensure that all officials, players and supporters are
   made fully aware of the need for conduct of the highest standard.

9. The Football Asssociation will approve matches only if it   is
   satisfied that the above procedures have been carried out   and that
   the National Association of the Country to be visited has   received
   assurances from the Club to be visited that all necessary   precautions
   have been taken.


POWERS OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


1. Failure to implement any of the precautions outlined in this
   Memorandum may be taken into account in the consideration of any
   charge brought against a Club or may, in itself, lead to such a
   charge.

2. The Football Association will take whatever steps are necessary
   in pursuit of the duty imposed on it by its Memorandum of
   Association to "promote the game of Association Football in every
way the Association or the Council of The Association shall think
    fIA i atl2 t0   6 SV ch steP s as shall be deemed necessary or
the r^mpen50^ £ I eV?ntlTlS lnfri^8 ements of the Rules and Laws of
the Game or other improper methods or.practices in such game, and
protecting it from a        b      u     s     e      s     B   s



E.A.Croker
General Secretary


18th November 1985
