FA/HILLSBOROUGH
I spoke to                 /ho said he was sending me a fax
dealing wi    my invitation to attend the meeting with
          He would be there, He said he seemed to recollect
that the one point of contention was the evidence between
      and                 , I confirmed that was right and
filled him in on the areas we were currently re-reading.
Friday morning would very much be a re-briefing session for
Glen.

I was at a slight disadvantage in that I had not seen any of
the pleadings nor was I aware of the current state of play
other than the trial had started yesterday. All we had done
was follow it in the Press.          bonfirmed that was about
as much asj knew as well.
          u-
He mentioned that the Coroner's Inquest was to be resumed on
19 November and the Commercial Union had taken the view that
they again should keep their heads down. In other words not
take up the Coroner's invitation to put forward any
witnesses that the FA wished to.   I said I was sure the FA
wouldn't depart from that view.

He conf irmed that there was no further progress concerning
the threatening letters that had been written by solicitors
for the various bereaved and injured a year and a half ago.
He did not think-the FA could possibly get sued now.

I said I was particularly interested in the       preliminay
issues relating to the nervous shock awards.

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation
                                            KJI   JUX'lA£i;n




                                                                          4 October 1990




        F.A.'s responsibility:



        1.                ireport: choice of ground - "it was not

        suggested that the choice of venue was causative of this

        disaster.       The only basis on which that could be said would
\

    t   be that because of its layout the Lappings Lane end was

        incapable of being successfully policed for this semi final,

        I do not believe that to be so".                  Taylor in his final report

        goes on to assert that the PA and the FL have not seen it as

        their duty to offer guidance to clubs on safety matters.                           In

        their written submission they said:-



        "Of course both the FA and the Football League are concerned
        to ensure that crowd safety standards are the highest



    I
        reasonably practical.            It? iTs^feslfc^hawevejr tteajtnn&itker of|

        these authoritiess?sfeQm®#^b«Kefea-E«sdi-.:With--'the^resp'ons<itoil'ity

        of setting d e t a i l e A * . s t a n d a r d s - - o-r-« enfo^fcihg/;;tgem." ■u**'-



        In this particular case in selecting Hillsborough as the

        venue for the Cup semi final the FA did not consider in any

        delptjlwhether it was suitable for a high risk match with an

        attendance of 54,000 requiring to be segregated all of whom

        were in effect away supporters lacking week-in week-out
