                                                                            f tr uiuwii
                                                                                 uiuwxi A
                                                                                        i1WCIO
                                                                                         iuuocUi
                                                                                               1 / i - r r L'cHllCG.rEl
                                                                                                           VO             JKtciCC
         I                                                              London EC4M 7JA
                                                                        Telephone 01-606 6677
 Fax Transmittal Form                                                   Telex 263396



                                                                                           5.05.89
 To:                                                                    Date:

 Company:            Football Association                               Time:

 Country:                                                               Fax No:

 From:                                                                  No. of pages (including this page): JJT

 Direct fax lines:

      ou do not receive all the pages, please telephone or telex immediately


      ------------------------------------------------------------------

       PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL


      Hillsborough

      I attach a draft of Graham Kelly's witness statement for first
      phase of the Inquiry.

      Points to note are:-

       1.      It is intended as a working draft and is therefore probably
               more lengthy than the final version will be. Please ask
               Graham to review it very carefully. It will form the basis
               of his Evidence-in-Chief and will be    submitted to   the
     |         Treasury Solicitor late next week.

               I have faxed Counsel copies today. I suggest we can all
               review it with Graham on Monday at 3   pm.



f    3.       You will note the gap in relation to     contrasting the position
              of the arrangements for internationals, under-21 games and
              Wembley matches.   You agreed you would produce a detailed
              comparison. Perhaps we could also discuss this at the
              meeting on Monday.
                                                                                                                                    ,




     Regards




A list o f p a r tn e r s ’ names is avai l abl e at the ab o v e address
                                               Draft:     04.05.89



                       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




                 WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY




I , GRAHAM KELLY of the Football Association; 16 Lancaster

Gate London W2 WILL SAY as followss-



Personal Details(Age, background, qualifications etc)



1.           I am the Chief Executive of the Football

Association Limited ("FA").     I have held that post for

years, having succeeded Mr E A Croker on his retirement in

     1988.    I was previously General Secretary to the

Football League (please set out relevant experience).



I will in this statement deal with



     1.      The FA's corporate structure and activities



     2.      How the Challenge Cup Competition is staged and

             the FA's role in this.
     3.    Ticket Allocation.



     4.    How the venue was selected for the

           Liverpool - Nottingham Forest game of 15 April

           1989.



     5.    An account of the events I witnessed on 15 April

           1989.



The FA



2.         The FA is a company limited by shares, most of

which are held by representatives of associations with

football clubs in England and Wales.      The share capital

consists of £100 divided into 2,000 shares of 5p each.        A

shareholder is not entitled to any dividend, bonus or

profit.   The FA acts through its Council and Committees.

The FA Handbook which is amended and re-printed every year

contains details of the powers and duties of



           (i)   The Council and its members;



          (ii)     Standing Committees;



and provides




                                 -2-
           (iii)   Standing Orders for the Conduct of business

                   at Meetings of the Council



3.          It also contains Rules which have to be read in

conjunction with the Articles of Association dealing with



     (a)    Constitution and Administration;



     (b)    Sanctioning of Associations, Leagues, Competitions

            and Matches;



     (c)    Players;



     (d)    International and Representative matches;



     (e)    Jurisdiction of Association over Officials,

            Players and Spectators;



     (f)    Club Finance;



     (g)    Laws of the Game.



The FA's Activities



The FA is the governing body of the game of Association of

Football in England and Wales and has been established as

such since 1863.       Its sanctions, directly or through one or




                                  -3-
                         Job 31080L




more of its affiliated County Football Associations, in

excess of of 2,000 leagues and competitions.     Best known of

these is the the Football League.     The Football Association

is governed by a Council, which is made up of nominees and

elected representatives of various bodies involved in the

game including those Clubs in full membership of the

Football Association, county Football Associations and the

Management Committee of the Football League.     All major

decisions including those involving policy are made by the

Council, which meets approximately [      ] times a year.



One of the FA's major objects is to promote the sport of

Association Football in the UK in all its various aspects.

The FA aims to ensure that the game is played to the highest

possible standards, both in terms of skill and behaviour, by

the greatest number of people and tries at all times to

present the game to the public in the best possible light.

The FA is concerned with raising standards through the

organisation of coaching and other educational activities

and encourages early participation by children in football

through grants and loans. The FA makes contributions and

monitors arrangements at playing areas and stadia.



We organise 6 national competitions, including the

Football Association Challenge Cup and an annual charity

match called the Football Association Charity Shield Match.
The FA is responsible for all arrangements concerning teams

representing England at all levels,     (senior, "B", under 21,

semi-professional and youth).      It is responsible through the

County Football Associations for the recruitment and

promotion of referees and operates a referee training

programme within its coaching activities.      It enforces the

laws of the game.   In conjunction with the Football League

it controls the broadcasting of all football matches in

England.



The main income of the Football Association derives from

revenues generated from international matches and

competition, from interests in investments, from royalties

received from the Pool Promoters Association and other

organisations and from fees paid by broadcasting

organisations, in particular television.



The FA Challenge Cup Competition



4.         Briefly, the FA Challenge Cup Competition ("the FA

Cup") is a knock-out competition in which opposing teams are

decided by lot and (prior to the semi-final) the matches are

played on the grounds of the teams whose names are drawn

first.   The FA can order a tie to be played elsewhere.    The

major teams ( the football league teams) are brought into the

competition only in the Third Round.     By that stage there

are also the small "non-league" clubs which have survived.




                              -5
                           u UD   J1UBUL




There are therefore on occasion ties in which a large

established club must play a very small one on the small

clubs' ground.    It is the contest between the smaller and

larger clubs which is widely held to be one of the main

attractions of the FA Cup.



The final of the FA Cup is played at Wembley Stadium in

London.    Semi-finals are played on neutral grounds (ie on

the ground of a club not connected with either contestant).



Most Cup ties are keenly followed by the fans of the clubs

involved and semi-finals are big occasions in the football

year with a great demand for tickets.



5.          I attach as Appendix 1 the FA Challenge club

Rules.    I would refer specifically to paragraphs 4, 15(i),

25(i)(ii), and 26(b) which I set out in full below:



Paragraph 4 control of Competition

     "The entire control and management of the Competition
      shall be vested in the Council. The Council shall have
      power to formulate the Rules of the Competition and to
      alter or add to the Rules as they, from time to time,
      deem expedient.  The Council shall appoint a Challenge
      Cup Committee to control and manage the Competition bn
      their behalf and to give decisions on matters arising
      out of the Competition which, within the Rules laid
      down by the Council, shall be deemed decisions of the
      Council. Clubs shall be bound by any Contract entered
      into by the Council in relation to the Competition, in
      any matter not specifically mentioned in these Rules,
      the Challenge Cup Committee shall have the power to
      take such action and impose such penalties as it deems
      necessary."
Paragraph 1 5 (i) Provisions For Semi Final Ties

     "(i)     the Council shall fix the ground for all
              Semi-Final Ties and shall have direct control of
              the arrangements."



Paragraph 25 (i) (ii) Admission to Cup Ties-Sale of Tickets

     "(i)     the home Club shall provide for the sale of
              tickets and for the visiting club to check the
              sale.

     (ii)     all members must be charged admission to the
              ground, enclosure and stands in matches in all Cup
              Ties."



Paragraph 26 Distribution of Tickets



     " (b )   Semi-Final Ties

              In the Semi-Final Ties the two competing Clubs
              shall be entitled to 50% each of the tickets for
              sale. The Association in its absolute discretion
              may vary these allocations."

The Competitions Department at the FA



6.            The Competitions Secretary is a Mr Steve Clarke.

He has held this position for ___ years.       Prior to this

Adrian Titcomb held the position for 15 years.        He now works

at ____ .     They liaise closely, and Mr Clarke draws on

Mr Titcomb's considerable experience.      I have spoken to both

Adrian Titcoxnb and Steve Clarke and the information

contained in this section is either derived from my own

knowledge or from matters I have learnt in my discussions

with them.      Steve Clarke has a staff of ____ .   He reports

directly to me.      He is responsible for the booklet the FA
produces attached at Appendix 2 entitled the "Football

Association Competitions Department FA Challenge Cup

Semi-Final Arrangements" which is sent to competing and

staging clubs.    The provisions relate to the arrangements

for the staging of an FA Cup Semi-Final.    It is important to

note that the various provisions deal in the main with



       i)   matters relating to the game itself and the

            players



      ii)   Tickets



     iii)   Ancillary matters such as broadcasting,

            photography, press, proceeds, programmes, guests,

            musical entertainment, refreshments.



I would refer to a paragraph marked "POLICE" and the wording

"arrange for an adequate number to be provided to control

the crowds both inside and outside the ground, according to

your normal practice".



The function of the Competitions Department can be

summarised as follows:-    [insert]



7.          In practice the Council does not, as paragraph 15

of the Rules of the Challenge Cup Competition dictate have

"direct control of the arrangements".    The various
                            Job 31080L




organisational arrangements needed to stage a Cup Semi-Final

are delegated in practice to the staging club.      The staging

club acts in conjunction with the Police and the relevant

authorities.   It would not be practicable for the FA to be

involved in the day-to-day organisation of arrangements for

a Cup Semi-Final.   The staging club chosen has greater

experience in organising the event.      The FA does not, and

has not thought it necessary to interfere with the staging

club's assumption of control of the day-to-day

decision-taking and arrangements made, on such matters as

crowd control and safety;    policing;   medical supervision;

co-ordination at the ground.     However, in selecting the

venue the FA does, as I later explain, take into account the

clubs proven ability with regard to these matters and

facilities at the ground itself.



8.         [Contrast position of Wembley/Internationals -

insert].



A staging club such as Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is

fully familiar with the competing club's arrangements and

supporters and would have the necessary direct contacts with

the Police and relevant authorities.     I understand that

meetings are held and pre match planning takes place.        The

FA are not normally invited to attend these meetings.      We

did not attend this year at Hillsborough.     We are not
                          Job 31080L




normally copied in with the documents created eg Police

Operations Orders, and were not copied in this year.



Ticket Allocation



9.         The staging clubs issue the tickets once the FA

have authorised the allocation under paragraph 26 of the

Rules of the Challenge Cup Competition above.   After the FA

has reserved some tickets for its own distribution to

members and officials as a reward for service to the game

(much of which will have been unpaid), despite Rule 26(b)

the FA would have no direct input as to how many tickets

each club would get.   That would dr end on the segregation

arrangements and capacities of the various sections of the

ground.   This would be a matter for the staging club to

decide, taking advice from the police.   If there were any

problems the FA would naturally become involved but the FA

would not be likely to exercise its discretion to reallocate

after the staging club given its allocation unless the

Police or club recommend it or if one competing club was

obviously getting a preponderance of tickets.



Procedure for Selecting Venue



10.       I attach a copy of a standard letter sent to

13 provisional staging clubs of 24 February 1989 as

Appendix 3.   I also attach a copy of a summary compiled by
                            Job 31080L




the FA in March 1989 giving details of the capacity of each

ground, whether the staging club was at home or away in the

League on that day, and whether it was prepared to stage the

game itself or a replay, as Appendix 4.     We do sometimes get

representations from clubs asking to be used.     It is a

matter of prestige for a. club to be chosen and also the

staging club benefits financially.



11.          The draw for the FA Cup Semi-Final was made on the

BBC TV and radio at 7.45 am on Monday 20 March 1989.        At

that stage although the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

match was certain, Everton were to play the winners of the

West Ham/Norwich replay.



12.          I had an informal discussion with Steve Clarke

about the possible venues for the Semi-Final that morning.

We agreed that Hillsborough for the Liverpool game and Villa

Park for the other Semi-Final would be best suited.     However

the matter was to be considered in full at the FA Challenge

Cup Committee meeting to be held later that morning.



13.          I attach as Appendix 5 a copy of the agenda for

the meeting which would have been circulated to all those

attending.    No other relevant papers on the question of

venue were put before the members.
                            Job 31080L




14.        I attach as appendix 6 a list of FA Cup Semi-Final

venues for the last 20 years which would not have been

before those members present at the meeting [but of which I

was aware].



15.        At about 10.00 am I am informed by Steve Clarke

that he received a telephone call from Peter Robinson the

Chief Executive and General Secretary of Liverpool Football

Club regarding the possible selection of Hillsborough for

their tie.     Mr Robinson asked for the Penistone Lane end of

the ground and not the Leppings Lane end.     The Penistone

Lane end is the East Stand and the Leppings Lane end is the

West Stand at Hillsborough.     If the allocation was as

Mr Robinson asked, Liverpool would have been given the Spion

Kop end, and the East and South Stands.     Nottingham Forest

would have been given the North Stand, West Stand and

Leppings Lane.     I attach as appendix 7 the various

capacities of the sections.     From this it is clear that two

points emerge.



      1.     One club would be given more standing places and

             therefore correspondingly the other would be given

           more seats.



      2.   One club would obtain approximately 4,200 more

           tickets than the other.
                         Job liiuauu




Although precise figures were not mentioned, from what Steve

Clarke has told me point 2 seemed to concern Mr Robinson,

and no reference was made to point 1.   I understand the call

was in the nature of an inquiry and Mr Robinson did not give

specific reasons as to why he wanted the ends switched.

However as I have explained the reason would have been

obvious to both parties to the conversation.   At last year's

FA Challenge Cup Semi-Final involving the same two clubs

which was staged at the same ground Liverpool subsequently

complained that they were not allocated the same number of

tickets as Nottingham Forest.   This is because of the way in

which Hillsborough is divided up and the need for

segregation to keep the fans apart on Police recommendation.

I attached a copy of a fax received from Sheffield Wednesday

Football Club on 16 April 1989 which sets out the ground

capacity together with computer read-out of how many people

were present according to the computer, as Appendix 8.

Although there are twice as many people able to stand at the

Penistone Lane end as able to stand at the Leppings Lane end

the balance is redressed to a certain extent by the

allocation to the Liverpool Club of the larger North Stand.



16.       I understand from Steve Clarke that Mr Robinson's

request was a reasonably friendly one and he put it on the

basis that the FA could expect complaints from Liverpool

Football Club supporters that they had not been given the

same number of tickets as Nottingham Forest for the second




                            -13-
                          Job 31080L




year running.   He said he felt he had to raise it in the

press and we should be aware of this.   In a sense I got the

impression it was a bit of a courtesy call.



17.       I have not been made aware of any subsequent

complaint made to the FA prior to 15 April 1989.     I am

informed that there was a Sports Bulletin at 6.00 pm in the

evening on BBC2 which had mentioned the Liverpool objection

as to allocation.   I should stress that I saw this objection

as inevitable in that it was Mr Robinson's function to try

and get as many tickets for his club as possible.     I saw the

objection as concentrating entirely on the numbers

allocation to Liverpool and Peter Robinson did not raise any

ancillary matters as to the particular ends allocated or the

venue itself.



18.       After he put the telephone down to Mr Robinson

Steve Clarke immediately telephoned the Secretary of

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Mr Graham Mackrell and

told him that Peter Robinson of Liverpool Football Club had

called and reiterated his conversation with him.     Steve

Clarke asked him what the Police views were on a

reallocation from last year if Hillsborough were selected,

so that Liverpool could be given the Penistone Lane end.



19.       I understand Graham Mackrell telephoned the Police

to see if the ends could be changed but was told that they
                             Job 31080L




could not sanction this because of the geographical location

of Liverpool and Nottingham in relation to the ground.

Taking into account access routes by rail and road and the

segregation arrangements the Police wanted to employ for

supporters going to and from the ground, the Police told

Mr Mackrell that they would not be able to properly

supervise the rival supporters behaviour, unless the

allocation stayed as it was.



20.           At 11.00 am the Challenge Cup Committee met with

Ernest Brown in the Chair.      Jack Wiseman the Chairman of the

Matches and Grounds Committee was invited to attend.



21.           The factors we took into account (not in any order

of importance) were as followss-



        (i)   Geography (Police considerations as to segregation

              with regard to approaches to and from the ground

              and from Liverpool and Nottingham;



       (ii)   Capacity;



      (iii)   Experience as a staging club (secretary and

              staff);



       (iv)   Security at the ground;
                              Job 31080L




        (v)   Whether the club was playing at home in a League

              match



       (vi)   Whether it was a "top 5" club and if not whether

              it would be fair and proper to afford it some

              prestige and revenue;



      (vii)   The fact that we could not give any one team an

              advantage eg Liverpool playing a match at Everton

              in the same town or city



(insert paragraph explanation on each).



These factors are taken into account every year when a

decision on the FA cup Semi-Final venue is taken.



22.           I met Jack Wiseman the Chairman of the Matches and

Grounds Committee prior to going into the meeting.       He said

that in his mind only four grounds of the twelve put forward

who were willing to stage the game were seen by him as

possible venues with Hillsborough and Villa Park the most

likely choices.       The other two grounds for consideration

were the two Manchester grounds, Maine Road and Old

Trafford, the City and United grounds respectively.       In his

view only those two grounds would have the relevant capacity

and experience to compare with Villa Park and Hillsborough.
                            Job 31080L




23.          Jack Wiseman has been Chairman of the Matches and

Grounds Committee since 1980 and has played an important

role in the selection of Semi-Final venues since at least

that time.     The Challenge Cup Committee normally acts on his

recommendation.     Jack Wiseman has a personal knowledge of

the grounds selected over the last ten years and visited

Hillsborough last year and was impressed with the set-up up

there.   I understand he met with the Club Secretary and was

told about the arrangements in some detail.



24.          Jack Wiseman also mentioned to me outside the

meeting that he would be recommending Hillsborough and Villa

Park and that the paramount consideration was the experience

of the secretary and staff at the club and the geography.

It was also fundamentally important in his view that it had

gone so successfully last year.     At the meeting Jack Wiseman

made it clear that he thought that Hillsborough was the

obvious choice for the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest tie

from the factors mentioned at 1 to 7 above and also because

of last years experience.     I attach a report from Ken Evans

a security consultant to the FA on matters arising from last

years semi-final on 9 April 1988 as Appendix 9.     The event

was extremely well handled and successful.    Jack Wiseman

mentioned the report in his recommendation of Hillsborough.

He mentioned that the police were happy with regard to

spectators approaching and leaving the ground.    He did not

think one needed to alter a system that had worked so well.
                           Job 31080L




We were aware that the standing area of the Leppings Lane

end was considerably less than the standing area at the

Peniston Lane end.    It is also common knowledge that

Liverpool had a traditional following which was larger than

Nottingham Forest and who, when Liverpool played at home,

regularly stood at the Anfield "Kop".     However the match was

all ticket.    In the normal course of events, no one without

a ticket ought to have been allowed in.     I am informed

Nottingham Forest filled the Peniston Lane end with their

supporters.



25.         Returning again to the question of the Manchester

grounds it was not that we discounted them but rather that

we decided to keep with the same system as last year.       I

myself fully endorsed Jack Wiseman's views on the venue and

think it was the right decision.     (I would make the same

decision if presented with the same facts today).     A vote

was taken and no one dissented.    Old Trafford was chosen for

the Livexpool and Nottingham Forest replay should there have

been one.



26.         I should mention that I did not mention the

phone call from Peter Robinson at the meeting.     I do not

consider that it would have made any difference to the

decision.    The FA have no input as to the allocation of ends

at a staging club.    That is a matter we leave entirely to

the club and the police to make a decision on.    In my view
                            Job 31080L




they are the best suited to making such a decision.       The

debate on venue lasted about 10 minutes and I attach as

Appendix 10 a note of the meeting.



27.        Immediately afterwards Steve Clarke was instructed

to contact the clubs involved as quickly as possible to let

them know of the outcome.



The events I witnessed on Saturday 15 April 1989



1.          I   attended the Match with Glen Kirton, [position].

We were the only officials "on duty" as it were.        I am

informed by Glen Kirton that he arrived at the ground at

10.35am.    I arrived at ---   [expand re traffic; secondary

screening].     I believe that about 35 Council members were

present in an unofficial capacity.



2.         I am informed by Glen Kirton that he contacted

Graham Mackrell and went to the VIP installation, the

dressing room area and pitch to familiarise himself with the

layout of the ground.     [What did Graham Kelly do?]



3.          I am also informed by Glen Kirton that at 2.40pm

Graham and he were on the perimeter track by the player's

tunnel.    The ground was nowhere near full at that stage.

Graham Mackrell said to Kirton that he thought about 20,000
                              Job 31080L




people were still outside at that stage.       [I would agree

with that assessment.]



4.          Glen Kirton tells me that he asked Mackrell

whether the police had asked to delay the kick off.

Mackrell told him they had not because delaying the kick off

caused all sorts of organisational problems at the end of

the game.       Both Glen Kirton and myself were unaware of any

danager to spectators at that stage.       If a request for a

delay was received we would of course approve the

recommendation from either the Police of the Club.        The 1987

finals at Villa Park and Hillsborough were both delayed at

the request      of the Police.



5.          I    noticed that many NottinghamForest   fans were

already arriving outside the ground between 12 and 12:30.         I

am informed by Mr Rogan Taylor of the Football Supporters

Association that many Liverpool supporters who were driving

to the ground were delayed on the M62.



6.          I did not notice anything untoward prior to the

start of the game [please expand as to whether you saw any

activity    at the Leppings Lane end].



7.          Inoticed that     fans were scaling theperimeter

fence at the Leppings Lane end just before a Liverpool

player, Peter Beardsley hit the cross-bar at the other end
                            Job 31080L




of the ground.    In fact I did not see this near miss because

I was looking at the Leppings Lane crowd.



8.         A Police Officer came over to speak to a lines-man

on my side of the ground.     I should mention that I was

sitting in the South Stand so that the Leppings Lane end was

on my left.    The lines man carried on and did not stop or

take any other action.    At 6 minutes past 3pm another

policeman ran onto the pitch from behind the goal at the

Leppings Lane end and then the referee Mr Ray Lewis,

suspended play.



9.         After about 15-minutes I went to the Police

Control Box with Graham Mackrell and Glen Kirton which is

situated between the South Stand and the West Stand and

affords a good view of the terraces in question looking

directly along the goal-line from the corner of the stadium.

I attach as Appendix 11 a plan of the grounds.     Close

circuit television cameras placed at various places around

the ground scan the terraces and areas just outside the

grounds.



10.        The Police in the Control Box told me that a gate

or gates had been forced and showed me a picture (on

screen?) which purported to represent this.    They said that

the match would have to be abandoned because there had been

fatalities.   They did not know how many.   The Police
                            Job 31080L




Commander was present in the Control Box together with the

Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson.     The officer in

charge was Chief Superintendend David Duckenfield.     We were

told that when the gate had been forced there had been an

in-rush of Liverpool supporters.



11.          About 10-minutes later I convened a meeting of the

three clubs concerned together with the referee and the

Police Commander in the main boardroom of the club.     The

police at that stage were not ruling out a possibility that

the match would go on having moved slightly away from their

previous indication to me that it would have to be

abandoned.     In my view this was because they were probably

worried as to what would happen if the full extent of the

situation became known to the supporters still inside the

ground at that stage.     I imagine they also wanted time for

the emergency vehicles to have access to the ground.        There

followed a long period of uncertainty with people from all

three clubs and the media milling around not knowing what to

do or what to say as it became apparent that the fatalities

were increasing.



12.          I requested the Police Commander to stay in close

contact with the referee with regard to whether the match

should continue or not.     I do not know whether they had any

further contact.
                            Job 31080L




13.        I am informed that the two team managers gave a

tannoyed announcement over the ground's system but I did not

hear this.     Also I did not see what was happening on the

pitch about half an hour after the incident and later

because I was behind the scenes dealing with the various

parties.



14.        Mr Brian Clough, the Manager of Nottingham Forest

sent out word that he wanted to take his players home and I

went into the dressing-room to explain to him and to the

players that although there was a less than 50:50 chance at

that stage of the match being resumed we ought not to say it

was abandoned until the police said so.     This was at _pm.

At about 4:25pm I understand that an announcement was made

to the effect that the match had been abandoned.     I believe

that the crowd were told that there had been a serious

incident and that people were requested to keep their

places.



15.        I had been informed at that stage that there had

been about 50 deaths.     The media had been trying to get an

interview from me for some time and I spoke to BBC

television and radio and gave a short press conference to

the waiting reporters at about 4:40pm.



16.          I understand that throughout this period of

uncertainty the back-room staff, many of them who were young
                          Job 31080L




boys and girls on the staff of Sheffield Wednesday, were

involved in supplying hot water and stretcher facilities.

In my view they gave a super-human performance.



17.        I did see           1, the Sheffield Wednesday

physiotherapist running up and down the pitch in the middle

tending to the injured.



18.        When the two teams had departed the Chairman of

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Mr Mackrell, was

persuaded to leave the ground by his relatives.



19.        Later that evening I was called to a meeting of

the remaining directors of Sheffield Wednesday together with

the Club Secretary, Mr Graham Mackrell.     I was also

subsequently extensively on TV and radio.    Later on that

evening I met with Mr Colin Moynihan the Sports Minister.



20.        The scenes of distress on that day will remain

with me forever.   People exhibited signs of anger,

bitterness, frustration and bewilderment.




(31080L)
