  Sec Mary:                                               K o o i b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n . L o m n > y S\ 2 3 L W

E. A . C rokhr                                                              Phone: 01-262 4M I
                                                                               Telex: 261110

                      16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

O ur Ref:           'FS/70                  Your Ref:                    21st January 1982



 Mr. H.E. McGee,
 Chairman,
 Sheffield Wednesday F.C.,
 Hillsborough,
 Sheffield,
 S6 1SW.



 Dear Mr. McGee,

      With reference to your letter dated 6th January,
 addressed to Mr. Millichip, I note your comments about
 the sanction following your match at Oldham last season.

      I am surprised at your comment about the financial
 loss to the Club, as the information that we received
 in November 1980 showed that for the three games prior to
 the ban your average gate was nearly £25,000, your average
 gate the       matches when the terrace ban applied was
 nearly £27,000 and for the three games following the ban
 it was just over £20,000.   It would seem, therefore, that
 as anticipated at the time of the decision, because of the
 amount of seating at Sheffield Wednesday, even after paying
 £3,000 to your opponents for each of the four away matches,
 the Club was actually better off financially.

      We are concerned about the comments of the Clubs who are
 inconvenienced by the all-ticket game sanction relating to
 Chelsea and I shall see that they are referred to the Chairman
 of the Disciplinary Committee,               but I am sure
 that you are totally aware of the difficulty imposing sanctions
 to try and improve behaviour of away supporters.   My impression
 is that after the Oldham game and the sanction imposed, the
 Sheffield Wednesday supporters who travel to away matches
 are very well behaved.   We knew that with your Club you had
 more seats than your average gate up until the ban was imposed,
 but regrettably this is not always the case with Clubs who are
 involved in crowd troubles.
                                                        Yours sincerely



                                                           E.A. Croker
            M r. F .A . M i l l i c h i p               General Secretary
  cc:
