Note of a Meeting

Tuesday, 30th July, 1985
10 Downing Street



Present:            The Prime Minister
                    Leon Brittan
                    Patrick Jenkin
                    Neil MeFarlane

                  Mr.   F   A Millichip
                  Mr.   G   Kirton
                  Mr.   R   H G Kelly
                  Mr.   J   J Dunnett
                  Mr.   D   Dent



1.   The Prime Minister opened the meeting by reiterating her view
      that the principal responsibility for tackling the problems
      of hooliganism rested with the football authorities themselves.
     Mr. Millichip explained the decision in the Luton Town - Millwall
      appeal and repeated that The FA could only act within its Rules
     when dealing with charges brought against Clubs.   He stated,
     nevertheless that The Association would be prepared to take
     whatever action was necessary to prevent misconduct as a matter
     of policy if not punishment.

2.   The Prime Minister continued to push strongly for the introduction
     of membership cards.  Mr. Millichip explained that The FA had
     not at any time refused to give consideration to the possibility
     of introducing such a scheme.   It had responded immediately to
     Government requests for its views on the subject.   It was not
     represented on the current Football League Committee because it
     had not been invited. Mr. Dunnett stated that, as The FA had
     clearly given the matter a great decil of thought over the years,
     he felt it would be more appropriate for the League to approach
     the subject independently.  The League was currently seekiny
     the views of the Clubs on the introduction of membership schemes.
     It would encourage First and Second Division Clubs to adopt such
     schemes.  There was, however, no possibility of the game financing
     an adequate nationally co-ordinated computer registration system.
     The Prime.Minister offered the services of the Central Computer
     and Telecommunications Agency for a joint feasibility study.
     Mr. Millichip said that The FA might take a Club's failure to
     introduce a membership scheme into account in any future
     disciplinary hearing.  The Secretary of State said that he would
     endeavour to support with the appropriate state legislation
     excluding offenders from grounds any membership programme the
     football authorities introduced.

                                                    cont/.
3.   The Prime Minister hoped that progress could be accelerated
     in the installation of CCTV equipment.  Mr. Kelly stated that
     all Clubs wished to have the equipment as soon as possible.
     Lord Aberdare reported that the funds of The Football Trust
     were stretched because of the new safety orders, as did
     Mr. Wharton on behalf of The Football Grounds Improvement
     Trust.  The Prime Minister and her colleagues insisted that
     money was available within the football industry, despite
     a detailed account by Mr. Dunnett of the realities of
     football finance and especially the transfer system.

4.   Mr. Millichip reported that The FA would monitor all matches
     and compile a list of potential problem games.  If necessary,
     The FA would order matches to be all ticket, or the time of
     kick-off or day of games to be changed.

5.   Mr. Millichip and Mr. Kirton informed the Prime Minister of
     plans to launch a publicity campaign, aimed at producing
     better behaviour and seeking help from the public in combatting
     hooliganism.




     6
Glen Kirton
2.8.85
GK/CRG/659
