                                     Gwent Ambulance Service
                          Headquarters: Mill Street, Caerleon, Newport, Gwent. NP6 1XG
                                                                        Administration: 0633 421521
                                                                             Operations: 0633 420283
                                 AH co rrespo ndenc e sho uld be add ressed to: Chief A m b u la n c e Officer.



Our ref                                  Y o u r ref                                                      D ate

                                                                                            21 April 1989

 Mr R H G Kelly
 Chief Executive
 Football Association
 16 Lancaster Gate
 LONDON W2                                                   '$z:
 Dear Mr Kelly

 I enclose a copy of a letter to the Right Honourable Mrs M Thatcher, Prime
 Minister, following the football disaster at Hillsborough, Sheffield, on
 Saturday 15 April, 1989.

 The letter is self explanatory, but I am requesting that you use your good
 offices to bring to the attention of your committee my personal objectives
 following the tradegy.

 1.       There was a total lack of professional resources to treat casualties
          on site at the disaster.

 2.       No equipment or ambulance aid was available within the confines of                                      the
           stadium grounds.

 3.       It appeared, following the injuries to spectators, that no control or
           leadership at the site of the disaster was established.

 4.       Press reports have indicated that only two ambulance vehicles were
           available, and sited outside the ground.

 I realise that the events which occured, and the circumstances involved
 produced a far from manageable scenario. Under these circumstances, with
 a crowd of on-lookers of over 50,000 strong, the presence of professional
 officers to over-see the evacuation and treatment of casualties would
 still have presented a very arduous and difficult task.

 Therefore, as outlined in my letter to the Prime Minister, I think it
 essential that both the Health Minister and your committee consider, that
 events, which involve a large number of spectators should be attended by
 the professional Ambulance Service, with sufficient staff resources and
 equipment located strategically to attend a group of injured people at a
 minutes notice.

I must emphasis that the comments in this letter are my own personal ones,
but I would request that you closely consider the content, and I would
welcome your comments.

Yours faithfully




L Porter
Chief Ambulance Officer


Enc
                           j
                                 Gwent Ambulance Service
                      Headquarters: Mill Street, Caerleon, Newport, G went. NP6 1XG
                                                                    Administration: 0633 421521
                                                                         Operations: 0633 420283
                             All co rrespo ndenc e should be addressed to: Ch ief A m b u la n c e O fficer.



Our ref                              Your ref                                                          Qate
                                                                                          19 April 1989

The Right Honourable Mrs M Thatcher
Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
Whitehall
LONDON

Dear Prime Minister

I am saddened by the disaster which occured at Sheffield last Saturday-
Under the circumstances the treatment afforded the casualties waa carried
out by volunteers and members of the public, and without wishing to
comment on the value of such treatment I feel that the attendance of
professional staff would greatly enhance the availability of specialist
treatment.

There should be a statutory obligation for the professional ambulance
service to provide resources to treat casualties at a minutes notice,
both inside and outside the premises.

Additionally the ambulance service should carry out training for football
stadium staff in basic life support resuscitation techniques. My own
service regularly train junior doctors, nurses and members of the public
in such techniques, throughout the year at a minimal cost to the Health
Service.

I can well understand the difficulties in reaching conclusions following
such a disaster by sifting through the evidence of the enquiry.

I have not had the opportunity to study the final report following the
Bradford Football Fire Disaster, but note that no recommendations or
legislation was forthcoming regarding the attendance and treatment of
casualties should such a disaster occur again.

I feel it is essential that this matter is brought to the attention of
the appropriate Health Service Minister. I am writing a separate letter
to the Chairman of the Football Association.

The proposals outlined in this letter are my own personal thoughts, but
I will ensure that the matter is brought to the attention of both the
Regional Ambulance Officers' Committee and the Secretary of the Association
of Chief Ambulance Officers'.

Yours faithfully




L Porter
Chief Ambulance Officer
