                    THE FOOTRATX ASSOCIATION

 MEMORANDUM TO FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS REGARDING CROWD CONTROL

CLUBS ONLY

MANDATORY

(a)   Make adequate arrangements for segregation of rival
      supporters.

(b)   Detailed prior planning can solve many problems experienced
      both inside and outside of grounds.  Clubs must, therefore,
      undertake detailed liaison with the Police, opposing Club,
      rail and coach operators and Supporters' Travel Clubs at
      least 10 days before a match to determine movement of
      spectators and arrangements. In the case of F.A. or
      League Cup Matches due consideration roust be given, at
      the time of the draw, to possible replay arrangements.

(c)   Ensure that the terraces are kept free of objects that can
      be used as missiles.

(d)   Arrange where practicable, for visiting supporters to use
      turnstiles nearest to the coach parks.

(e)   Avoid all-night queues for tickets.

Strongly Recommended

(f)   Install double barriers and walkway systems to afford
      quick access to terraces should the need arise.
      (MANDATORY FOR DESIGNATED CLUBS).

(g)   Take legal steps to ban known trouble-makers from the
      ground.

(h)   Co-operate as closely as possible with   Magistrates.

(i)   Arrange for appeals for good behaviour to be made -
       possibly by leading players/Officials in programmes
       and over the public address system.

IN RELATION TO ALCOHOL

MANDATORY

(a) Ensure that drinks are sold in plastic     containers.

Strongly Recommended

(b)   Liaise with the Police to obtain the co-operation of
      publicans, off-licence propietors and all licence holders
      for sale of alcohol near the ground to close at appropriate
      time on match days.

(c)   Restrict or, on occasion, ban the sale of alcoholic
       drink within the stadium, except in approved areas.
3.   CLUBS WITH THE POLICE

     MANDATORY
     (a)    Liaise with the Police to ensure proper deployment of
            stewards within grounds. Stewards should be properly
            trained and regularly briefed to ensure they are
            capable of working closely with Police. Stewards
            must be conspicuously dressed and easily identifiable.

     (b)    Liaise with Police to arrange for the escort of visiting
            supporters from stations and coach parks to the ground
            and return.  (See also Mandatory Recommendation 1(b)).

     (c)    Arrange for Police surveillance at the turnstiles to
            prevent missiles and alcoholic drinks being taken into
            the ground.

     Strongly Recommended
     (d)    Liaise with Police over visits to motorway service areas
            by football supporters travelling to away matches.

     (e)    Consider, in liaison with the Police, making potential
            problem games "all ticket" and give maximum publicity
            to the fact that tickets will not be available for
            purchase on the day of the match.

4.   CLUBS AND SUPPORTERS' CLUBS

     Strongly Recommended
      (a)   Arrange with official Supporters' Club and Travel Clubs
            that charter coaches and trains only carry non-alcoholic
            drinks.
      (b)   Develop and maintain close relationship with Supporters
            Club.
      (c)   Examine from time to time the arrangements made for
            the sale of tickets by Supporters' and Travel Clubs.

      (d)   Encourage supporters to travel to away matches in
            chartered stewarded, responsible groups.

      (e)    Consider with Supporters' Clubs the issue of combined
             travel and match tickets.




      E.A. Croker
      General Secretary



       17th August, 1983.
