 NOTE OF MEETING AT FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

 Present:
                                                   FA
                                Chairman          ;
                 Z4atches & Grounds Committee     )




                                                                      )
1.   I went over the chronology as provided by              C ju
on 20 March which d ^ a g r e e d with. He also gave" me" a copy of
the agenda for the meeting and the notes for the meeting
which were not approved as y e t . The meeting was that of the
Challenge Cup Committee on Monday 20 March at 11.30 am.

2.   JW* confirmed he would have seen a copy of the agenda
before the meeting and had already in his mind Hillsborough
and Villa Park as the likely venu e. There were only 4
venues in his mind that would be worthy of consideration.
The previous two and Old Trafford and Maine Roa d . Those are
the only grounds with sufficient capacity and experience to
host a semi-final in his view.   They would look at
segregation, capacity, geography, and organisational ability
of the club.

3.   He                    ior to going into the meeting who          )
did not mention the                 (Liverpool) phone call.
Outside the meeting he told Mr~K&l‘lyi that his personal view
would be to recommend villa Park and Hillsborough.     Both
decisions had as their paramount consideration the
experience of the staff in arranging those matches and
geography.  It would not have been fair to make Norwich
travel to Hillsborough and so villa Park was the obvious
midway point between Everton and Norwich.    That left
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest with Hillsborough as the
obvious choice.

4.   -jv; said that he knew exactly what each of the grounds
were like.    They had had exactly the same match the year
before and the general opinion was that it was
^onqratulations all round.    Thev had also read
report which was extremely complimentary.    That was a major
factor in his mind.

5.   Police were happy that there were two separate routes
in to each end of the ground so that supporters could be
kept apart.  There were no traffic problems last year so why
alter a system that had worked so well? Exactly the same
teams had been involved.

6.   It was not that they had thought about Old Trafford and
discounted it rather than they had kept with the same
system.  As chairman of the Matches and Grounds Committee
his experience would be looked on for choosing venues by the
FA Challenge Cup Committee and he had given it quite a lot
of thought beforehand.  If he had to make the decision again
today he would still choose Hillsborough.

7.   He had visited Hillsborough last year prior to the
semi-final and had seen the police control room and spoken
in detail with the secretary of how the arrangements were to
be carried out.  No notes were kept. He had also met the
police and looked at the set up.  He had toured the ground.
He had also been satisfied with the VIP and special
arrangements that Hillsborough could put on.


3.   He would have expected someone from the FA to go up
this year again.

9   .
Committee and himself were both agreed on the two venues and
they recommended them.  A vote was taken and there were no
dissenters.

10.  He repeated that he had had no knowledge of the phone
call from Liverpool at that stage.  He said he did not think
it would really have made any difference althought it would
have been given due consideration.

11.  He said that Peter Robinson had no choice but to make
an objection on behalf of his club.  He was looking at
purely ticket allocation is numbers.  He was not looking at
the safety aspect.  It was a token gesture.

12.  One point about   Hillsborough over Old Trafford was that
it had more seating.    However if there was a replay Old
Irafford was chosen.    Mo way were they saying that Maine
Road or Old Trafford   were not suitable just that the other
grounds were chosen.    In the event he pointed out that the
natch was all ticket   and that Nottingham Forest had in fact
filled the Penistone   Lane end.

13 . In response to a question as to what his function was
=e the committee meeting he said that the standing orders ox
the FA expected as a matter of courtesy that the chairman of
the Matches & Grounds Committee attended at those meetings
selecting venues to give the benefit of his expertise.
SadJLy^ince 1980 he had been instrumental in directing the
choice^of the relevant semi-final.   Since 1980 Villa Park
had been chosen every time except 1988.   When Tottenham
Hotspur at White Hart Lane was chosen because of the
involvement of the London Club.   Hillsborough was chosen in
80/81 87/88 and 89. Highbury was chosen between 1982 and
1984.  That may have been because of a London club being
involved.  He could not remember.

14.  Out of the previous 2 0 years Hillsborough was chosen 13
times and Villa Park 12.

15. With r|gard to FA involvement in preparations for the
semi-final fill thought it would be usual for an FA
representative to go up and sit on the committee meetings at
the secretary's request.    That is what they certainly did on
the international side of things when               gand
       would actually inspect the ground at under 21
internationals.    Apparently that was not the practice ie
that was not the evidence we were getting on semi-final.
The under 21 England internationals were viewed on as
special matches as were the internationals at Wembley for
the special considerations with regard to the style of the
foreign supporters and clubs involved.    Here with FA cup
semi-finals the staging club would be fully familiar with
the competing club's arrangements and the fans and would
have all the necessary contacts of experience with eg.
police, local authority, ambulance etc.

17. He pointed out that there had been quite an increase in
che gate of Liverpool this year and there was certainly not
overcrowding last year.

13.    When asked what he thought of Mr Makrell at Sheffield
Wednesday he would he was a first-class secretary who he
would appoint again to stage a match.      It was of course
prestigious for the club but involved the secretary in a lot
of w o r k . fTakrelF nad done an excellent job.

19.  Thinking about it W9 thought that the phone call from
Liverpool may have come through whilst they were having
their meeting.   He went and had a word with Steve Clark
after the meeting who had said that they should expect some
publicity as Mr Robinson was going to say that Liverpool
ought to hav been allocated mere tickets and given the other
end.  He said that the police were not going play ball with
that and -7W had asked him to keep him advised if there was
any problem.   He had not received any further
communications.

ingaged xk hours including dictation
