                                               14 August 1989




  F .A . Hillsborough

  Present

                  Graham Kelly            (F.A.)
                  Glen Kirton

                  Adrian Titcombe

                                          (Freshfields)

 ^ e x p l a i n e d that the purpose of this morning's
 meeting was to discuss the FA's role in relation to the
 coming season in the light of the Taylor Interim report.
 The FA had no inspectorate for safety. Was it to set up an
 in house department with experts to monitor compliance? Or
 was it merely to assist in the interpretation of
 recommendations?

 2*        If it was to set up an inspectorate it would be
 changing its role although it had "dipped its toe" in safety
 matters in the past and so liability for future accidents
 may well attach.

 3•        Both Popplewell and Taylor and the Government
 accepted that the FA were not the body charged with the
 responsibility of setting safety standards and enforcing
 them.

4*        After some discussion about this it was agreed
that the FA's policy both in terms of league and cup
matches, FA cup matches, and Internationals ought to be
clear. It would not get involved in safety matters. We
agreed that it was often difficult to differentiate between
crowd control and crowd safety but it was best to stay clear
of safety matters.

 5.        That being the case the 11th November memorandum
 (1985) on crowd control needed substantial revision. A lot
of it was obsolete and needed replacement. I took them
through the various sections explaining which sections could
be left and which needed amending. There was some
discussion as to powers of the FA under Rule 24 of the Rules
of the Association if any of the terms of"the memorandum
were breached. Adrian Titcombe was unhappy that the failure
to implement any of the matters outlined in the memorandum
were not automatically subject to disciplinary proceedings.
        We explained the terms of Rule 24 and the definition of
        misconduct and said that we would need to re-draft Rule 24
        itself to make the terms of the memorandum (albeit in
        shortened form to take out matters which the FA ought not to
        be getting involved with) fall within Rule 24.

      6.        An EGM needed to be called to draft the two safety
      measures we had suggested in Rule 24 (i) (b) "_____ r.for
      reasons relating to crowd safety" and in Rule 2 4 (ii) we had
      drafted the same provision in the defence paragraph to the
      extent that there would be a defence of "reasons relating to
      crowd safety and/or that the officers and agents had used
      all due diligence to ensure that the responsibility was
      discharged". Those two amendments could go in straight
      away. Graham Kelly was reluctant to call an EGM just to put
      in those two amendments and would prefer to call one with a
      recommendation once we had formulated our policy with regard
      to Rule 24. There were two alternatives: first of all we
    » keep the memorandum albeit in shortened form, as a document
    I containing provisions the breach of which are taken into
    ' consideration of any charge brought against a club, or, we
      create a new paragraph in Rule 24 which allows^breach of any
      of the terms of the memorandum to be a matter in itself
      which is defined as misconduct. That would mean redefining
      misconduct and perhaps to have a definition which is
      exhaustive.
        7.        i would talk to              |in addition as to the
        difficulty he was encountering as to which bodies were
        covered by the Rule.
        8.        I set up a meeting with Adrian Titcombe on Friday
        25th August at 9.30 to go over the drafting of Rule 24 and
        memorandum.
        9.        we agreed that the existing memorandum on crowd
        safety at paragraph 339 of the handbook together with the
        forms relating to certificates on ground inspection ought to
        be deleted by way of letter to the clubs as the provisions

t       were obsolete and dangerous.
        10.       We went over the FA phase two submissions from
        paragraph 2.5 onwards and from paragraph 6.3 onwards.
        Graham Kelly asked [ZID and Glen to review where the FA was
        on the recommendations it was making and to give him all up
        to date information so that he could put those matters
        forward to Taylor when he went to seem him the Autumn. He
        also asked them to look at ticketing in view of the Judge's
        findings in the interim report.
        11.       we agreed that the role of the FA could be to
        interpret the provisions of the interim report ie summarise
        them in a readily digestible form for the league clubs and
        perhaps append them to the revised memorandum on crowd



                                     -   2-
management.         I said I would fax out a re-draft to

^        “ s e ^ a ^ n l - t c^ e
T         H S^lSert.^fSr            ^ c ^ M U       L i c e S n g AuJhority to

K ? 8t “relating                                                        SScificall?
recom m ended i n t h e FA s u b r a is s io n t h a t t h i s c u g h t n o t t o

e J i s ? i n g ns y s S i ° v i S S g h t S r M l i ^ r d . How ever . i w ouid
r e a d   this proposed amendment with interest. I did not

-k.rlrL.-r-.T.s.ss’sssk .“»•»«»•
if there was going to be thi= J n^ p^ a ! nSlthCprSoeIdingS up
Committee. In any event we >«d to deal          pr“ “ hou5d let
until the bill becoming law. In that respect, we u>u
inconsisten^policy'that^the^F^had^hitherto put forward ie
getting involved in safety matters on an arbitrary an
superficial basis, here and there.

    12.          There was some discussion of                        ^     kept1




    matters.
/   11           We discussed the selection of FA Cup semi-final


    Z      ^ e “ ^ a d Pcome 0Ute0ftit= *                                * . * “ **
    lettJrSto9a°mire limited selection of staging cl£bs
    requesting information relating to c°mpl±ance w ±tli the


    S a v f n o o i j - .g   ^   (s ° s r : ) . s ^ r s ; s s » to « »
    r e l e v a n t f actors. It “ ulfsend out these letters early so
    that clubs would make eariy responses.
    1A            In relation to perimeter fencing it was f^reed



                                                                                   «lth
    the r ecommendat ions in the Taylor Interim Report .
    1«        Kelly was asked questions by Collins and the Judge
    at'the inquiry in relation to a breach of the memorandum if
fencing had been taken down. That led to Dyson QC saying
the memo would be revised. In fact there was no strict
liability' breach of the memorandum. If one looked at
paragraph I(i) the failure to implement any of the
precautions outlined "may be taken into account in the
consideration of any charge brought against the Club or
may, lead to such a charge" that did not mean tnar pulling
down fences in itself was a disciplinary offence. Nothing
in the memorandum on crowd control in 1985 nor in the
memorandum we had taken out from paragraph 339 of the
handbook referred back to Rule 24 in any event. Therefore
the questioning was not accurate but the FA policyon
fencing should be made clear in the memorandum. The FA
policy had hitherto been concentrated towards combating
hooliganism which is why safety was perhaps not best
expressed in the memorandum.
16.       It was agreed that the FA would generally have a
watching brief over matches held at under 21 level and at
Wembley and if Wembley were going wrong it would refer back
to the interim recommendation's points. There was no point
having the FA's own memorandum setting out these points
piecemeal as has happened in the past because the interim
recommendations were so detailed and specific and covered
everything so well that the FA's former points looked pretty
inadequate. That should be the blue print from which they
should work and they should assist in interpreting the
provisions.
17        significantly at Wembley they had recently had a
meeting with the Fire, Police, and Local Authority - Brent
and had not invited the FA.

That concluded the meeting.



Time engaged including dictations 3.5 hours.
(10954LL)
