                      THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


                     COMMITTEE ON CROWD CONTROL


                     MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD
                at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2 on
                    Friday, 19th September, 1980


Present:   Sir Harold Thompson (in the Chair), Messrs. R.W. Lord,
           L.A.M. Mackay, J.B. Mears, A.D. McMullen, F.A. Millichip,
           W.H. Webster and Lord Westwood.

           Messrs. E.A. Croker (Secretary) and H.N. Bird

Apologies for absence were received from Sir Matt Busby,
  Messrs. J.J. Dunnett, E.G. Powell, R. Wragg and G. Kelly (Secretary
  Football League).


1.   ENGLAND TRAVEL CLUB

      The Chairman referred to a report of alleged mis-behaviour by a
      group of Club members travelling to Italy by coach for the European
      Nations Finals in June 1980. It was agreed that no action could be
      taken in the matter until such time as a full investigation of the
      allegations had been concluded.


2.   ACTIONS ON HOOLIGANISM

      Incidents of crowd mis-conduct that had occurred since the start
      of the Season were noted.

      After a lengthy discussion, it was decided that further thought should
      be given to the application of suggested preventive measures proposed
      by the Committee, including Attendance Centres, corporal punishment,
      the sale of alcoholic drinks, removal of passports, National ID Cards,
      conscription, ban on "away” travel, alternative kick-off times and stanc
      seats only for visitors.

      It was agreed that a further meeting of the Committee should be held on
      the 8th October 1980 to discuss and prepare a comprehensive memorandum
      on crowd mis-conduct following which a meeting with the Home Secretary
      should be sought to put forward proposals it was felt should be adopted
      at government level to combat hooliganism.
                           MEMORANDUM ON HOOLIGANISM


1.   The decline in standards and behaviour is a national malaise and
     not restricted to football.

2.   Last Season there were indications of a decline in hooliganism at
     football grounds but, unfortunately, this has not been the case            ,
     this season.

3.   There is clear evidence of hooliganism and violence in other sports
      and also in circumstances quite separate from sporting events, e.g.
      seaside towns, political demonstrations, picketing, etc.

4.   Some, perhaps large numbers, stress the need for a return of corporal
      punishment. Others stress an immediate return to National Service
      for a year or longer.

5.   There appears to be a need for more public emphasis on parental
      influence on the young and for better school discipline.

Past Actions of The Football Association

1.   The Association was actively engaged in Denis Howell's Working Party
      on Crowd Behaviour. Interviews were held with Merlyn Rees
      on crowd problems and discussions held with the Magistrates' Association,
      Change of Act 1978.

2.   Stronger penalties are now being imposed by the Disciplinary Committee
      and F.A. Commissions. Large fines are imposed on Clubs for spectator
      and player misconduct. Considerable expense has been incurred in providing
      for ground improvements.

3.   On occasions, admission to matches on a ticket only basis has been
      ordered following crowd problems and in certain instances terraces and
      grounds have been closed.

4.   The sale of alcohol was stopped at Millwall and is being limited at
      other games.

5.   Many discussions have been held with Hector Monro, British Rail, the
      Police Authorities and other organisations as regards crowd behaviour.
      The recent new Bye-law of British Rail is welcomed but one must ask
      can the loop-holes be closed.

Suggested Actions to be Taken

By The Football Association

1.   No sale of alcohol on grounds at matches.

2.   No tickets to be sold to away team supporters for terraces, all
     possible steps to be taken to enforce this (to be applied to all Clubs,
     or big offenders, e.g. Chelsea, Manchester United, Sheffield Wednesday,
     etc.)

3.   All identified trouble makers to be banned from all football grounds for
     five years (possible use of close circuit television to identify and
     make this practicable).

4.   Further study of possible use of identity cards in some practicable way.
                                    -:       2   :-
5.      Further study of Football Association Travel Club, sale of tickets,
        etc., for foreign matches, of F.A. and Clubs.

6.      Use of players (current players and older and distinguished players,
        i.e. Honorary Members) to help publicise and appeal.
                                                                   I.       ,
7.      Possible ban on all "away” travel.                     '                      *

8.      Meetings to be held between Football Association, Football League, P.F.A.,
        and Managers’, Secretaries' and Coaches' Association to emphasise the
        importance of The Football Association's campaign.

Players and P.F.A.

1.      No kissing, hugging, jumping on backs when goals are scored.

2.   No running to touchline with outstretched arms and clenched fists.

3.   Persistent offenders to be struck off list of candidates for
      International teams. Team Manager to be informed.

4.      P.F.A. to be asked to support the above actions.

5.      "Professional fouls” to be punished more strongly.

Managers *, Secretaries' and Coaches * Association

To instruct players firmly that they must adhere to The Football Association's
Code of Conduct and publicly assert their interest and action.

Clubs

1.   To instruct their Managers more firmly and ensure they comply with
      The Football Association's Code of Conduct.

2.   Consideration of penalties on Clubs, apart from fines, e.g. loss of
      points, etc.

3.   Club Directors to let it be known that they will insist on better
      field behaviour.

4.   To examine the possible use of vigilanties and plain clothed police
      on terraces.

5.   Examine the deployment of Club Stewards and the use of T.V. Monitors.

6.   The Football Association to make records of Clubs more publicly known.

7.   Clubs to ensure that terraces are kept clear of possible missiles, e.g.
      stones, loose pieces of concrete, etc.

8.   Arrange for Police sirveillaice at turnstiles to restrict, as far as
      possible, missiles to be taken into the grounds.

Transport Authorities

1.   No cheap fares to be made available for "away" travel.

2.   Ban on alcoholic drinks being carried on trains and coaches.




                                                                                3/.
 Press

 1.      Press to be kept fully informed of actions taken by The Football
         Association and of the requests made to the Home Office. ,,

 2.      Closer liaison with Press with discussions on their "tactics".

 Requests to Home Secretary

 1.      Creation urgently of more Attendance Centres for appropriate age
         groups, as promised.long ago.

 2.      Apart from Attendance Centres stiffer penalties also needed in some
         cases.

 3.   Withhold Passports from trouble makers abroad, for say two years, as
       licences for drunken drivers.

 4.   Consideration be given to the re-introduction of National Identity
       Cards.

 5.   Random checks by police on coaches travelling on motorways and main
       roads with a view to confiscating alcoholic drinks.

 6.   Following conviction in the Courts the names of offenders to be sent
       to their Clubs so that they can be debarred from attending subsequent
       home games.

 7.   Justices to impose restriction on offenders attending matches with
       further Court Action should they break such ruling.

 8.   Unpaid fines to be increased in cases of default and such fines to
       be deducted from wages, if necessary.

 9.   The sale of alcoholic drinks to be banned both on "Specials” and
       on"Ordinary" services when used by supporters travelling to away
       games.

10.   Supporters under the influence of drink not to be allowed to join
       trains.

11.   Possible of restriction on sale of alcohol outside and in the vicinity
       of grounds (to youths etc.) and on coaches and trains.




October 1980
