                                                    20th April 1989

Dear Sirs,
I would like you to accept this letter as an attempt in a small way
to assist you with your Inquiry into the events that lead to the
disaster last Saturday at Hillsborough.

We travelled to Sheffield (my husband and two sons, aged 15 and 11),
for the game arriving in Sheffield at approximately 11.30am. We
joined the flow of traffic around the ring road (directed by police)
which although only four miles from the ground actually took over 1|
hours to reach the parking areas designated for Forest supporters.
During this drive and subsequent walk to the ground we passed numerous
public houses, overflowing with heavy drinking, rowdy supporters. As
we neared the ground on foot, shortly before 1.45pm we had difficulty
getting through the crowds outside these public houses having to walk
around them into the road. Also we met many supporters coming away
from the ground, and it was obvious from their comments that they
were making their way to these public houses.

Having secured our places on the Kop end at approximately 1.45pm we
noticed that although our end of the ground was reasonably full by
then, apart from the central terracing section behind the far goal
the Liverpool end was almost empty. We watched in wonderment at the
great number of Liverpool supporters who were jumping into the central
terrace from the seating area above, and the 'game' that was being
played by the supporters ie. standing on their fellow supporters
shoulders and diving back into the crowd as seen done by fans at rock
concerts.
With a few minutes to go before the kick off the Forest "drunks" arrived,
and our end of the ground became totally full. We unfortunately had
five of these undesirables behind us. At one stage after the game had
been stopped and as some Liverpool fans ran across the pitch to taunt
our supporters, one of the undesirables behind us knocked my youngest
son off the barrier he was sat on and trampled on him in his eagerness
to reach the Liverpool fans, and then turned on my husband and neigh­
bouring supporters after being reprimanded.. Therefore I am of the
opinion that if those fences had not been there at the front, the con­
sequences could have been far worse, because of the actions of the
beer sodden, unthinking 'yobs’ that seem to be attracted to football
matches.
I was very surprised to see that unlike the League game against Forest
and Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsbrough on New Year's Eve where we were
even stopped from standing up in the front row of the Leppings Road
seating area prior to the game, on the orders of the many police in the
crowd, there were no stewards or police between our turnstiles and the
perimeter fences at the Semi-Final, and I can only assume that this was
the same the other end.
If we want to encourage women, children and families to attend football
matches we must improve facilities within the grounds and remove some
of the aggresiveness that seems to be in the supporters, fuelled in
many cases by excessive amounts of alcohol. This also adds to the
disruption by the need to keep leaving their seats or places, much
to the annoyance of people around to answer the call of nature, and
subsequently   the inevitable sight of male personnelrelievingthem­
selves wherever they pleased, oblivious to the people around them.
This was especially evident at Wembley during the Littlewoods Cup
Final, where the toilet facilities at such an impressive venue were
pathetic, disgusting and unable to cope.

We appreciate that the disaster was caused by many contributing factors,
but the sight of some of the stretcher bearers gesticulating and
spitting at the opposing fans who were mostly young children at the
front, and the many non-ticket holders trying to hide in the seating
areas leads us to conclude that many spectators have no regard for the
safety and feelings of their fellow supporters.

We hope that    all the vested interests   ie;

      the   FA   and Clubs desire to return to Europe,
      the   publicans desire to continue to sell alcohol
      the   Liverpool politicians desire to paint everyone snow white,
      and   the police desire to appear super efficient,

do not cloud the issue and the true facts and reasons for the disaster
are allowed to be published.


Yours faithfully,




Aged 40
