                                                                 c-



                      MEMORANDUM ON HOOLIGANISM


The decline in standards and behaviour is a national malaise and not
restricted to football, nor to this country alone.

There is clear evidence of hooliganisn and violence in other sports,
and also in circumstances quite separate from sporting events, e.g.
seaside towns, political demonstrations, picketing, teenage disco­
theques, etc.

Last Season there were indications of a decline in hooliganism inside
football grounds. Official reports from Referees and the Police do
not suggest an increase so far this Season, although the national Press
has given a different impression. Certainly there has been little
improvement in violent behaviour in the public transport. Also, we are
all concerned about what happens outside the grounds, and elsewhere.

We would stress the need for a return of corporal punishment for acts
of violence, others emphasize, also, an immediate return to National
Service for a year or longer.

There appears to be a need for more public emphasis on parental influence
on the young and for better school discipline, and for allowing greater
powers to teachers. We would welcome the recent proposal of the Home
Secretary requiring the payment of fines imposed on juveniles by parents,
if this can be implemented in law.

PAST ACTIONS BY THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

1.   The Association was actively engaged   in Mr. D. Howell's Working Party
     on Crowd Behaviour. Interviews were    held with Mr. Merlyn Rees on
     crowd problems, and discussions held   with the Magistrates' Association.
     The relevant Act was amended in 1978   to give the Magistrates greater
     powers.

2.   Stronger penalties are now being imposed by the Disciplinary Committee
     and F.A. Commissions. Large fines are imposed on Clubs for spectator
     and player misconduct. Considerable expense has been incurred in
     providing ground improvements.                    i formerly Deputy
     Commissioner, Metropolitan Police, was appointed two years ago as
     an adviser and has helped the F.A. considerably.

3.   On occasions, admission to matches on a ticket-only basis has been
     ordered following crowd problems and in certain instances terraces
     and grounds have been closed. Clubs have taken action also, with
     their groups of supporters living in different parts of the country.

4.   The sale of alcohol was stopped at one ground temporarily, and is
     already being limited at other grounds.

5.   Numerous discussions have been held with Mr. H. Munro, Minister of
     Sport, British Pail, the Police authorities and other organizations
     as regards crowd behaviour. Specific and expensive actions are being
     taken in regard to the 1981 England v. Scotland match at Wembley.
                                -   2   -




ACTIONS TO DE TAKEN

The Football Association and the Football League have taken actions listed
above, but the problems cannot be solved by the football authorities alone,
and many desirable directives are outside their legal powers. Further
policy of the F.A., which will now be applied, is listed below, but a more
positive action by H.M. Government is now essential.

By The Football Association

1.   The sale of alcohol at matches will be prohibited within the Stadia
     of Football League . Clubs except in such places as may be authorised
     from time to time by The Football Association.

2.   The Football Association recommends that Clubs shall acquire the
     authority, if it is needed, to ban identified trouble-makers from
     all grounds for life, or a lesser period. The use of T.V. monitoring
     systems, which is being examined, should help in this identification.

3.   There will be a further study of identity cards in some practicable
     way.

4.   The F.A. Travel Club will be re-examined, as regards sale of tickets,
     travelling arrangements, etc. for foreign’matches, and Clubs will be
     requested to examine similar arrangements and responsibilities of
     their own travel club.

5.   The F.A. will prepare a new "Code of Conduct" for issue to Clubs,
     players and all involved in football.

6.   The F.A. will invite its Honorary Members (distinguished past players)
     and Honorary Vice-Presidents to help in a campaign to eliminate crowd
     problems.

7.   Meetings will be arranged between the F.A., Football League, P.F.A.,
     Secretaries', Managers' and Coaches' Association and Referees to
     emphasize the importance of the F.A.'s campaign.

By Players and the P.F.A.

1.   Some current practices, such as players running to or beyond the
     touchline with outstretched arms and clenched fists, or excessive
     shows of exuberance, when a goal is scored, will be strongly
     discouraged.

2.   Persistent offenders against field discipline will, with the approval
     of the F.A. International Committee, cease to be available for selection
     in National teams until decided otherwise.

3.   Premeditated serious foul play will be punished more strongly.

4.   The P.F.A. will be asked to support the above policy, and discourage
     bad practices.

By the Football League Secretaries', Managers' and Coaches' Association

The Football Association has noted with approval the recent report    of the F.L.
Secretaries', Managers' and Coaches' Association on crowd violence    in
football, and hopes that it will instruct players firmly that they    must
adhere to the Code of Conduct and policy now being formulated, and    publicly
assert their interest and action.
                                   -   3   -




By Clubs

1.     Should instruct their Managers more firmly and ensure that they comply
       with The Football Association's Code of Conduct.

2.     Club Directors should let it be known that they will insist on better
       field behaviour.

3.    The matter of greater penalties on Clubs, apart from fines, such as
       the loss of affiliation or of match points or other sanctions, will
       be examined.

4.    Clubs should take all steps in their power to eliminate obscene
       chanting at football matches.

5.     Clubs should examine the deployment of Club Stewards, in co-operation
       with the Police, and the use of T.V. monitoring systems.

6.    Terraces should be kept clear of possible missiles, such as stones,
       loose concrete, etc.

7.    Arrangements should be made for Police surveillance at turnstiles
       to restrict, as far as possible, missiles being taken into grounds.

8.    Steps should be taken to ban offenders frao grounds.

9.    The F.A. will, in the first instance, refer to the Football League
      details of Clubs whose record is unsatisfactory.

By Transport Authorities

1.    No cheap fares should be available for travel to 'away" matches.

2.    The Football Association welcooes the recent Bye-law of British
       Rail, concerning the sale or carriage of alcohol on certain trains,
       but hopes that sane possible loop-holes can be closed. In addition,
       however, the F.A. recommends that the provisions of the Act in
       Scotland should be examined, for it allows for a complete ban on
       alcohol on coaches. Also, the F.A. understands that the granting
       of drink licences to English football coach operators is no longer
       required, and this matter should be re-examined.

By Referees

The Football Association intends, in consultation with the Football League,
to consider some possible changes of Rule on such matters as dissent, the
premeditated foul, the indirect free kick, and the use of yellow and red
cards, etc. and hopes to discuss these matters shortly with the Football
League Referees and Referees Association.

     Press, Television and Radio

1.    The Press will be kept fully informed of actions taken by the F.A.
      and of the requests made to the Heme Office.

2.    Discussions will be arranged with the media and to stress the
      desirability of avoiding display or canment on selected incidents
      which may stimulate fresh trouble.
                                    -   4   -




 REQUESTS TO Till: HOME SECRETARY

 The Football Association recalls the importance attached to the
 preservation of law and order as a major intention of the present
 Government when it was elected, and therefore feels justified in
 making further recommendations to the Heme Secretary. After reveiwing
 its past actions, and now making new proposals to all sections of
 football, The Football Association feels canpelled to draw attention
 to some possible actions which are beyond its own authority:-

 1.   A sufficient number of Attendance Centres for appropriate age
      groups should be created, as premised long ago. They should be
      "local" to the large trouble centres. Failure to attend as
      ordered should be appropriately punished. Magistrates should be
      informed that as far as football is concerned, twelve attendances
      of two hours each is far more effective than one of twenty-four
      hours.

 2.   Apart from Attendance Centres, stiffer penalties are also needed
      in some cases.

 3.   Passports should be withheld from those who make trouble abroad,
      for say two years, as licences are removed fran drunken drivers.

 4.   Consideration should be given to the re-introduction of National
      Identity Cards, which would make the task of the Football Clubs
      much easier.

 5.   The carriage and the sale of alcohol on coaches and trains should
      be re-examined. A ban of alcohol on football coaches should be
      considered, as allowed by Scottish law. Randan checks by police
      should be made on coaches travelling on motorways and main roads,
      with a view to its confiscation.

 6.   British Rail should be asked toprevent as far as they can, supporters
      under the influence of drink fran joining trains.

 7.   Justices should be asked to impose restrictions on offenders attending
      matches, with further Court action should they break such ruling.

 8.   Following consideration in the Courts the names of offenders should
      be sent to their Club so that they can be debarred from attending
      subsequent home games.

 9.   Coaches should be required to off-load football supporters outside
      the ground, not too long before the match. The Police should be
      asked to consider whether escorted processions between stations and
      grounds are really desirable, or whether they incite further difficulties.
      Also on some occasions the Police have requested large crowds of
      hooligans to be admitted to grounds so as to get them off the streets
      and this has caused further difficulty for the Clubs.

lO.   The possibility of restricting sale of alcohol outside and in the
      vicinity of grounds should be considered. In a recent discussion
      with the Licensed Victuallers Association, The Football Association
      was informed that they were taking steps to this end and would welcome
       such action.



NOVEMBER, 1980
