    n.SSTSx
      (m ««•))
                    THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED                                  -----
                                       r w i m m   » OPfiei
                                  LYTHAM ST A N N E S
      07078                                LANCS                              ».K»««u.r.r.ca3.   |i
                                           FY8 UG.
      7/20371                                                          2,1,1 *Pril* 1985*




      TO ALL CLUBS


      Dear Secretary,
                                         HooUgMiBB
t          You will know that the President and I were invited, along with represen
      of the Football Association, to attend a meeting called by the Prime Minister
      yesterday.

           In addition to the Prime Minister herself, the Government were represent*
      by the Home Secretary, the Environment Secretary, the Minister for Sport,
      Foreign Office Minister Mr. Timothy Renton, Transport Minister Mr. David
      Mitchell, Scottish Office officials and senior civil servants.

           X give below my notes of the meeting, insofar as clubs' matches in
      this country are concerned

      1.      The Prime Minister emphasised that something further must be done
              to tackle the problem of hooliganism, which had brought both the
              game and the country into disrepute, but she was conscious of the
              need to avoid blanket measures which would unfairly penalise those
              clubs which did not have a record of trouble.


      2.      F.A. Rule 31 was discussed - clubs to take "reasonable precautions
*             and the Prime Minister asked the Football Association to delete the
              term and take wider and more effective, though not necessarily absolute,
              powers.

       3.     Emphasis was placed upon better containment of crowd misbehaviour
              in and around grounds, including specifically:-

              a)    more and/or improved perimeter fencing at appropriate grounds,
              b)    more effective segregation of rival supporters at appropriate
                   grounds which were not already subject to the local authority
                   requirements.

       4.     it was agreed to try to accelerate the use of closed circuit television,
              systems as a means of apprehending and deterring hooligans. Aepresentati«
              would be made to the Football Trust.

       5.     The President referred to the need for adequate numbers of police
              inside grounds, as a deterrent prijttrily, and requested that cluba
              be absolved of the cost. The Prlae Minister said that thie would
              be considered, but felt that Cluba should at least bear some of the u p M

                          AO ComVootaGS to bs addMMd to THE SBOETARY
Continued/2.


6.    All were agreed on the necessity for suitable charges to be brought
       end firm sentences to be bended down - Indeed the Priae Minister
       confined that jail sentences were the only appropriate measure In
       cases of violence, attendance centres perhaps for the lesser offences
       not involving violence - and the Haae Secretary assured us that he
       would take note of our wishes when publishing his forthcoming White
       Paper on hie review of publle order in the country. The blend replies




                                                                                  «
       which football had in the past reeelved from successive Hone Secretaries
       on the question of hoollganlaa would not be given by the present
       Qovernaent.

7.    The Government intends to pass legislation to take powers to curb
       the sale of alcohol within certain areas of certain grounds, to restrict
       alcohol on the way to Batches, i.e. coaches- etc., and to deny access          •m m
      to persons carrying alcohol or under the influence of alcohol. The



8.
      grounds affected will depend upon the Government’s assessment of
       the problem,

      The Prime Minister placed particular eaphasis on encouraging fsally
       attendance at Batches and recognised the various measures taken by
       a majority of clubs to encourage faally attendance, particularly
                                                                                      ■* *

                                                                                       i- f   5
       family enclosures. Both the Football Association and the League
                                                                                       V I
       referred to the S.A.F.E. and Match Mates schemes, for instance, which
                                                                                       w.«
       the Government were aware of and fully approved.

9.     The Governaent were insistent that football-re-examined the idea
      - of membership and identity cards and, although our reservations about
        a centralised scheme were clearly expressed, we were asked to look
                                                                                       w
        again at the whole situation within six weeks.

10. The Government also requested that wider use of all-ticket matches
                                                                                       it
     be considered

11. It was pointed out to the Government that a number of home clubs
     had used earlier kick-offs to conbat hooliganism.

12.    The Prime Minister felt that the behaviour of players in other sports
       was better than football, where a minority let the game down by setting
       a poor exssiple.

13. The President felt that clubs themselves should be encouraged to
     prosecute wrongdoers in appropriate caaes.
                                                                                  i
                                                                                  ■
14. The rscisa aspect of crowd alsbehavlour was touched upon.

15. The Krlae Minister undertook to set out views in a letter within
     a few days.
                                                                                  m
     Again, I would emphasise that these notes cover only the dcaestlc
aspect of hoollgaalaa - they do not embrace discussions on trouble abroad .       I
Continued/3. •




     The President assured the Government that the League and clubs would
co-operate insofar as it was practicable with both the Football Association
                                                                              ■■m
                                                                              m
and the Government in attempts to eliminate the problem once and for all.
                                                                        e

     We welcomed the initiative taken by the Government in setting up
the meeting and and the resolve demonstrated by the Ministers present         H M
to concentrate upon specific rather than blanket measures.                     mt



                             Yours sincerely,
