         LIVERPOOL    v.   NOTTINGHAM FOREST    -   15TH APRIL 1989



        I travelled to Hillsborough on the morning of the match with

my son,              [aged 7), and arrived at the ground at 10.35 a.m.



        I Immediately made contact with Graham Mackrell the Club's

Chief Executive and handed to him, on behalf of the Competitions

Department, the few tickets that remained in our possession.           We

then went for a quick walk round the V. I. P. installation and the

dressing room area so that I could familiarise myself once more

with the layout of the ground.       We had a brief look at the pitch

at this stage.



        At 12 noon I went with          to the official, lunch which

started late at around 12.45 p. m. and I left the lunch at around

2. 10 p. m.   I put          in the guest lounge and went with Arthur

McMullen to see Ray Lewis in the referees room.          We stayed there

for no more than five minutes wishing the officials the best of

luck on behalf of The Football Association,              then returned, I

believe to the Board Room, and I stayed in the dressing room

area.



        At around 2. 40 p. m. I was on the perimeter track by the

player's tunnel with Graham Mackrell looking round the ground.

It was clearly nowhere near full at this stage.          Graham told me

that there were 20,000 still outside.          Calling to mind the 1987

semi-finals at Villa Park and Hillsborough when the kick-off of

both had been delayed at the request of the Police, I asked
Graham whether, on this occasion the Police wanted a delay.        His

answer was that they did not, because putting back the kick-off

produced all sorts of organisational problems at the end of the

game.    I would stress that at this stage I was completely unaware

of any danger to spectators and, to the best of my knowledge,

Graham Mackrell had also not been informed of any such danger.

At around this time I returned to the Guest Room and took

to his seat in the Director's Box, returning immediately to the

tunnel area.     I remained there until kick-off time, principally

because there was a great amount of press interest in Brian

Clough who had been banned from sitting on the bench for the rest

of the season but was allowed for this match to sit in the seats

immediately behind the substitutes bench.     I was in this area at

the time the players came onto the field, I believe the Liverpool

team first, followed around thirty seconds later by the

Nottingham Forest team.     Shortly before the kick-off, Brian

Clough came out and went immediately to his seat.     At this stage,

with the match about to kick-off I returned to my seat in the

Director's Box.



        Shortly after the start of the game I was aware of movement

amongst the spectators at the Leppings Lane end and my immediate

thought was that there was some form of hooligan disturbance, as

the Police appeared to be attempting to contain a movement of

supporters.     I was aware at the same time that Liverpool were

attacking the Nottingham Forest goal and that an incident had

taken place in the Nottingham Forest goalmouth.            told me

that Peter Beardsley had hit the bar from a corner.      Nottingham

Forest then took the play down into the Liverpool half and I was

aware that the disturbance behind the goal at the Leppings Lane

end was becomming more serious with people coming over the fence
onto the perimeter and much Police activity.     A Police Officer

ran onto the pitch and waved to Ray Lewis to stop the game.          I

immediately went from the Director's Box to the pitch by the

player's tunnel and found Graham Kelly already there.      A lot of

people began to mill about the area.     There were Police Officers,

some supporters, photographers, St.     John Ambulance personnel and

the officials of both clubs.     Almost immediately Ray Lewis

brought the teams off the pitch.     I asked him how much of the

match had gone by.     He told me approximately six minutes.    At

this stage one youth ran from the Liverpool end of the ground and

stood in front of the Forest supporters on the Kop making obscene

gestures to them.     This evoked an angry response and, when the

youth was chased and brought to the ground by a Police Officer a

huge roar of approval went up from the Forest supporters.



     I found a Police Sergeant who was clearly under some

pressure,   and asked him to put us in touch immediately with the

Police Officer in charge of the event for the purpose of

information.   At this stage John Smith, the Chairman of

Liverpool, began to make demands himself for The Football

Association to call the match off.     I explained to him that we

had requested advice from the Police as to whether or not the

match should be abandoned or suspended for a period.     It was at

about 3. 15 p.m.    that it became apparent to us for the first time

that there might well be fatalities.     Graham Kelly and I then

went immediately with Graham Mackrell to the Police Control Room

and spoke to the Officer in Charge, Chief Superintendent David

Duckenfield.   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield told us that a

gate had been forced and there had been an in-rush of Liverpool

supporters that had caused casulties.     He was not clear at that

stage as to how many dead and injured there were.     He stated that
in his view, the match must be abandoned, but that he did not

want such an announcement made for the moment as he had “a lot of

angry people" and he feared disturbances if such an announcement

was made.     He also wished to have time for the emergency vehicles

to clear away the casulties from the area.     We asked that we be

informed immediately an announcement could be made and left the

Control Room as it was extremely cramped.     I should remark that

it was clear to me from the scenes in front of me that many

people were dead and injured and whatever action was being taken

to help these people was haphazard.     I should also add that

Graham Kelly, who was recognised by the Liverpool supporters in

the Leppings Lane end was loudly abused by these supporters who

clearly felt that the accident was in some way the responsibility

of The Football Association.     Throughout the day, many Liverpool

supporters who passed within my hearing made the comment that

they blamed The Football Association's ticket allocation.



      On leaving the Control Room, Graham Kelly called a meeting

of all interested parties including representatives of the clubs,

the referee and the Police Commander.     The Police Commander

explained at this time that he had withheld the decision about an

abandonment as he felt that it might be necessary for security

reasons to have the match continued.     I spent much of the time

between the end of this meeting and 4. 00 p. m.   fending off

newsmen who were looking for comment.     I promised them that there

would be a full statement by The Football Association as soon as

the immediate needs of the situation had been dealt with.       At

4. 00 p. m.   approximately I was informed that Nottingham Forest

were becoming restless and threatening to leave the Stadium.

Graham Kelly went immediately to the dressing room to sort out

the situation and I went to the Control Room to ascertain at what
stage the final decision was likely to be made.     While I was in

the Control Room waiting to speak to the Commander, a uniformed

person whom I took to be a Fire Officer came in and asked for the

ambulance liaison man.    The Police Commander stated that he had

asked for one but had not been provided with one.      While I was

waiting, the decision was made that the match could now be

abandoned.   I left the Control Box to convey this information to

various interested parties, but before I could get back to the

Board Room area an announcement was made over the tanoy.            As I

recall the substance of this announcement was that the match had

been abandoned;   spectators were asked to stay where they were

for a few minutes and remain calm to allow the emergency services

to clear the casualties; and persons should hold their ticket

stubs pending an announcement of a possible replay.      The

announcement was greeted with a round of applause from the

supporters above and around me in the Main Stand.      I do not know

what the reaction of the supporters on the terraces was as I

could not see them from the position I was in.    Once all of the

relevant persons had been informed of the abandonment I began to

organise the passing of the necessary information on to the

media.   Graham Kelly conducted interviews with t. v. , radio and

the written press.   At around this stage, I met Rogan Taylor,

Chairman of the F. S.A.   in the dressing room area.    He complained

to me in strong terms about the actions of the police.         In

particular, he repeated what I had overheard stated by several

supporters during the afternoon, which was that the gates had not

been forced but had been opened at the direction of the police

and that supporters had been admitted to the ground without

tickets being checked.
        I then gave my attention to attempting to reach people

outside the ground by telephone to inform them of what had

happened as we knew it and the action that was being taken.

                    assisted me with some telephone numbers in

attempting to reach Colin Moynihan.        I also spoke to

            who was on Saturday phone duty for The Football

Association and who was being swamped by calls that he was unable

to give any meaningful answers to.     Among the calls he had

received was one from Ken Merrett from Manchester United

concerning the possible replay on Wednesday.        It was decided by

Graham Kelly that the match could not take place and I asked

to pass this message on to Ken Merrett.        I also asked him to

phone my wife             to let her know that both           and I

were safe.     The attention of the press was now turned to the

Police who, according to the press, had made no statement on the

situation.     At first a rumour spread that the Police Commander

was to give a conference in the old gymnasium at 6. 00 p. m.         This

was refuted by a Police Press Officer who knew nothing about any

such plans.     At about 6.00 p.m., a high ranking Police Officer

announced that there would be a Press Conference given by South

Yorkshire Police at the Central Police Station in town at 6. 45

p. m.    It was agreed that Graham Kelly would remain at the ground

and that I should attend the Press Conference.        It was also

decided and announced at some stage during the procedings that

The Football Association would be making no decisions on the

possible replay of the game in the next forty-eight hours, but

that a press conference would be held at Lancaster Gate at 3. 00

p. m.    the following day.   While driving to the Police Station, I

attempted to phone                   bo ask him to open the office

for this conference.     There was no answer from The Football

Association.     Immediately afterwards,             managed to
contact me on my mobile phone and we agreed that she would

attempt to contact                 [and that she would arrange for

the office to be opened at 9.00 a.m. on Sunday morning.




     I attended the press conference which was given by the

Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr.     Peter Wright.     He was

half an hour late arriving and was clearly very ill-informed

about what had happened.     He announced that ninety-three were

dead, two hundred injured of which eighty-three had been

detained.     He said he could not say what was the cause of these

deaths.     He said there had been pressure on the outside

turnstiles by 3 - 4,000 people arriving no earlier than five

minutes before the kick-off.     He was not aware of any non-ticket

holders trying to get in.     He said that there was room in the

stand.    He then responded to some very aggressive questionning.

He said that a gate had been opened with Police permission, in

fact at Police direction, he knew who had opened the gate but he

was not able to divulge the name.     He said the gate had been

opened because of the danger to life outside the ground.       In

response to a question as to how many officers were on duty he

said eight hundred, of which fifteen were mounted officers

outside the ground.    He went on to refer to another gate which he

said had been shut to avoid crushing and that this gate had been

forced open.    After fifteen minutes or so he said he could answer

no further questions and attempts to elicit any more anwers from

the Police were resisted angrily by one of Mr.     Wright's

colleagues.
     At 7. 45 p. m. , I returned to Hillsborough with Andy

Williamson of The Football League who had also been at the press




conference and briefed Graham Kelly on what had been said.   I

left Hillsborough at 8. 00 p. m. and collected my son who had been

taken to the home of Graham Mackrell by Graham Mackrell's

girl friend.



     I drove back to London and arrived home at midnight.
