                                               Draft:   08.05.89



                       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




                 WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY




I, GRAHAM KELLY of the Football Association; 16 Lancaster
Gate London W2 WILL SAY as follows



Personal Details



1»         I am 43 years of age and have qualified asa
Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and

Administrators.    I am the Chief Executive of the Football

Association Limited ("FA").    I have held that post for three

months, having succeeded Mr E A Croker on his retirement in

February 1989.    I was previously Secretary of the Football

League from 1979 to 1988, having joined the League in 1968

and progressed through the post of' Assistant Secretary from
1973 to 1979.



2   .     (Feelings about incident).
    3.          I attended the Match with Glen Kirton,      [position].

    We were the only officials "on duty" as it were.         I am

    informed by Glen Kirton that he arrived at the ground at

    10.35am.    I arrived at 12.20 p.m. and noticed many

    Nottingham Forest fans arriving.          I believe that about

    35 council members were present in an unofficial capacity.

    There was a build up of traffic at exi/£t 34 and I left the

    Ml Motorway at Junction 35 and went through Ecclesfield,

a   joining the traffic from Liverpool at a traffic lights

    controlled by police officers.        I was not stopped by police

1   as I had been the year before.


    4.          I am informed by Glen Kirton that he contacted

    Graham Mackrell and went to the VIP installation, the
    dressing room area and pitch to familiarise himself with the

    layout of the ground.     I met various people and attended a

    lunch hosted by the Sheffield Wednesday directors.


®   5.          i am also informed by Glen Kirton that at 2.40pm

^   Graham Mackrell and he were on the perimeter track by the
    player's tunnel.     The ground was nowhere near full at that

    stage.     Graham Mackrell said to Kirton that he thought about

     20,000 people were still outside at that stage.



     6.          Glen Kirton tells me that he asked Mackrell

     whether the police had asked to delay the kick off.

     Mackrell told him they had not because delaying the kick off




                                     -   2-
caused all sorts of organisational problems at the end of

the game.     Both Glen Kirton and myself were unaware of any

danger to spectators at that stage.     If a request for a

delay was received we would of course approve the

recommendation from either the Police of th6 Club.      The 1987

finals at Villa Park and Hillsborough were both delayed at

the request of the Police as was the replay at Old Trafford

on 7 May 1989.



7.          I had noticed that many Nottingham Forest fans

were already arriving in the vicinity of the ground between

12 and 12:30.



8.          Soon after kick off I noticed that fans were

scaling the perimeter fence at the Leppings Lane end.        In

fact I did not see the incident when Peter Beardsley hit the

bar because I was looking at the Leppings Lane crowd.



9.          A Police Officer came over to speak to a lines-man

on my side of the ground.     I should mention that I was

sitting in the South Stand so that the Leppings Lane end was

on my left.     The lines man carried on and did not stop or

take any other action.     At 6 minutes past 3pm' another

policeman ran onto the pitch from behind the goal at the

Leppings Lane end and then the referee Mr Ray Lewis,

suspended play.
10.          After about 15-minutes I went to the Police

Control Box with Graham Mackrell and Glen Kirton which is

situated between the South stand and the West Stand and

affords a good view of the terraces in question looking

directly along the goal-line from the corner of the stadium.

Close circuit television cameras placed at various places

around the ground scan the terraces and areas just outside
the grounds.



11.       The Police in the Control Box were under the

impression that a gate or gates had been forced.     They told

me so and showed me a picture which purported to represent

this.   They said that the match would have to be abandoned

because there had been fatalities.     They did not know how

many.   The Police Commander was present in the Control Box

together with the Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson.

The officer in charge was Chief Superintendent David

Duckenfield.     We were told that when the gate had been

forced there had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters.



12.       About 10-minutes later I convened a meeting of the

three clubs concerned together with the referee and the

Police Commander in the main boardroom of the club.     The

police at that stage were not ruling out a possibility that

the match would go on having moved slightly away from their

previous indication to me that it would have to be

abandoned.     In my view this was because they were probably
worried as to what would happen if the full extent of the

situation became known to the supporters still inside the

ground at that stage.     I imagine they also wanted time for

the emergency vehicles to have access to the ground.     There

followed a long period of uncertainty with people from all

three clubs and the media milling around not knowing what to

do or what to say as it became apparent that the number of

fatalities and casualties were higher than previously

realised.



13.          I requested the Police Commander to stay in close

contact with the referee with regard to whether the match

should continue or not.     I do not know whether they had any

further contact.     My concern was to keep administrative

control over what was obviously a very confusing and

difficult situation.


14.          I am informed that the two team managers gave a

tannoyed announcement over the ground's system but I did not

hear this.     Also I did not see what was happening on the

pitch about half an hour after the incident and later

because I was behind the scenes dealing with the various

parties.



15.          Mr Brian Clough, the Manager of Nottingham Forest

sent out word that he wanted to take his players home and I

went into the dressing-room to explain to him and to the
players that although there was a less than 50:50 chance at

that stage of the match being resumed we ought not to say it

was abandoned until the police said so.     This was at. 4pm.

At about 4:2 5pm I understand that an announcement was made

to the effect that the match had been abandoned.     I believe

that the crowd were told that there had been a serious

incident and that people were requested to keep their

places.



16.       I had been informed at that stage that there had

been about 50 deaths.     The media had been trying to get an

interview from me for some time and I spoke to BBC

television and radio and gave a short press conference to

the waiting reporters at about 4:40pm.



17.       I understand that throughout this period of

uncertainty the back-room staff, many of them who were young

boys and girls on the staff of Sheffield Wednesday, were

involved in supplying hot water and stretcher facilities.

In my view they gave a super-human performance.



18.       I did see I           I, the Sheffield Wednesday

physiotherapist running up and down the pitch' in the middle

tending to the injured.
             When the two teams had departed the Chairman of
  Sheffield Wednesday Football club, Mr Kackrell, was

  persuaded to leave the ground by his relatives.



  20.       Later that evening I was called to a meeting of

  the remaining directors of Sheffield Wednesday together with
  the Club secretary, Mr Graham Mackrell.    I was also

  interviewed subsequently extensively on TV and radio.   Later

 on that evening I met Mr Colin Moynihan the Sports Minister
 and Irving Patrick, M.P. who were touring the ground with
 police officials.



 21.       The scenes of distress on that day will remain
 with me forever.    People exhibited signs of anger,
 bitterness, frustration and bewilderment.




(31127L)
