                         THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                      LIMITED
                                                       Founded 1863
                                      Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                    President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                           Chairman: F. A. M i l l i c h i p

   Chief Executive:                                                                      Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G.    K e l l y f c is                                                                    Telex: 261110
                                                                                           Facsimile: 01-402 0486


                               16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 Our Ref:                                          Your Ref:
                                                                                    13th June, 1989




   Freshfields,
   Grindall House,
   2 5 Newgate Street,
   London,
   EC1A7LH.



   Dear

   As requested I am enclosing, herewith, the Minutes of the
   Council Meeting held on 25th May, 1989, in which reference
   is made to the Hillsborough Inquiry.

   I am also enclosing a copy of the Minutes of the Executive
   Committee Meeting held on 31st May, 1989, which also contain
   an item relating to the Hillsborough disaster.

   These Minutes are to be included in the agenda for the
   Council Meeting to be held on 1st July, 1989 and if you have
   any comments you may wish to make, I shall be grateful if
   you will advise me accordingly by Friday, 15th June.

   Yours sincerely,




   for Chief Executive




                                  Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W 23LW
                                  Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
              FIs.                                l^ et^ d r^ Y .



                               THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION



6£.
\   \va\
                                  EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

                                MINUTES OF A MEETING
                     held at 16, Lancaster Gate, London, W. 2.
                           on Wednesday, 31st May, 198 9,
                              commencing at 11. 15 a.m.


    Messrs.    F. A. Millichip (in the Chair), W. T. Annable,
               J. J. Dunnett, D. R. Goodchild, A. D. McMulen,
               Dr. J. O' Hara, H. R. Smith and C. H. Willcox.

               Mr.    R. H. G. Kelly,                   and Miss J. Smith.

    An apology for absence was received from Mr.           R. B. Strachan, who
           was on F. A. business.

    150. MINUTES The Minutes of the Meeting held on 25th April,
           1989 were taken as read and signed by the Chairman as
           a correct record.


    151. MATTERS ARISING NOT COVERED ELSEWHERE ON THE AGENDA

              ( i ) Minute 142 - Postponement of Football League
                    Matches/ Albania v.   England - 8th Match 1989 It
                    was noted that the Millwall v.   Middlesbrough match
                    due to be played on Saturday, 4th March had been
                    played in mid-week as the England Manager had
                    indicated that he would be selecting a member of
                    the Middlesbrough team for the Squad for the
                    Albania v England match and, therefore, he would
                    not be available for selection by Middlesbrough on
                    4th March.  Subsequently the player had not been
                    selected for the England Squad.   Millwall F. C.  was
                    claiming compensation, therefore, for the loss of
                    revenue resulting from a mid-week fixture.

                     Although the Committee did not necessarily agree
                     with the views of Millwall F. C. on this matter, it
                     was agreed that The Association had a moral
                     responsibility to compensate the club.  The Chief
                     Executive was authorised to negotiate a
                     satisfactory settlement.

              (ii) Minute 112 (b) - Insurance Cover It was noted
                   that a report on the insurance of Council Members
                   of County Associations would be available for
                   consideration at the next meeting.

           (iii) Minute 139 - Artificial Pitches   The view was
                 expressed that a decision should be taken as soon
                 as possible regarding the use of artificial
                 pitches.  It was noted that the Football League's
                 Sub-Committee on Artificial Surfaces had now
                 prepared its final report on the subject and a copy
                 would be forwarded to The Association.

                                                (1)
152.   CIRCULATION OF F. A. HANDBOOKS   (Reference Minute 133 (a) -
         25. 4. 89) The Committee was of the view that Council at
         its Meeting on 25th May, 1989, had accepted the
         principle of circulating an Abridged F. A.   Handbook to
         all affiliated Clubs.    It was agreed that the Chief
         Executive would liaise with Messrs.    W. T. Annable and
         D. R.   Goodchild regarding the information to be
         contained in the Abridged Handbook.    It was further
         agreed that the cost of supplying the Abridged Handbooks
         would not be charged to the Publications Committee's
         Account.


153.   WEMBLEY STADIUM The Committee noted that as authorised the
         Chief Executive had discussed with Wembley Stadium
         various proposals relating to increased revenue from
         improved facilities at Wembley Stadium and these
         proposals were agreed.


154.   FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL It was noted that following
         recent incidents the Government had indicated its
         intention to proceed with the Football Spectators Bill,
         although it was not felt that it would be finalised until
         October/November, by which time Lord Justice Taylor's
         Report would be available.


155.   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER The Committee received a draft of
         the "FA Submission to Taylor Inquiry" document prepared
         by the Chief Executive.

        The Chairman reminded the Committee that at the Council
        Meeting on 25th May, it had been agreed that a
        Committee be formed to finalise the document which
        was to be submitted to the Inquiry by 12th June.   It was
        noted that the Committee comprised Messrs.  B. W.
        Bright, R. G. Noades, I.  Stott, G.  Thompson and N.
        White.

        Mr.  Dunnett was of the view that for the sake of
        unanimity it would not be appropriate for The Football
        League to make a separate submission to the Inquiry.

        It was agreed that the Chief Executive would keep the
        Executive Committee informed as appropriate.

        Dr. 0' Hara referred to Item 9 of the draft Report
        regarding Medical Provision.   Following a discussion it
        was agreed that the Chief Executive should consult with
        the Solicitors regarding whether The Association should
        await the outcome of the Taylor Report before advising
        clubs of the minimum medical requirements.




                                      (2)
156.   ENGLAND AMPUTEE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION The Committee
         considered a request from the England Amputee Football
         Association that it be affiliated to The Football
         Association and its national team be permitted to wear
         the F. A. badge.  It was decideed that whilst it was not
         possible to agree to the request for affiliation,
         permission would be given for the national team to wear
         the F. A. badge subject to minor modification.   It was
         further agreed that the office should consider other
         methods of assisting the England Amputee Football
         Association and other disabled organisations.    Dr.
         0' Hara's views would be obtained in this respect.


157.   EXECUTIVE SUB-COMMITTEE MINUTES The Committee noted the
         decisions of the Executive Sub-Committee between 26th
         April and 22nd May 1989 (see attached).

         It was agreed that the office should increase the
         suggested fines payable for breaches of F. A. Rules.


158.   BRITISH AEROSPACE The Committee received and approved a
         Report by the Chief Executive giving details of the
         proposed formation of a joint venture private limited
         company with British Aeorspace to develop football
         projects in particular and sports projects in general.

         It was hoped that the expertise of both The Football
         Association and British Aerospace would result in the
         private limited company proving to be a successful
         enterprise.

         The Chairman and Chief Executive were authorised to
         progress the matter.


159.   COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS OF APPEAL The Committee noted and
         agreed to recommend proposed amendments to the Powers and
         Duties of the Disciplinary, Leagues Sanction &
         Registrations and Referees Committees as
         set out in the relevant Minutes of 26th April, 1989,
         10th April, 1989 and 18th April, 1989 respectively.


160.   DISTRIBUTION OF MONIES - F. A. RULE 16 (e) SUB COMMITTEE
         The Notes of a Meeting of the Sub-Committee held on 25th
         April, 1989, were received.

        The Chairman confirmed that The Association had
        contractual and statutory obligations regarding payments
        from the Semi-Final Ties and the Final Tie of the F. A.
        Challenge Cup Competition and this would protect
        monies payable to County Associations.




                                      (3 )
161.   LIFE VICE-PRESIDENTS The view was expressed that
         consideration should be given to removing the age limit
         in respect of the appointment of Life Vice-Presidents.,

           It was noted that at the Council Meeting on 25th May,
           1989, it had been agreed that the question of an age
           limit being imposed on members of the F. A. Council would
           again receive consideration and it was felt that the
           question of the age restriction on Life Vice-Presidents
           should be considered at that time.


162. APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES Dr. O'Hara was assured that the
       possibility of the Executive Committee being responsible
       for the appointment of Standing and Other Committees was
       receiving consideration.  The matter would be discussed
       when consideration was given to a Report prepared by The
       Association's Auditors in respect of the situation
       regarding Directors of The Association, at the first
       full Meeting of the Executive Committee after the Summer
       Meeting.


The Meeting closed at 1. 15 p.m.




7. 6. 89




                                        (4 )
