                            THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED


REPORT OF A MEETING HELD ON THURSDAY, 1ST JUNE, 1989, AT MANCHESTER UNITED
FOOTBALL CLUB TO DISCUSS MINIMUM MEDICAL REQUIREMENTS AT LEAGUE GROUNDS



               Present:         J.A. Crawford (Football League)
                                Dr. D. Dawson (Stockport County)
                                Dr. D. Dennard (Bolton Wanderers)
                                D. McBain (Bolton Wanderers)
                                K. Merrett (Manchester United)
                                B. Halford (Manchester City)
                                C.J. Whalley (Football League)




        Prior to the commencement of the meeting, a visit was made to one
of the three First Aid rooms at Old Trafford and to the medical room in the
vicinity of the players' dressing rooms.


INTRODUCTION

        Mr Crawford reported that, at its last meeting, the Football League
Anti-Hooliganism Committee had felt that consideration be given to compiling
a list of minimum medical requirements for Football League grounds. This
meeting had been called to consider these requirements and to put forward
recommendations to the Anti-Hooliganism Committee.

        Before considering the requirements in detail, the following general
observations were made:-

     i)     each club's safety certificate does contain a provision for
             first aid facilities.

     ii)    it is all well and goocl suggesting that clubs should have a
             defribillator and resuscitative equipment, but there is always
             a danger that untrained people would be tempted to use such
             equipment which, in untrained hands, can be lethal.

     iii)      clubs would need a fully-equipped casualty ward to cope with a
               major disaster. We should, therefore, be looking at what can
               reasonably be provided.


                                                                        Contd./2
                                    -   2   -




ACCOMMODATION


        It was felt that each club should have a designated First Aid room;
this in addition to the club's medical room which is usually in the vicinity
of the players' dressing rooms. The First Aid room should contain a couple
of beds, a sink, a work-top and should have facility for a curtain to give
privacy, if necessary. The room should be supplied with power, light, water
and a (dire'ct-line) telephone. The Room should be in such a situation so as
to allow easy access for ambulance/emergency vehicles.


MEDICAL REQUIREMENTS


        The First Aid room should have a well-stocked first aid cabinet
containing antiseptics, analgaesics, bandages, etc. It was felt that one
person should be responsible for stocking the cabinet. Stretchers should be
available as well as a carrying chair. It was felt that oxygen would be
beneficial.


MEDICAL~STAFF

        It was recognised that the club doctor's attendance at matches was
primarily for attention to players. It was felt, therefore, that there should
be at least one extra qualified person in attendance at matches. It was
suggested that each club find out if there are doctors who attend their
matches regularly, as spectators. It might be possible to offer these
doctors season-tickets and display their seat numbers in the First Aid room.

        It was reported that clubs could hire a fully-equipped ambulance and
two paramedics for approximately £90 per match. The meeting was very much
in favour of this, as the ambulance would not only have defribillators and
resuscitative equipment etc. , but they would be in good working order and
would be supplied with people trained to use them. Clubs would not have to
worry about the security of the equipment during the week. It was felt that
The Football league might like to consider recommending such an ambulance for
attendances over a certain figure.

        It was fel£ that the minimum number of first aiders at each match
should be 1 for every 1,000 spectators. These to be fully-trained first
aiders and not young, inexperienced ones. It was further felt that the St. John
Ambulance should provide each club with a list of their trained staff at the
start of each season; such list to be regularly up-dated. The club secretaries
present indicated that extra first aiders do tend to turn up for the bigger
games.




                                                                    Contd./3
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES


        It was suggested that clubs review their emergency procedures in
conjunction with the police and ambulance services. It would be helpful if
these could be shown in each club's local plans.


COMMUNICATIONS


        It was felt that clubs should review their communications system and
consider if it is sufficient.


FUNDING


        The meeting recognised that funding medical initiatives might present
problems for some clubs. It was felt that the Football Grounds Improvement
Trust and/or the Football Trust might be approached to see if they could
assist clubs financially in this area.

        There being no further business, Mr Crawford thanked everyone for
their attendance.




                                                         C.J. Whalley
                                                         3rd June, 1989
