              The Checkpoint System for Crowd Control

I n t r o duction: As arranged with the F .A. Office I attended a
meeting at Braintree, Essex on Friday 30th January, 1987, set
up by C.P.U. (Holdings) Ltd who with their associated Companies,
and specifically Springmead Ltd, are involved in the development,
supply and distribution of Computer based products.

O b j e c t : The object of the meeting, attended by representatives
of D.O.E., Essex County Council including Police and Fire Service,
the Football League together with the Secretary of Colchester
United F.C., was to outline and, subsequently, demonstrate a
system of control and surveillance at Football grounds developed
by Springmead Ltd, in co-operation with Colchester United F . C ., so
as     to eliminate hooliganism at Football.

Local Action:  Some preliminary discussions have already taken
place with the Local Authority and if the scheme meets with their
approval it is hoped that it might be operational from the end
of March 1987.

The System:  It is claimed that Checkpoint will operate (a) by
controlling the movement of spectators into a Football ground
and their subsequent movement therein and (b) by monitoring
and recording such movements.

M e t h o d : All persons who attend will require a Key Card which
will contain a Machine Readable i.e. a number on a magnetic
strip similar to a Credit/Bank Card or a Barcode; a number to
aid identification and the name of the Club.       The latter is
included so that a lost card can be returned to the Club.

I s s u e : Key Cards will be issued on completion of an   application
form.      Details of all applicants will be recorded on   the Computer
as a Data Base.      Such information stored on the Data   Base can be
used for ancillary purposes e.g. advertising, Credit       Control,
Mail Shots, etc etc.

A d m i s s i o n : Admission to the ground will be by normal Turnstiles
which will be so located that access can be gained to the Terraces
or Seating a c commodation. The Card will be h a nd e d , together with
the price of admission to the Turnstile operator who will pass
it through a slot in a metal box (which contains the Code Reader)
mounted on the operator's side of the Turnstile.

The Turnstile - in effect a modified Ticket Booth - will have
a C.C.T.V. Camera able to view and record the face of the
supporter though he will not be aware of this procedure.  By
this time a Ticket will have appeared from another box on the
Turnstile - an Entrance Ticket - which in effect is a message
to the operator to inform the spectator from where he can view
the match.




                                                     Contd/
\                                           - 2 -




     9.   M o d i f ic a t i o n s : Modifications to existing Turnstiles - and
          Colchester have only 14 - to cater for the Checkpoint System
          will n e c e s s i t a t e :-

          (a)   Notices to inform supporters of the appropriate Turnstiles.

          (b)   Machine Code Reader to read the Key        Card.

          (c)   C.C.T.V. Camera to make visual record.

          (d)   Entrance Ticket Printer.

          (e)   Warning System, i.e. alarm button and warning light   to
                 alert operator that person concerned is banned, etc.

          (f)   Inter-Coin   System to alert Control Room.

    10.   Control Room:  This will act as the nerve centre to deal with
          all problems/emergencies and will be a separate entity from
          Police Control Centre.

    11.   Additional aspects:  Additional sophistication will restrict
          supporters to zones/areas within the ground by means of further
          Card Readers positioned at the zone or area entrance.

    12.   Visiting Supporters:   Visitors will need to complete application
          forms obtainable at the 'Home' or 'Away' ground.   Such applications
          will be posted to the 'Home' Club together with the appropriate
          remittance.   The number of tickets will be restricted to five per
          application.   Liaison between opposing Clubs can sinplify this
          procedure which, in the case of cup replays, would be impossible
          to complete in the time available.

    13.   G e n e r a l : There are, as one would expect in a system as complex
          as this, other aspects to be considered but the foregoing is
           the broad outline of what is intended.

    14.   What is clear is that the system envisaged will require a heavy
          manpower commitment to operate.  It will also, I feel, require
          personnel of a higher calibre than that normally employed on
          Turnstile duties if it is to work efficiently.

    15.   No mention was made of the likely cost on the grounds that certain
          refinements remain to be finalised.  I suspect that Colchester F.C.
          as the guinea-pigs, have struck a deal with Springmead Ltd.
          However, even if the scheme is installed at Colchester the real
          test of its merits can hardly be properly assessed at a ground with
          an attendance, on average, of about 3,000.

    16.   The first hurdle to be negotiated is the Essex County Council.
          Subject t o their approval and the installation of the scheme
          there will be an opportunity to examine    it more closely before
          the end of the season.




                                                                   Contd/
t



                                       - 3 -

/
    17.   On a personal view the acid test for Springmead will be the
          acceptance of the scheme by a 1st Division Club.  Without that
          it is likely to be just another hooligan oriented project.

    18.   For information.
