                                 City of Liverpool

                        From C ity Councillor                   .....................................

                                           c/o Room 42, Municipal Buildings,
                        Please reply to:   fial.S..S .t r g i^ f c ' ^.Liverp.Q.ol... L69 2DH.

                                                                                           Date:        15th May, 1989.


Mr. Kelly,
Chief Executive,
Football Association,                                     0              "


16 Lancaster Gate,
LONDON
W2 3LW.

Dear Mr. Kelly,

The recent decision by the Football Association to substantially increase
ticket allocations to both competing teams' supporters at this years
Football Association Challenge Cup Final is welcomed by this Hillsborough
Working Party.

This decision, set against a reduced Wembley capacity, does raise to the
number of important issues relevant to the F.A ticket allocation and
distibution policy for their Wembley final.

Firstly, were the events of 15th April, at Hillsborough, the sole influence
on your decision? If so, is the increased allocation to be viewed purely
on a gesture of goodwill to the people of Liverpool and the supporter's of
both Everton and Liverpool? If this is the case does it indicate that the
F.A will, for future finds, revert to the 'normal' policy for ticket
allocation to competing clubs and appropriate bodies.

Secondly, in light of the failure of segregation at last year's Liverpool
Wimbledon F.A Cup Final, and in view of the increasing call for ticket
allocations at all neutral venues to be based on competing clubs average
attendances, would the Football Association consider a wholesale review of
its ticket allocation policy in light of these and other catalogued
factors which are subject to subjudice at this time?

Thirdly, if the F.A are to revert to the pre-existing ticket allocation
policy would the reduced capacity, in future, lead to a commensurate
reduction in the tickets made available to competing team supporters?

Finally, arising from Liverpool City Council's own Trading Standards Dept,
Report into the 1988 F.A Cup Final, what action has the F.A taken against
those associate bodies and clubs identified as having been the original agents
for tickets which subsequently entered the black-market.

Your comments and views in the above would be most welcome.

Yours sincere^y^-,_________


H. Chase,
Chair - Hillsborough Working Party.
