 DRAFT LETTER TO PRIME MINISTER


 Dear Mrs Thatcher

 I should be failing in ray duty if I did not write to you as
 soon as possible at ter Saturday's tragic events to thank you,
 Douglas Hurd and Colin Moynihan for your support, compassion
 and understanding.

 Quite properly, you have acted swiftly to set up the judicial
 enquiry that we ail hope will ensure that tnese devastating
 scenes are never again seen on an English football ground.

 Clearly, we must wait for the findings of Lord Justice Taylor
 before we can be certain of tne action that must be taken. I
 can, however, tell you now of the steps that The Football
 ^sociation has put immediately into effect.

 jBfcresponse to the suttering of the injured and the bereaved,
     will be aware that we Have made an^lnterirrP^donation of
 £250,000 to the Liverpool Appeal Fund. We intend to supplement
 this with the revenue from matches, football itself has no
 relevance when set alongside such an appalling catastrophe. But
 if it is a love of our game that has cost people their lives,
 then in it is right that we should offer the Semi-Final replay
 and the Cup Final not only as a fitting memorial Dut also as
 the most effective means that we have at our disposal of
 providing the concrete help that I have already referred to.

We understand that many people will feel that Liverpool FC
should not be expected to continue in this season's FA Cup
competition. We respect these views and shall not go against
the wishes of theclub. If it does not prove possible to play
on, we shall find otner means of raising money for the disaster
fund. Whatever the case, you may rest assured that no football
batfk or club will benefit financially in any way from the
pj^ULng of FA Cup games for the rest of this season.

^ThV role played by the security fence in the death or injury of
 many of Saturday's casualties has caused great public concern.
 We have instructed all of our clubs to consult as a matter of
 urgency their Licencing Authority on this and other relevant
 aspects of Crowd Safety. As you will have seen from reports,
many of them have taken this step unprompted by us. Already
 some fences are down.

We have felt it necessary to take a lead on the question of
all-seater stadia. Wembley Stadium Ltd wish to go down t m s
path now. We shall help tnem in every way we can. We have
already had discussions with The Football Trust and with The
Football Grounds Improvements Trust. The Football Association
is now benefitting from increased revenue from television. We
shall be looking to put this to the most etrective use in
helping clubs to instal more seating capacity.. Football has
spent £^0,000,000 on Ground Safety in the last ten years. We
shall not shirk from tinaing however much is now necessary to
continue this essential work. We have said and will continue to
say that Football must expect to solve its own financial
problems and not look for subsidies elsewhere. I should bring
to your attention, however, one point of which you may not be
aware. The Pools Companies have an agreement with The Football
League that, should the tax on Pool betting be reduced from
42%% to 42%, tfcMfr-fifths of the revenue thus saved would be
given to the League, but on the strict understanding that such
money should be used only for ground improvements. 1 am sure
you will wish to bear this in mind.

 Let me assure you once more of our determination to raise our
[game up again and to act with all expediency to implement the
 lessons that will emerge from this tragedy. I am confident that
w e K a v e your support and good will in this endeavour.

   rs sincerely




FA Millichip
Chairman
