                                          23 June 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH
Glen Kirton telephoned. X updated him on how Adrian thought
his evidence had gone. There was just that sticky point ^
with Glasgow. I said it was a merit point that went to his
credibility rather than a point of substance. It was a
matter between himself and McCrell as to whether he thought
it right to mention to McCrell that his account differed on
16 or 17 April. I did not think it took Glasgow very far to
have mentioned it in the way he did and he thought he was
probably clutching at straws because of the corroborative
evidence from the other Sheffield Wednesday official that it
was at 2.40 pm that the conversation took place.

 The other point Glen was worried about was that he said he
 it was#dangerous to have told a police officer that a delay
 in the kick-off might be sensible. Immediately there were
'dangers'he knew that Counsel for the Inquiry would be down
 his throat. He corrected himself.
He needed copies of the Phase 2 submissions for the 90
council members. He would check his print department as to
how much it would cost. He would need proper velo bound
copies for the senior people. We would arrange that next
week.
Engaged 15 minutes including dictation

S u b s e q u e n t l y ^ attending Glen Kirton. A father of a deceased
person^ ^ H e wanted to give him his views on medical
facilities. Glen did not want to speak to him.
What should he tell his secretary to tell him? I said that
the FA had submitted a written material to Lord Justice
Taylor which covered medical provision and commented     ^
specifically on the green guide to safety at sports stadia.
That document had not been made public yet. The judge had
also heard lots of evidence about first aid and medical
facilities at stadia. It would be far better if the person
phoning could submit material or write to the Treasury
Solicitor in Sheffield. There was no point asking the FA
for its views as at the moment the matter was not made
public and in any event Lord Justice Taylor's recommendatms
were the important way of getting new measures introduced.

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation
