                         THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


                            EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE


                           MINUTES OF A MEETING
                 held at 16, Lancaster Gate, London,   W. 2. ,
                       on Tuesday, 25th April, 198 9
                         commencing at 11. 15 a.m.


Present:     Messrs. F. A. Millichip (in the Chair), W. T. Annable,
             J. J. Dunnett, D. R. Goodchild, A. D. McMullen, Dr.
             J. O' Hara, H. R. Smith and R. B. Strachan.

             Mr. R. H. G. Kelly,                    Mr.   G. Kirton and
             Miss J. Smith.

An apology for absence was received from Mr.        C. H. Willcox.


Prior   to the business of the Meeting the Chairman: -

(a)      referred with deep regret to the sudden death of Mr. H. N.
        Bird, who had retired as Deputy Secretary of The
        Association in June 1988, following 49 years service;

The Committee stood in silence as a mark of respect.

(b)     reported that Mr. Willcox was suffering from asuspected
        slipped disc and was undergoing tests.   The Committee
        expressed its best wishes for a speedy recovery;


132.    MINUTES The Minutes of the Meetings held on 30th March,
          and 18th April, 1989, were taken as read and signed by
          the Chairman as a correct record.


13 3.   MATTERS ARISING

           (a)    Minute 129 - Circulation of F. A. Handbooks  Mr.
                  Annable reiterated his views that the provision
                  of F. A. Handbooks to all Football Clubs in
                  Membership of County Associations would eliminate
                  some of the problems that presently arose in
                  respect of disciplinary matters because players
                  were not fully aware of F. A. Rules.

           (b)    Minute 112 (b) - Insurance Cover A report was
                  received of the present position in respect of
                  the insurance of Council Members of County
                  Associations.  It was agreed that consideration
                  should be given to increasing the
                  benefits payable under the policy.  A further
                  report would, therefore, be prepared for
                  consideration in due course.  Such report would
                  also examine the question of the upper age limit
                  of 75.
(c)   Minute 114 - Governors of the GM Vauxhall
      Football Association National School A list was
      received showing the names of the boys who had
      passed out from the School and their present
      whereabouts.  It was agreed that further
      information should be supplied giving details of
      how the boys were progressing with their clubs.

(d)   Minute 120 - Proposed Amendment to F. A. Rule 37
      The Committee was pleased to note that Chelsea
      F. C. had agreed to withdraw the proposed
      amendment to F. A. Rule 37 pending an
      investigation by The Association.

(e)   Minute 122 - Executive Committee - Retirement
      Mr. Dunnett indicated that, despite his
      appointment as President of The Football League,
      he wished to retain his position as an elected
      member of the Executive Committee.  It was agreed,
      therefore, that the notification to Council
      regarding re-election at the Summer Meeting should
      only refer to those retiring in accordance with
      Standing Orders.

(f)   Minute 124 - Wembley International Tournament
      The Chairman gave a detailed report of
      correspondence that had been received and
      a meeting he had attended with the Chairman of
      Wembley Stadium, in respect of the Wembley
      International Tournament.

      Following a lengthy discussion the Chairman said
      he had taken note of the various views expressed
      and any member of the Executive Committee wishing
      to speak on the proposed Tournament at the
      Council Meeting the following day would be given
      the opportunity to do so.

(g)   Minute 125 - Wembley Stadium The Chief Executive
      outlined proposals relating to increased revenue
      from the improved facilities at Wembley Stadium.

      Following a discussion the Chief Executive
      was authorised to progress the matter to a
      conclusion based on the principles outlined.

(i)   Minute 128 - Admittance of English Clubs into
      European Competitions    The Committee noted the
      following decision of the UEFA Executive Committee
      Meeting on 11th April: -

      "Because of the enormous efforts made by the
      English football authorities, the Committee have
      unanimously decided to re-integrate English clubs
      from Season 1990-91, subject to the
      implementation of the European Convention on
      Spectator Violence at Sports Events and to the
      British Government giving its help and support to
      the English football authorities.
                                                    £xton\oz-
               "The President of UEFA will seek a        ~~     ~~
               the Minister for Sport in April 19
               back to the Executive Committee in

         (j)   Minute 126 - Postponement of Footbr
               Matches  The Chairman expressed th<
               the situation would not arise again whereby a
               Football League match involving several
               International Players would be scheduled for
               televising on the Sunday before an important World
               Cup or European Championship Qualifying match.
               Mr.  Dunnett said that the recent decision to
               postpone League fixtures prior to important
               International matches should prevent a recurrence
               of the problem.


134.   F. A. CUP SEMI-FINAL - LIVERPOOL F. C. v. NOTTINGHAM FOREST
          F. C. AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F. C. - 15TH APRIL, 198 9
          The Chief Executive gave a comprehensive report of the
          events that had taken place since the Special Meeting
          of the Executive Committee Meeting on 18th April, 1989,
          covering many points, including: -

         The work involved in supplying the Inquiry with
         relevant information and statements.  It was noted that
         The Football League had offered administrative
         assistance if required.

        A request from the Department of the Environment that
        The Association provide a Report on the events that had
        taken place at Hillsborough by Friday, 28th April,
        1989.  The Association's Solicitors were drafting a
        reply to the effect that this would not be possible
        because of the requirements of the Inquiry.

        A Board Meeting that was taking place at Liverpool F.C.
        later that day, to which the Chief Executive had been
        invited,  when it was hoped a decision would be reached
        regarding the continued participation of Liverpool F. C.
        in the Competition.

         Liverpool F. C.'s request to delay the F. A.  Cup Final
         until 12th August, 1989, the date of the F. A.   Charity
         Shield match.   Although it was sympathetic to the
         feelings of Liverpool F. C. , the Committee felt that
         having regard to all the circumstances and other clubs
         involved it would not be appropriate for the Cup Final
         to be delayed until the following season.

        The Committee reiterated its decision that The
        Association should not benefit financially from the
        Final and that its share of the profit and the proceeds
        from the Semi-Final tie should be donated to the
        Disaster Fund.
It was agreed that if Liverpool F. C. decided to
withdraw from the Competition, Nottingham Forest F.C.
would be invited to play Everton F. C. in the Final and
it would be left for the two teams to decide
whether they wished their share of the profits to be
donated to the Fund.

It was reported that a Meeting had been held between
Mr. G. Kirton and M. J. Georges, President of UEFA,
following the comments attributed to M. J. Georges in
the week following the Hillsborough Disaster.   At the
meeting M. J. Georges stated that he had corresponded
with the Chairman and wished to make no further public
statements on the subject.

It was noted that: -

(a)   Various claims had been made against The
      Association and these were in the hands of The
      Association's Solicitors.  Counsel had been
      retained;

(b)   Clubs had been instructed to review their safety
      arrangements as a matter of urgency, particularly
      regarding perimeter fencing, and replies were
      being examined;

(c)   Members of staff were being given details of
      various people who could be approached to offer
      counselling following their experiences dealing
      with the aftermath of the disaster;

(d)   UEFA and FIFA would be issuing directives in the
      near future regarding "all seater" requirements at
      grounds staging important matches;

It was agreed that a letter from Wembley Stadium
Limited regarding the installation of seats in the
lower standing areas would be passed to the Match and
Grounds Committee.

Dr. O' Hara's comments regarding the provision of
certain medical facilities at grounds were noted
and would receive consideration following the
outcome of the Inquiry;

It was noted that the suggestion had been made that the
present F. A. Cup should be given to the City of
Liverpool as a tribute to those who had died at
Hillsborough.   It was not felt, however, that any
decision should be reached on this suggestion at the
present time.

It was further noted that the Inquiry, being held by
Lord Justice Taylor in Sheffield, would commence on
Friday, 28th April, 1989 and The Association would be
represented thereat.  It was not felt necessary for a
representative of The Football League to be present.
             Mr.   Annable, at the request of                     pf
             the Leicestershire & Rutland County Football
             Association, reported that the Leicestershire & Rutland
             County F.A.   could see no justification for allowing
             the two competing teams in the F. A.  Cup Final to
             receive an allocation, of approximately 37, 000 tickets
             each.   It was appreciated that several Counties shared
             this view but the Committee felt that in the
             circumstances the correct decision had been reached.

              It was reiterated that the decision to increase the
              allocation of the tickets was not to be taken as a
              precedent and Council members would be able to express
              their views at the Special Council Meeting the
              following day.  Should, however, the two competing
              Clubs decide not to take their full allocation, a
              further allocation would be offered to the various
              Clubs and Associations that usually received an
              allocation of tickets.
(
    135.    UEFA CUP COMPETITIONS 1989-90/LUTON TOWN F. C. A report
              was received that following correspondence with the
              Executive Committee, Luton Town F. C. had been advised
              that they would not be treated differently from any
              other club regarding participation in UEFA Cup
              Competitions.


    13 7.   FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

              (a)   It was noted that following the Hillsborough
                    disaster, the Government had decided to delay
                    the third Reading of the Bill in the House of
                    Lords.

              (b)   A report was received that the Executive

c                   Committee had agreed by a majority to a postal
                    recommendation from the Chief Executive that an
                    advertisement opposing the Football Spectators
                    Bill, Part One, should be placed at a total cost
                    of approximately £60,000, such cost to be shared
                    equally between The Football Association, The
                    Football League and Wembley Stadium Limited.   It
                    was agreed that it would not be appropriate for
                    the advertisement to be placed until such time as
                    the Bill was to proceed.


    138.    EXECUTIVE SUB-COMMITTEE The decisions of the Executive
              Sub-Committee during the period 14th March to 14th
              April, 1989, were noted  (See Appendix 'B' ).


    139.    ARTIFICIAL PITCHES The Committee agreed a recommendation
              of the Challenge Cup Committee that a Survey be
              commissioned to ascertain spectator opinion on the
              subject of artificial pitches, at a cost of
              approximately £4,000.
140.   APPEALS BOARD PROCEDURE The Committee considered a
         proposed "Appeals Board Procedure" suggested by Mr.
           '          It was noted that the Office felt that
         further information should be added to the proposed
         Procedure and it was agreed, to refer the matter to
         the Disciplinary and Rules Revision Committees.


141.   FOOTBALL LEAGUE REGULATIONS 17 AND 18 As requested by
         the Leagues Sanction and Registrations Committee,
         consideration was given to whether F. A. Rule 10 was
         contrary to the proposed new Football League Regulation
         18.  It was noted that the proposed Regulation 18
         authorised The Football League to appoint its own
         Appeals Board and this would not comprise members of
         the F. A. Council.  F. A. Rule 10 indicated that such
         Boards should be appointed by The Association.    Mr.
         Dunnett queried whether The Football League could be
         given a waiver whereby it would not be bound by the
         provisions of F. A. Rule 10 in this respect.

         It was agreed that the office should look into the
         possibility of F. A. Rule 10 remaining as at present
         and The Football League being given authority to
         appoint its own Appeals Boards.  Mr.  Dunnett gave an
         assurance that proposed Football League Regulation 18
         would be put to its Annual General Meeting on the
         understanding that Football Association approval was
         necessary before the amendment could come into effect.


142.   POSTPONEMENT OF FOOTBALL LEAGUE MATCHES/ALBANIA v.
         ENGLAND - 8TH MARCH, 1989 The Committee considered a
         letter from The Football League setting out details of
         claims for compensation from Southampton F. C. and
         Millwall F.C. in connection with financial loss
         incurred as a result of postponement of fixtures on 4th
         March.

         It was agreed, in principle, to accept responsibility
         for the losses incurred by Southampton F. C. upon
         verification of the figures supplied by the Club.
         The Chief Executive was instructed to ascertain further
         details of the Millwall F. C. claim.


143.   ENGLAND TRAVEL CLUB/AGENCY The possible establishment of
         an England Travel Club was deferred for consideration
         at a later date.


144.   PROPOSED FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR THE EDUCATIONAL SPORTS
         MEDICINE PROVISION TO ASSIST THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE The
         Committee noted a Minute of the Finance & General
         Purposes Committee Meeting held on 14th February, 1989,
         asking that consideration be given to extending the
         Scheme whereby beds would be made available for
         non-League players.  It was agreed that the matter be
         deferred for discussion prior to the commencement of
         Season 1989/90.
         145.   FORM 'A' AND MEMORANDUM FOR THE GUIDANCE OF FOOTBALL
                  CLUBS ON THE SAFETY OF SPECTATORS AND CONTROL OF CROWDS
                  AT FOOTBALL MATCHES The Committee approved, subject to
                  confirmation by The Association's Solicitors, proposed
                  amendments to both Form 'A' and the Memorandum for the
                  Guidance of Football Clubs following the issue of The
                  Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
                  1987 and the Safety of Places of Sport Regulations
                  198 8 (See Appendix ' B' ).


         146.   PROPOSED PRE-SEASON TOURNAMENT - CHELSEA F. C. The
                  Committee considered a request from Chelsea F.C. to
                  stage a Pre-Season Tournament at Stamford Bridge over
                  the weekend 12th/13th August, 1989.  It was agreed to
                  defer the matter pending receipt of further
                  information.


     x   147.   ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING The Committee discussed the
                  Agenda for the Annual General Meeting to be held on
                  25th May, 1989.

                  With regard to the proposed amendment to Article 4 3
                  (b), the Committee was of the view that it was not in
                  the best interests of The Association and it was agreed
                  to recommend that it be opposed.

                  With regard to the proposed amendments to Articles 3 6
                  (a), 36 (f) (A) and 42 (b) recommending that the role
                  of Treasurer cease to exist, Mr. Goodchild wished it to
                  be known that the reason he had proposed the
                  appointment of a Treasurer at the last Council Meeting
                  was to enable consideration to be given to
                            filling the role, which would lessen the
                  chance of his being removed from Council and thus
y-                ensure continuity in dealing with The Association's
                  finances.

                  The attention of the Chief Executive was drawn to the
                  wording 11and such reference to arbitration shall be a
                  condition precedent to any legal proceedings concerning
                  the matter" at the end of proposed new Rule 3 9 (a).   It
                  was felt that the wording was contradictory.


         148.   SPONSORSHIP OF REFEREES AND LINESMEN   It was agreed that
                  the matter be deferred pending further consideration by
                  the Referees' Committee.


         149.   COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS OF APPEAL It was noted that
                  consideration was being given by various Committees to
                  proposed amendments to their Powers and Duties to
                  simplify/regularise the appointment of Commissions and
                  Boards of Appeal.  It was agreed that the matter be
                  deferred for consideration at the next meeting.


         The meeting closed at 2.20 p.m.
