                                                                                          Walden House 17-24 Cathedral Place
                                                                                          London EC4M 7JA
                                                                                          Telephone 01-606 6677
Fax Transmittal Form                                                                      Telex 263396


                                                                                                    5 July 89
To:

Company:               Herbert Smith                                                     Time:

Country:               ^                                                                  Fax No:

From:                                                                                    No. of pages (including this page):

Direct fax lines:



i
  you do not receive all the pages, please telephone or telex immediately



   cc                                   Chambers, Fax No 353 3978^/
   cc                                        Herbert Smith, Fax No 329 0426

   For Julian Gibson-Watt
   Hillsborough
  I attach a suggested redraft of the first section to the
  submission. I have put the draft we discussed at our meeting on
  our system so that amendments can be incorporated tomorrow.
   I put my redraft forward as a suggestion for discussion only. I
  have no particular problems with the section on causes in the
  jwtevious draft but as a matter of presentation I would prefer it
  t B be set out in the way I have suggested.
  l^^m happy with "the FA section" in the first draft subject to the
  amendments agreed at our meeting. These will be incorporated in
  the document on our system. Perhaps a recommendation that a
  specific police officer be assigned to monitor the filling up of
  terraces, or particular pens, should be included in the
  recommendations part (we say as much in paragraph 12).
  Regards




      o f p a r t n e r s ’ n a m e s is a v a i l a b l e at t h e a b o v e a d d r e s s
 involvement was not causative of the tragedy we only
 summarise the evidence which in our view resulted in it.
 The Inquiry has received a vast amount of factual evidence
 over the last 7 weeks and a wealth of additional opinion.
 It is likely to receive detailed submissions on liability
 from other parties directly involved in the causes.     The FA
 reserves its position to deal with anything which may be
said against it in this connection by way of oral argument
on 14 July.


The factors we list are in no particular order of importance
but it is sought to present them chronologically.      Taken
individually any one of these factors would not have
resulted in tragedy.     Taken together they proved to be
disastrous.


The FA have not sought to allocate blame during the hearing
of the evidence in this case, but it is felt right that on
major factors, especially where we feel interim
recommendations ought to be made, the FA's views on blame
ought to be submitted.    In our view the South Yorkshire
Police Force must bear a major proportion of the
responsibility for the tragedy having assumed control of the
main operations of the day [refer to matters in paragraph 6
of draft 1 if necessary].




                               -   2-
                                                       DRAFT:   04.07.89
                        Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry


                                   Phase 1


                         Written Submissions of the


                            Football Association



         Tha-fforatball Assgglgfltm   ("FA") will deal in this

I         submission with:-


          (i)    A brief summary of the         ^^usative features of
                 the teragedy .           ' -    - '            / \        |


         (ii)    The FA's proposals to the Inquiry on interim
                 recommendations prior to the new season.


       (iii)     Matters given in evidence which directly involve

                                                            —         1
    The Causes of the Tragedy


    We propose to deal in this section with the main causative
    factors which led to the 95 deaths.      We aim to deal with
    these factors in point form as some are directly linked to
    the suggested interim recommendations we discuss at
    section 2.    As it is our submission that the FA's
In our submission the causes of the tragedy can be
summarised as follows


    i.    The configuration of the Leppings Lane end of the
          ground both inside and outside and the constricted
          area for spectators to approach the turnstiles.


    ii.   The inadequate number of turnstiles at that end.


    iii. The late arrival of fans in great numbers, some of
          whom were drunk, most of whom were desperate to
          get in in time.   Allied to this the lack of
          anticipation and secondary screening by the police
          and subsequent loss of crowd control immediately
          around the turnstiles.      -


    iv.   The police decision that, despite the numbers
          outside the ground at 2.30 pm that they could get
          everyone in by 3.00 pm.     The subsequent refusal to
          delay the kick-off because the fans were simply
          late, not held up for reasons beyond their
          control.


    v.    The opening of gate C which of course let in fans
          with and without tickets with no consequent
          directional indications either by way of sign or




                             -   3-
      marshalling to the fans who came in through that
      gate.


vi.   The failure by the police to block off the central
      tunnel.   The absence of communication between
      police officers inside and outside the ground.


vii. Confusing ticket and turnstile coding.


viii.The failure to properly monitor and control the
      numbers of spectators in the pens either visually,
      mechanically or electronically and in particular
      not to do anything about the congestion in pens 3
      and 4 as compared with the flank terracing.
      Distribution of spectators rather than excessive
      numbers in the west stand caused the deaths.


      In particular it was hazardous to allow the crowd
      to find its own level in the traditionally
      favoured areas behind the goal and dangerous to
      leave such matters to the initiative of the
      officers concerned.


ix.   The division of the terracing by radial fences and
      their design which did not allow for movement from
      one pen to another.




                            -   4-
                                 Job 31989L



           x.    The design of the perimeter fencing and the area
                 immediately leading up to the fencing from the
                 terracing.


           xi.   The structural faults in the crush barriers and
                 gradient of the tunnel.


           xii. The inadequate medical supplies at the ground.


0k         xiii.Police conditioning which led them to fail to
                 appreciate the gravity of the situation straight
                 away.   The subsequent delays in coordinating the
                 emergency services.




     Interim Recommendations




     (31989L)



                                    -   5-
