                                         28 June 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH
Note of meeting at the FA.
Present:       John Dyson QC
                Graham Kelly)
               Glen Kirton )
                             )




1.   John Dyson met with Peter Taylor in his private room
and discussed that written submissions on liability on
Phase 1 were to be submitted next week. Everyone could
disclose their submissions to everyone else and release them
to the Press if people wanted to. It would be useful if we
could swap with the FSA on this. JGW particularly wanted
to.
2.   Counsel would then be invited on 10 or 14 July to make
oral submissions to the judge for not more than 20 minutes
each. Tacti<fly JD thought we ought not to (jin keeping with
our low profile^give an oral address unless someone else
commented on our written submission or made points against
the FA. We had successfully maintained a very low profile
so far.
3.    With regard to Phase 2 those submissions could be
released to the press if the FA so required. At the council
meeting this Saturday it was likely that the press would be
brieftrf* The council members had had Phase 2 material for
quite some time now. The final report was unlikely to be
published before the beginning of 1990. Taylor might want
to see an FA official to give evidence privately to him on
Phase 2 in late Autumn.
4.   With the new season approaching£only 7 weeks away}it
was important to make submissions to the judge in relation
to the temporary recommendations he was likely to make. It
would certainly look odd if the FA said nothing at all. Ron
Noades had not been re-elected so was no longer a member of
the executive committee which sat to produce Phase 2
material. The FA would need to consult with the other wise
men tomorrow or on Saturday.
 5.   The issues we ought to deal with were:-
 (i)       overcrowding and the penning of fans in
 combination with a perimeter fence. Allied to that was the
 inability of grounds to monitor how many people were going
 into which particular part of the terrace*. The Safety
 Certificate and capacity did not relate in many cases to
 what happened in the individual terraces.which was a recipe
 for disaster at Hillsborough.
           JD had mentioned that at the meetings he had
 advocated for separate groups of turnstiles for each
 separate area and for some monitoring for numbers but as
 could be seen from our paragraph 6.7 of the written
 submission it was considerably watered down. Lord Justice
 Taylor was likely to be more robust. We should urge him not
 to recommend that all fences should be pulled down for the
 rehearsed reasons.
          It would not be feasible to call upon clubs to do
major works in the timescale available. It was ftet$er to
tamper with the existing system.
(ii)      We discussed new safety gates. Eastwood had been
asked about these. The judge was quite taken with an idea
of a large overall gate coupled with a smaller gate through
which an officer could go in and remove troublemakers. That
seemed to him to be more attractive and simple than the
flashy French experiment.
          It would be useful to submit to Taylor how many
sell-out matches or near sell-out matches there would be
between now and the publication of his final report. We
need not worry about Wembley as they were taking safety
measures independently. However the league clubs ought to
be looked at together with allied competition.
          Would it be possible for a recommendation to be
made to take out radial barriers from the pens so that
people could be moved along terraces. It was unlikely that
anyone would want that with regard to segregation and it was
unlikely that Taylor would recommend it.
uf )           The most likely recommendation we could put
"forward that would be acceptable to the clubs and Taylor
would be a percentage reduction on all games on any part of
terracing fenced by perimeter fencing. It needed to be a
proper percentage and not a token one. Something in the
region of 20% would be desirable. It should be stressed
that this measure was temporary until the final report* aad-
acL6A>'ttt<*fck)4s a credibility matter it was important for the
FA to put forward sensible proposals. It could be combined
with a recommendation to monitor people coming through the
turnstiles and for some system of visual monitoring ie for
the police and stewards to carry out visual monitoring from
^rantage point over terracing to actually see whether there
was build up in terraces. It was no use saying that the
crowd could find their own level. In this connection it was
mentioned that FIFA had recommended a 5% reduction in world
cup qualifying matches post Hillsborough.
5.   It may be difficult for the Football League to give
their agreement to some of these interim recommendations in
which case the FA may decide to go its own way. The
Football League would always be entitled to put in
submissions for itself. The FA may take the lead and itself
impose reductions on the Englandvltaly game and Charity
Shield match.
6.   The possibility of keeping bays free for overspill was
also mooted. Taylor's temporary recommendations were likely
to go before the minister by the end of July so that it
could be published before the season started on 19 August.
7.   It was fiCti/pe*agreed that medical provision would be
looked at in detail to see whether it could be implemented
temporarily. The whole point was to avoid another
Hillsborough occurring before the final report came out.
JGW wanted to include some explanation of the technical
breach of Rule 24.1(b). After discussion it was agreed that
only if there was misconduct as defined by the Rules would
the FA take action if people did spill through perimeter
fencing. JD did not think the point ought to be mentioned
in the draft.
7.   We would also need to spell out the lack of
communication and breakdown between the stewards and the
police and the other lessons that could be immediately
learnt from what went wrong.
8.   The FA would fax JD and Freshfields the result of the
deliberations in precise terms so that precise instructions
were available from which to draft.
9.   JD and JGW were going to produce the first draft of
Phase 1 submissions ie why the FA were not responsible. All
these submissions would be passed through the FA for
approval.
Miscellaneous points
10. There was a possible issue that the local authority was
completely useless in this case. It worked better when the
licensing authority for the safety certificate was the South
Yorkshire County Council. That looked after 5 grounds.
Sheffield City only looked after two grounds from 1986. We
had discussed central licensing authority in our submission
but had not realised that as far as certification procedures
were concerned that a certificate from an engineer was
required already under the Safety Certificate that Sheffield
Wednesday had. Even with that certification process human
error had caused the disaster. We were looking at the best
possible systems but disasters could always occur with human
error.
11. We would recommend that whatever the temporary measures^
should be made pursuant to the safety certificate so that
they could be 4&w£orcejf, However it was agreed that if
Taylor recommended them the authorities concerned would
treat that as if it had the force of law.
We provisionally pencilled in a meeting for next Tuesday at
2.30 to discuss the matter again once we had instructions on
the interim recommendation points.
Two ancillary points were raised. Firstly      JD thought
were likely to take most of the blame for the disaster? The
police were likely to shoulder most of the blame because of
the special way they took over the running of the day from
the Club. Their Counsel had not been very effective whereas
Sheffield Wednesday's Counsel Edwin Glasgow had been very
effective.
Graham Kelly asked about the general view of the FA by those
at the Inquiry. JD said that unfortunately he picked up
from various people he had spoken to up in Sheffield that
the general consensus was that the FA was     a fairly
ineffective organisation which needed a kick up the
backside. That would come as no surprise to those present.
However the Phase 2 submissions were a start in redressing
the balance. There was a lot of PR work still to be done.
Engaged 3^ hours including dictation
