                                               May 1389




 F A /HILLSBOROUGH

              clark phoned me back and apologised for not
 mentioning it earlier but he .had forgotten to mention
 expenses. I confirmed that ’Mri-DySjOn/®?expenses would be
 paid for the time he is at Sheffield which included hotel
 and travelling and the like.

 Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


 Subsequently attending ‘thief ^Superintendent' 'Bake#- his call.
 We had copied the letters and he could have the two files,
 He would get someone to pick them up.

With regard to the statements he wondered whan he could get
them. I said he ought to gat them on Friday if we had
finished. However it was quite a task. Ha asked me to get
the witnesses to sign each page.   I asked whether that was
necessary and he confirmed it was.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


Subsequentlyf^QKnyDysoffirphoned, We discussed the case
generally.   The following points emerged.

1,   He agreed after I updated him on the West Midland
police interviews yesterday chat it would be disingenuous
for us not to put in Evidence-in-Chief on a warts and all
basis.  Obviously we would not highlight cross-examination
material but as there were no rules about discovery we were
under a general duty to assist the Inquiry,

2,   He had spoken to [                    [who is actxngyfor
Shsffi'e'ld"'-Wednesday *Football Clitiy who told him that there
had been problems with regard to inconsistent witnesses and
the documents were also not very impressive.


would have' a field day in cross-exam

4,    He found our witnesses to be pretty unimpressive
generally,   He did not fully trust Steve; Clark and that
Kelly was not at all impressive,   He ned been rather exposed
        ■al oros3"examination, However we should not overdo
chose aspects as the general prejudice points against the FA
were not always relevant issues in the case.

5,   He thought j       J would be a better witness , However
he was not going to give too much relevant evidence, Ha
thought |         |was absolutely super,

5,    We discussed this afternoon's meeting and I hoped hs
could have the draft statements and also be in a position to
watch some of the videos. It was only down to about 20
minutes of relevant stuff. tTed Crofcer would be joining us a
   pm. I had another meeting to'^goM&o "but would ba coming
;n. Only             Dught to be there from the FA.

Sngaged   \   minutes including dictation
