                                         9 May 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

X attended at the offices of the FA and,      ■    ■ -hi
3upe.rintendent Baker of the \Jest Midlands Police and
 j perinte.nde.nt Fancctt,  They informed me 'tiiat they had
already spoken to various council members and were
interviewing the high profile people in the various parties
to the Inquiry,     150 officers were taking statements from
the “average fan",

It became very clear to me that both officers knew quite a
lot about which people at the FA attended the match and
which people would have been responsible for the
administration of the build-up. They asked questions
relating to ticket allocation and venue. They asked to see
the files relating to those two matters. We said that
ticket allocation and venue would be dealt with in detail in
           longer statement and at present we were quite
happy to show them the letters files from claimants which
would be relevant as those people might have to give
avidence at the Inquiry but were reluctant to give them
access to any other documents as they were so voluminous.
They seemed to accept this and were content to have the
letters.

They were anxious to interview■Ted Croker and got his
address. During the course of the interviews with
          and           we went through a question and
answer session on the questionnaires provided and also went
through amending their written statements.

m   addition they are to interview
                  and stressed that each witness should be
given an opportunity to sign his statement and that every
effort should be made to get those final versions out to
them in Sheffield by Friday.   They explained to each witness
prior to the interview that this was not a criminal
investigation. The statements would be used by .Lord Justice
Taylor' at the Inquiry and it would be for the Treasury
Solicitor to decide whether the witnesses were actually
called.   They had no idea of the sequence of calling
witnesses or who would be called.

They also confirmed that the statements would be sent to all
relevant parties to the Inquiry and their lawyers, They
were keen to interview         and ,-lark, I said we would
be submitting statments to tha Treasury Solicitors and would
send them a copy. They were being co-ordinated by Geoffrey
Dear who was the man in charge.

I attended at all the meetings at which witness statements
were taken and answers given and the result of these
meetings appears in the drafts created.

Engaged l\ hours including dictation and travelling
