                    F. A. CUP FINAL 1989 - 20TH MAY,    1989

     Notes of a meeting held at Wembley Stadium on 9th May,      1989



Present :      Representatives of Wembley Stadium Limited
                                  London Borough of Brent
                                  Wembley Police
                                  The Football Association


The Football Association was represented by



1.   Events/Schedule

     The turnstiles would open at 1. 00 p. m. although they would be
     geared up to an earlier opening time if required.

     The Band of the Royal Marines will play from 1. 00 p. m.

     1. 50 -       Pitch inspection
     2. 05 p. m

     2. 15 p. m.   Community Singing with the Liverpool theme.
                    To include "You'll never walk alone".
                    (Subsequently this has been changed to at
                     2.10 p. m. start).

     2. 45 p. m.   The singing of Abide with Me.

     2. 50 p. m.   Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of
                    Kent will proceed to the playing area for
                    presentation to the Captains, players and
                    Match Officials.

     3. 00 p. m.   Kick-off.

     3. 45 p. m.   Half-time.

     4. 40 p. m.   Final whistle.

     Extra-time will be played if necessary.   If a replay is
     necessary it will take place at Wembley Stadium at 7. 30 p. m.
     on Thursday, 8th June, 1989.

2.   N. C. P

     There will be a full compliment of NCP staff.    The VIP car park
     is Car Park No. 5 with the over-flow in car park No. 7.



                                                   Contd/.
                                 - 2 -



     The North Circular road will be closed from 8. 00 p. m. on
     Saturday, 20th May until 6. 00 a. m. on Monday, 2 2nd May.

     There was a possibility that the roofs of supporters' coaches
     would be marked in order to make it easier to identify progress
     coaches were making and any hold-ups that may be occurring.

     There will be a charity collection outside the Stadium for
     the Sports Aid Foundation.   Radio City have a travelling
     Roadshow, similar to that in 1986 and will be positioned near
     the Exhibition Hall.

     There is a possibility that three London Buses may be running
     some supporters from Euston to Wembley and the fares will be
     donated to the Hillsborough Disaster Fund.

3.   N. L. C.

     Catering arrangements will be similar to those for a normal Cup
     Final.  Low alcohol lager will be available.

     Approximately 450 people will attend the Luncheon in the
     Banqueting Hall which is timed at 12. 15 for 12. 45 p.m.

     The hospitality Restaurant is full and the private areas
     will be fully licensed.

4.   Merchandise

     The programme costs £3.00.     Details concerning the sale of
     tickets for any replay will be made clear to those at the
     match.   The B. B. C. will be asked to assist in this and
     information will also be shown on the electronic scoreboards.

5.   Medical

     There will be 4 or 5 Doctors on duty, the additional Doctor
     being dependent on whether an operational unit will be in
     place in the Restaurant area to cover the Olympic Gallery.

     There will be one senior Nursing Officer and six State
     Registered Nurses.

     If they wish to the two Team Doctors may inspect the medical
     arrangements.

     Space will be available for the two team Doctors to sit on
     the players' benches.


                                         Contd/.
                                 - 3 -



6.   Box Office

     Everton will be at the West end and Liverpool at the East end.

     Tickets for the Cup Final have a much higher security level than
     in previous years and will be far more difficult to forge.

     On Sunday, 14th May, Wembley will be doing a double check
     on the seat numbering to ensure that all seats are correctly
     numbered.

7.   Technical

     The Police indicated that they would be happy if the fence was
     down, assuming that Wembley were able to steward the area
     satis factorily.

                    stated that he was in favour of the fence being
     down whilst                     believed it should remain up.

     __________ asked for clarification with regard to the Policing
     of the perimeter area.     In subsequent discussions with the
     Police she was advised that they would be prepared to assist
     the Stewards in the perimeter area if there was a need.
                [advised that it was unlikely that The Football
     Association would agree to the fences being down unless there
     was a good police presence in the perimeter area with the
     Stewards the whole time not just to react to any problems
     that may occur.               Ihas had subsequent discussions
     with Wembley Stadium and there is to be a meeting between
     senior Wembley Officials and Senior Police Officials on
     Thursday, 11th May in order to clarify this point, before a
     final decision is made.

     Brent advised that they were awaiting a commissioning date
     regarding the Olympic Gallery.

8.   Media

     The B. B. C. will be covering the match with 17 camera positions.

     ___________ preferred to the need for two photographers to be
     by the Royal Box when the presentation of the Cup and Medals
     takes place in order to obtain good photographs.      This was
     noted by Wembley.

9.   Security

     There will be 1200 Personnel on duty in connection with
     security.

                                               Contd/.
                                - 4 -

    All 100 turnstiles will be opened and would be manned
    efficiently.  There will be several people vetting those
    who are allowed to enter and there will be checks for forged
    tickets.

    There will be 100 Stewards on the Olympic Gallery.  There will
    be 80 Stewards on the perimeter pitch area to start with and
    as other Stewards are relieved from other duties they will also
    be placed in the perimeter area.

    Whilst the turnstiles will open at 1. 00 p. m. Wembley hope to
    be ready "to go" at 12. 15 p.m.

    Wembley have requested 300 police to be on duty.

    The Football Association confirmed that they wished to have
    radio communication for four F. A. Personnel. Wembley confirmed
    that this would be on Channel Four and that |      |      would
    be the link.

    Any other business

    There was a general discussion as to who had final
    responsibility for delaying kick-off.    It was agreed that
    whilst it was essential for the views of the Police, Wembley
    Stadium and The Football Association to be taken into account
    and for those Organisations to be kept fully informed at all
    times, the final announcement would have to come through the
    control room, in this instance through |          | |of the
    Wembley Staff.




c. c. Mr. R. H. G. Kelly
      Mr. G. Kirton
      Mr. A. R. Titcombe



     Freshfields.y'''
