                                                   2 May 1989     £




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

Discussing with^_______       subsequently events arisincskut of
the preliminary hearing,      We suggested the following points
ought to be actioned.

 (i)         An informal link ought to be kept with Sheffield
             Wednesday with regard to what their intentions
             were on procedural matters before the hearing on
             15 May.

 (ii)        'The documents had just about dried up but they
             were keeping us informed of the agency on
             video/radio/press coverage. All paper by the end
             of this week should have been through Freshfields,
We would be liaising with the Treasury Solicitors with
regard to a daily transcript and      exchange.

We needed the insurance file from^ .            We had put
Herbert Smith off until the end of next week but we ought to
be getting some papers to them by that date. As far as
papers to the inquiry were concerned &fafea?«,4s no specific
directions on discovery were given«**MB| and I thought that
we should holdback until pressed. Some of the documents
were not terribly attractive    the FA's position.
We need' to sit down with                   and discuss his
comments on issues such as
(a)     crowd behaviour/police control
ib)     stewarding/club organisation
i'c)    ticket allocation
(d)     all seater stadia
(e)     medical supervision
(f)     perimeter fencing
(g)     co-ordination
(h)     the FA role past experience and future.

    -agreed that it might be most efficient if we talked
through all those issues and all the relevant documents that
we had been chrough with'.-^tffi9S|BBnK449it: to leave him-'cold''''
                                          >t a s

on preparing a submission paper for the inquiry would be
difficult. That would be submitted by the latter half of
the inquiry but wa needed to ast it ready by the and of next
week. They had blotted dates out of their diary so that
they could be with us next week.

    suggested that we go up to Old Trafford on Sunday to see
how the arrangements for the semi-final are conducted and
asked me if I would ask JGW. I said I would and she said
she would get three tickets for ^      I and JGW and we
would probably go up in her car. She would make
arrangements with the secretary to be there for 10 oclock so
we could see what went on.

I came away with more papers in various files. I also read
and amended some notes from Glen Kirton>on insertions to the
programme for Sunday's semi-final commenting on
Hillsborough.      mentioned that she could arrange
secretarial support which may be cheaper than sending a
secretary from Freshfields if we needed one. The hotel
would be arranged and sufficient rooms taken with a
documents room as well.

Engaged 1 \ hours including dictation
