                                                                                          London EC4M 7JA
                                                                                          Telephone 01-606 6677
 Fax Transmittal Form                                                                     Telex 263396


                           ■j   ohn DysoM|                                                            30 May 1989
 To:

 Company:                  2 Garden Court, Temple                                         Time:

 Country:

 From:                     J P J Rickard*                                                 No. of pages (including this page):

Direct fax lines:

T^ o u do not receive all the pages, please telephone or telex immediately




       Attn John Dyson


       Please find attached Whalley'ii; letter to Graham Kellyftogether
       with, a suggested draft reply. There is no pride of authorship!
       Regards




A li st o f p a r t n e r s ’ n a m e s is a v a i l a b l e at t he a b o v e a d d r e s s
            U N i v # liiii
    STADIUM DISASTER
                                              50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                              London SW1H 9AT
                                              01-273 2577/ 3602/2370

3 Kelly Esq
Chief Executive
Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
LONDON
W2 31W




    ear Mr Kelly


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

 As you may know, the Home Secretary has asked lord Justice Taylor
 to enquire into the events at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
 1989 in which 95 people lost their lives and many were injured,
 fiord Justice Taylor is being assisted by two Assessors, Mr&Briaa
(Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
^Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
 University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Lord Justice Taylor *s terms of reference are as follows:-

        11To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
        Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
        recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
|       safety at sports grounds.1'
rhe first stages.-of the Inquiry consists of oral hearings in
Sheffieldr which began on 15 May. In the second stage/|pj|pgj|
                proposes to consider any written submissions which
may be put to him. As you may know, &©a?d Justice Taylor has
already issued a general invitation for written submissions, but
I am now writing to you specifically on his behalf to ask if you
would like to submit written material to his Inquiry, Perhaps
you would be kind enough to acknowledge this letter (to the
address above) and indicate whether you intend to respond to'TfQftL
Justice Taylor'-s invitation. He would find it convenient if any
written submissions could reach him by 12 June if possible:
perhaps you could also kindly indicate whether or not you will be
able to meet that timetable. Submissions should likewise be sent
to me at the Inquiry address above.
It -would be helpful   if3ia sets of any written material could be
sent.--^rt would be also be helpful if the material could be
indexed and summarised wherever possible.
'Cord Justice Taylor   maywish to invite some of those who submit
written evidence to    him to discuss it with him at a later stage.

                                          Yours sincerely




                                          R M WHALLEY
                                          Secretary to the Inquiry
DRAFT LETTER FROM FA TO SECRETARY TO THE INQUIRY




Dear Mr Whalley


Thank you for your latter of 23 May,


I confirm that the Football Association wishes to submit
written material in connection with the second stage of
.l»e®4*^»stice“-Taylor' s Inquiry,


I understand that Lord Justice Taylor is hoping to
complete an interim report on the first stage of the
Inquiry in July and that that report will not take
account of any submissions made in connection with the
second stage. As these submissions could have a bearing
on-Lord, Justice Taylor's conclusions in the interim
report, we would suggest that the Judge takes them into
account. However, if he is not proposing to to do this,
it would be helpful if we could be given until say
30 June to submit written material,    You will appreciate
chat until very recently we have had to concentrate on
dealing with the statements required for the first stage
but we are now preparing for the second stage,
    Mr^Whalley                          30 May 1989          2




    I confirm that the FA would be very pleased to discuss
    with the Judge any points arising out of the written
    submissions.


    Yours sincerely




>
