             THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION                                                              Cr
                                       L I MI T E D
                         Patron: HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
                        President: H.R.H. THE DUKE OF KENT
                              Quantum: F A . MlLUCHIP
                                                                                    Telegraphic A M rea :
General Secretary:                                                 F o o tba ll Asso cia tio n , Lo n d o n , W23LW
  E.A.CROKER                                                                ' Phone: 01-262 4542/402 7151
                                                                                     Telex: 2(1110

                     16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

  Our Ref:                                YourRef:                                17th August, 1983



    TO:      SECRETARIES OF FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS



    Dear Sirs
                                  CROWD CONTROL

          A joint Liaison Group consisting of members of The
    Football Association, the Football League and the Ministry
    of Sport, representing H.M. Government, has recently been
    examining the recommendations of the Ministerial Working
    Party of 1974/75 in relation to crowd control matters
    with a view to bringing them up to date in the light of
    present day problems now facing Clubs.
           The Safety of Sports Grounds Act of 1975 requires
     designated Clubs to comply with certain regulations such
     as the installation of segregation barriers and walkway
     systems and these undoubtedly play their part in con­
     tributing towards better crowd behaviour. There are
     other aspects of crowd control however, which it is
     felt, if applied, can make a major contribution towards
     good crowd behaviour and it has therefore been agreed
     by The Football Association and the Football League
     that the enclosed Memorandum be circulated to all
     Football League Clubs.
           Needless to say, in the event of spectator mis­
     behaviour occurring at a match, due consideration would
     be given to the extent to which the Club involved had
     applied the points referred to in the Memorandum.
     We appreciate that in accordance with the Recommendations
     sent out in 1975, a good aany Clubs will have already
     inplemented nany of the ideas set out in the enclosed
     Memorandum but we trust that it will be understood that
     the prime object of issuing this directive is to help
     Clubs in their efforts to ensure good behaviour at their
     matches.


                                                                                        C ont./ . .




                       Rtgbtend Office: I6Lt*auttrG*te, London W23LW
                       Jm corpom ttd M L ondon   R tgixtn t l tm N um ber 77797
                        -   2   -




       Should there be any other points that are not included
in the Memorandum that you feel would be advantageous to
adopt, perhaps you would be kind enough to send them to
ire for consideration by the Association and the Football
League with a view to their being passed on to other Clubs.


                                Yours faithfully,




                                E.A. Croker,
                                General Secretary.




ENC.
