                                               Drafts   11.05.89
         (j*ri\    1

                        HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




                  WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY




I, GRAHAM KELLY of the Football Association, 16 Lancaster
Gate London W2 WILL SAY as follows


Personal Details


1.         I am the Chief Executive of the Football
Association Limited ("FA"). I have held that post for 3
months having succeeded Mr E A Croker on his retirement in
February 1989.     I was previously Secretary of the Football
League from 1979 to 1988, having joined the League in 1968
and progressed through the post of assistant secretary from
1973 to 1979.


2.        I have already made a statement about events at
Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 and have, I hope, made clear
my feelings about what happened.     In this statement I deal
with further matters possibly material to the first phase of
the Inquiry, the functions of the FA and the allocation by
                             JOD 28315L




the FA of the match to Hillsborough.       The FA wish to put in
considerable further evidence to the second phase of the
Inquiry dealing with the wider issues.


The FA


3.         The FA is a company limited by shares, most of
which are held by representatives of associations with
football clubs in England and Wales.       The share capital
consists of £100 divided into 2,000 shares of 5p each.         A
shareholder is not entitled to any dividend, bonus or
profit.   The FA acts through its Council and Committees.
The Inquiry will have been provided with the FA Handbook
which is amended and re-printed every year and contains
amongst other material the Memorandum, Articles of
Association and Rules of the FA, Standing Orders, Powers and
Duties of Committees, Laws of the Game and Rules of the FA
Cup.


The FA's Activities


4.        The FA is the governing body of the game of
Association Football in England and Wales and has been
established as such since 1863.       It sanctions, directly or
through one or more of its affiliated County Football
Associations, in excess of of 2,000 leagues and
competitions.   Best known



                                -2-
League.   The Football Association is governed by a Council,
which is made up of nominees and elected representatives of
various bodies involved in the game including those Clubs in
full membership of the Football Association, County Football
Associations and the Management Committee of the Football
League.   All major decisions including those involving
policy are made by the Council, which meets approximately 6
times a year.


5.        The FA's major object is to promote the sport of
Association Football in the UK in all its various aspects.
It aims to ensure that the game is played to the highest
possible standards, both in terms of skill and behaviour, by
the greatest number of people and tries at all times to
present the game to the public in the best possible light.
It is concerned with raising standards through the
organisation of coaching and other educational activities
and encourages early participation by children in football
through grants and loans.


6.        We organise 6 national competitions, including the
Football Association Challenge Cup (!IFA Cup") FA Cup and an
annual charity match called the Football Association Charity
Shield Match, played at the beginning of the football year
between the FA Cup Winners and the Football League champions
for the previous year.




                             -3-
7.        The FA is responsible for all arrangements
concerning teams representing England at all levels,
(senior, "B", under 21, semi-professional and youth).          It is
responsible through the County Football Associations for the
recruitment and promotion of referees and operates a referee
training programme within its coaching activities,        it
enforces the Laws of the Game.     In conjunction with the
Football League it controls the broadcasting of all football
matches in England.


8.        The main income of the FA derives from revenues
generated from international matches and competitions, from
interests in investments, from royalties received from the
Pool Promoters Association and other organisations and from
fees paid by broadcasting organisations, in particular
television.     This income is put back into football.


9   .     Because of problems of crowd safety and control
both here and abroad, the FA now employs three experienced
ex-policemen;                      \                     an<^ ^      Ken
Evans, as consultants who visit matches thought likely to
cause problems\/ Mr Evans attended the 1988 semi-final at
Hillsborough between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.          His
report is at pages 1 to 3 attached and as can be seen he
reported that the tie went well.       The identical 1989 tie was
not regarded as a ,,problem,, match and the three consultants
were deployed elsewhere.
The FA Cup


10.        Briefly, the FA Cup is a knock-out competition in
which opposing teams are decided by a draw in every round
and (prior to the semi-final) the matches are played on the
grounds of the teams whose names are drawn first.        The FA
can order a tie to be played elsewhere.       The major teams
(the Football Leaguesteams) are brought into the competition
only in the Third Round.  At later stages there may be
                                 fa*#*
smaller "non-League" clubs"'which have survived. There are
therefore on occasion ties in which a large established club
must play a very small one on the small club's ground.          The
contest between the smaller and larger clubs (with the
chance of the smaller winning on the day) is widely held to
be one of the main attractions of the FA Cup.


11.        The final of the FA Cup is played at Wembley
Stadium in London. Semi-finals are played on neutral
           /t»h                                     . . . . .
grounds (ie/on the ground of a.ol-tfcb-nuL uoiiiTrecLed wxfch
either contestant) .


12.        Most Cup ties are keenly followed by the fans of
the clubs involved and semi-finals are big occasions in the
football year often with a great demand for tickets.




                                -5-
The Competitions Department at the FA


13.       This Department consists of the Competitions
Secretary, Mr Steve Clark, with one assistant.    He has held
this position for 6 years.   Prior to this Adrian Titcombe
held the position for 10 years and now supervises Mr Clark's
Department, among others.    They liaise closely, and Mr Clark
draws on Mr Titcombe's considerable experience.    I have
spoken to both Adrian Titcombe and Steve Clark and the
information contained in this section is either derived from
my own knowledge or from matters I have learnt from
documents or in my discussions with them.


14.       Mr Clark deals with the mechanics of organisation
of the various FA competitions including the FA Cup, under
the direction of Mr Titcombf' the Chief Executive or the
appropriate Cup Committee.    In the case of the FA Cup
semi-finals this includes establishing which of the clubs
whose grounds are likely to be suitable are willing to stage
a tie and gathering necessary data about those grounds.     He
then liaises as may be necessary with the clubs involved.
He has little involvement once the grounds have been
selected for the two ties.


15.       The staging of an FA Cup semi-final must obviously
take account of all the problems usually associated with
staging a major football match in modern conditions, but
each semi-final tie will or should have been allocated to
the ground of a staging club familiar with such problems.
The main problem in modern times has been the necessity to
segregate rival supporters both at the match and while
coming to and departing from the ground, and this requires
substantial planning and co-operation with the local' police.


16.       The FA, therefore, having chosen two staging clubs
(and clubs for possible replays) does not seek to control
the direct organisation of a semi-final tie (in the sense of
police provision, crowd control, medical support, etc) which
are dealt with by the staging club.   We are not equipped in
terms of staff and local knowledge to deal with these
matters, and I think it would be unwise, and would only
cause confusion, if the FA became involved in them.   We
appoint the match officials and are involved with
arrangements for press and television.   We also print a
booklet entitled "FA Challenge Cup Semi-Final Arrangements"
sent to the competing and staging clubs which is up-dated
every year.   A copy of the booklet sent out for this year's
semi-finals is attached at pages 4 to 11.


17.       Accordingly the FA is not normally invited to or
involved in planning meetings between the staging club and
the relevant authorities and is not copied with resulting
documents, for instance Police Operations Orders for the
ties.   We did not attend meetings or receive documents for



                              -7-
Hillsborough this year.   However, after the 1988 semi-final
venue had been chosen as Hillsborough, for the Liverpool
Nottingham Forest tie,    Mr Titcomi^did attend a meeting
there between representatives of Sheffield Wednesday,
Liverpool, Nottingham Forest and the police at which
Liverpool sought unsuccessfully to persuade the police to
reverse their decision on allocation of ends of the ground.
Liverpool's position was that they as the club with greater
support were being allocated fewer tickets because of the
allocation of ends and other parts of the ground.    The FA
would have been content if this attempt had succeeded.


18.       I should perhaps add that the organisation of the
Cup Final at Wembley Stadium is different because there is
no "staging Club" and the FA is involved in meetings with
the company which owns the stadium and which organises
events there both for Cup Finals and International Matches
(as well as many non-football events).


Ticket Allocation


19.       The purpose of Rule 26 (b/, which provides that
subject to variation by the FA each competing club should
have 50% of the tickets sold, is that there should not be a
"home ground" atmosphere for one club from obtaining a
markedly greater number of tickets.   In practice the
allocation to competing clubs is now dictated by the need



                              -8-
       for segregation and the capacity of the sections of the
   ground allocated to each club's supporters on police advice
   to the staging club, which will be dictated by the
                                                                                                 .<5
   configuration o f ^ s f e a n d s urnmiB, 11atorilo~-ar<sas
   ejteL.    Both at Hillsborough and at Villa Park this results
       in an imbalance of about 4,000 tickets between the two clubs.


   20.              Accordingly, the staging clubs consult the police
       in the usual way, accept their advice on allocation of ends
   and then liaise direct with the competing clubs.  They also
                                                         S’**
   print the tickets for the tie and distribute themv(after                                                                                       K
   reservation of some tickets for the FA and for themselves).
   The two clubs would then have sold those tickets.                                                                             Unless
   there is a particular problem which cannot be resolved the
   FA is not consulted during this process.


   Procedure for Selecting Venue


   21.              A list of grounds at which semi-finals have been
   staged over the last twenty years has been prepared and is
   at page 12 attached.                                   It will be seen that excluding this
   year, Hillsborough had staged 13 ties and Villa Park (at
   Aston Villa in Birmingham) 12 with 5 replays.                                                                            The F.A.
   Challenge Cup Committee decides venue.                                                                             The Committee        .. .
   members when deciding the venue in 1989 did note-                                                                                  fcttlfl
                      ifirjf t f y   •i i i ' i n ' f   r il l#   J uiIlf"   L*>   ............." n      I**1" " '   " II

   IteteaAAed—in£ogaation feat-would have been we 1                                                                              of the
   fr-g.gn<ar>o y                     <             -       b         " h M g r rn-irn3-s b aA - b a a f l - u s e d ^



V du                                  tU i i>»4*s
        Oj Lm JL    io f     fa jt                                           ■&&- <%
                                                                                   mJ                                          S fe*
                                                                                                       fif) fe/9*. fit*
                                  '&j>A    t             ^   ^ ^ 6lA <^^i
     22.       There was          is^incident at~Hillabuii
     the 1981 semi-final between Spurs and Wolves which appears
     to have involved a crowd surge with some 38
     medical treatment. V 11 refer to the letter from the Chief
                                                               d U /*/ > ^ Bj
     Constable of South Yorkshire to my predecessor Mr Croker ^ ^ 4#-^
                                                               UIA&& /<*<§*? .
     dated 3 June 1981 at pages 13-15 for details. The crowd
     capacity was different then because considerable changes $4n           ^
     have been made to the ground between 1981-9 . This incident
     appeared to have had its origin in fans being able to buy
     tickets allocated to their rivals.        It coincided with a
     campaign by local residents and the local MP to stop
s'

     semi-finals being held at Hillsborough.       No semi-finals were
     played there for some years.     In 1986, Hillsborough was
     selected for a possible semi final replay which was not
     needed.   In 1987, Hillsborough appeared convenient
     for the semi-final between Leeds United and Coventry City
     and was again selected.


     23.       Mr Clark followed normal procedure this year.         A
     letter in standard form was sent to 13 clubs on
     24 February 1989 (page£l6-17) and replies were received from all
     of them of which those from the two selected staging clubs
     Sheffield Wednesday and Aston Villa are included at pages
     18-21 and are fairly typical.     A list was compiled on the
     basis of the replies giving relevant details of the 13
     grounds (page 22).    We do sometimes get representations




                                    -10-
from a club asking to be considered, since it is a matter of
prestige and financial benefit to stage a semi-final tie.


24.       The draw for the semi-final ties was made on BBC
TV and radio at 7.45am on Monday 20 March 1989.   Liverpool
were drawn to play Nottingham Forest.   Everton were'drawn to
play the winners of a replay between Norwich and West Ham.


25.       The decision as to venue was to be taken by the FA
Challenge Cup Committee at a meeting at 11.30am on the same
day, there being a sub-committee meeting concerned with
artificial pitches at 11am.


26.       I consider that as Chief Executive I should have a
recommendation for the Committee on matters such as this.        I
had discussed grounds with Mr Titcom&^and Mr Clark on the
previous Friday and I again discussed the matter with Mr
Clark after the draw but before the Committee meeting.      We
came to a provisional view that the Everton tie should go to
Villa Park and the Liverpool tie should be a repeat of the
previous year at Hillsborough which had gone well.      I was
told by Mr Clark'that morning of a telephone call made to
him by Mr Peter Robinson of Liverpool FC concerning the
possible selection of Hillsborough for their tie asking
for the Penis tone Road End of the ground and not the
Leppings Lane end (ie reversing the allocations for the
previous year, which Liverpool had complained gave them a
lesser allocation of tickets). As I understood it, Mr.
Robinson was pointing out that we could expect complaints
from Liverpool supporters if they got less tickets for
the second year running when Liverpool were known to
have the larger support, and that this would be raised in
the press and we should realise this.     Mr Clark had telephoned
Mr Mackrell at Sheffield Wednesday to see if the police would
allow allocation of the Penistone Road End to Liverpool.        Just
before 11am the return call from Mr Mackrell (who had spoken
to the police) indicated that the police would require the
allocation to remain as last year in order to avoid a clash
of rival supporters approaching or leaving the ground.     On
matters like this the staging club and the FA are really
bound to accept the view of the police.


27.       We did not feel that Liverpool's point outweighed
the reasons for staging the tie at Hillsborough.    The
factors on which I would place weight in deciding venue, and
which I understand from FA staff and committee members are
considered significant, are as follows (not in any order of
importance):


(i)     Geography, not only of the two clubs but of travel
routes (hooliganism en route can be a problem)




                            -12-
that it was the turn of Manchester United of the two
Manchester clubs.    I believe that the main point which
prevailed with members, some of whom I believe had attended
Hillsborough in 1988, was that the identical tie had been
well handled then.   There was no dissent to allocation of.
the tie to Hillsborough and the replay to Old Traffo'rd. I
  /U\r
did—    mention-fthe call from Mr Robinson in the (committee
meeting.


31.        Immediately afterwards Mr Clark was instructed to
contact the clubs involved as soon as possible, which I
understand he did.   He later sent the arrangements booklet
for 1988/9 in the normal way.   As I have said the FA did not
participate in any meetings about the arrangements at
Hillsborough (or Villa Park) and were not copied with
documents concerning arrangements.


32.        Since the tragedy I have heard criticism of the
choice of Hillsborough for the tie.   In view of what has
happened, I do not want to speak of "right" or "wrong"
choices, but I do think that it was natural to allocate the
tie to Hillsborough as a repeat of the previous year.      It is
particularly shocking for me and I believe many people
involved in organising major football matches that this
should have occurred at an all-ticket match on a ground
where so many previous big matches had been played.




  Graham Kelly
