                                         31 July 1989




 FA/HILLSBOROUGH

 I spoke to           1 We were sending 4 boxes of original
 files round this afternoon.  I had not listed them but
 someone would be writing on the boxes what files were
 contained in each.      said that was fine.      |was going
 on holiday tomorrow so she would find a home for them this
 afternoon.

We discussed the final day's hearing at Sheffield and also
an article that appeared in the Times a couple of Saturdays
ago which said that the FA had not responded on the question
of all seater stadia.  That was not strictly true and
was waiting for Glen to come back from holiday to suggest a
correction.

    was very pleased that Lord Justice Taylor seemed to want
to implement the alcohol considerations we recommended in
the Phase 2 report.  She had received a lot of stick for
that both in the press and internally at the FA and was
pleased that Taylor agreed with her views.

She had spoken to Adrian Titcombe about our meeting on
Monday week and she would be attending with Glen. We would
be getting into policy matters such as the role of the FA in
semi final arrangements.

I said we would be considering redrafting the memorandum on
crowd control, Rule 24, and the other    sections of the
handbook under cover of a letter sent    to us in April which
we were holding back on until the outcome of the report. I
said I would be writing to Whalley to    get the written
submissions of all other parties to Phase 2 and I knew that
John Dyson wanted to consider the draft wordings produced
from our meetings prior to the FA signing off on them.

    was very pleased at the outcome of the inquiry at least
from the leaked report and agreed with me that it would be
entirely speculative to commence legal action against the FA
given the likely findings and evidence.  She was concerned
that the Wembley internationals practice was different from
allowing the police and the staging club to sort out semi
finals.  She wanted the FA to become much more involved in
safety matters in relation to staging matches at Wembley.
It was agreed that the FA had to get their policy right and
clear for the future.

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation
