                          6-v-u£3       U       W   '^L-ld    o io...(5?-


                            rm


             FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND FOOTBALL LEAGUE SUBMISSION
                    TO THB HILLSBOROUGH DX8A1TBR INQUIRY
                           PHASE 2 -"W P B R ISSUfS




      DRAFT/13 16 June 1989




      t.   INTRODUCTION


      1, 1. Football is the world's moat popular team sport, being
      played in practically every country.   There are 136 national . '
      football associations in membership of the Federation
      Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the game's world
      governing body. Thera are four separata national football
      associations' in Great Britain - in England, Wales, Scotland and
      Northern Ireland.   In Bngland, the association is named "The
      Football Association." (The FA). ,     •*                   ’ .•=

      1,2. The professional game in England attraots. .millions of
      supporters from all walks of life, /’transcending barriers of
      class, race, religion, politics and sex7 The total attendance
      at matches involving Football League clubs in »*$»©§ 1987-86
      was in excess of 20,000/000.   Attendances in 1981-93 show an
      increase of some 2. 5%, or an additional half-million
      attendances, whioh represents the third consecutive seasonal
      increase in attendances.   Attendance figures are appended.
      (Annex A - Sources Digest of Football Statistics, 1988)



# :        THE FOOTBALL ASS0C1MIQK AND THE Z O            ™


  2.1.   The FA is the governing body of the game of Association.
  Football in Bngland.   It is responsible for the promotion,
  development, regulation and control of the game within its
  territory.   Among its activities are the running of the England
  international teams and the organisation of a national
  knock-out competition for senior clubs, ■oalled The FA Challenge
  Cup Competition (The FA Cup).




                                            1




                                    T0EE8W.T0 SCrOIJHSBHJ Cfefc&Oiyf 6S :02 6 8/ 8T Mflf
    2. 2. The FA is also responsible for the sanctioning, either
    directly or indirectly through its constituent County Football
    Associations, of more than 2,000 league* and competitions.           The
    best known of these leagues is The Football League.              The
    Football League             without nrtieaa»”titl-(j-because it W H -tke
 --■f-irgefe-ef -ito kind i n 'the-world?-'fewftded in ■L-&3-3-), is an
    organisation consisting of 92 professional football clubs, who
    compete in four separate divisions, with promotion and
    relegation between th*_.d±vis ions.       Three of the clubs competing
    in The Football Leaguefwre affiliated to The Football
   Association of Wales and not to the FA. These three Welsh
    clubs, together with eleven others from the Principality, also
    compete in the FA Cup.

     2. 3. The FA is governed by a Counoil, made up of nominees and
     elected representatives of various bodies involved in the game,
     including those clubs in full membership of The FA and County
     Football Associations.  The Football        is managed by a
     Committee, consisting of four representatives elected by the
     clubs in the First Division, three elected by the Second
     Division and one elected by the olubs of the Third and Fourth
     Divisions (The Management Committee).  The Management Committee
     in its entirety also sits on The FA Counoil and its members sit
     on the various FA Committees.

     2. 4.   The only specific powers that The FA oan exercise in
     relation to crowd control are contained in Rules 24 and 26 of
     The Association.   Rule 24(i) of the Rules of The Association
     provides that every Association and Club shall be responsible
     for ensuring:

           "(a) that its directors, players, officials, employees,
  spectators and all persons purporting to be its supporters or
  followers conduct themselves in an orderly fashion and refrain
  from violent, threatening, abusive, obscene or provooative
  behaviour, conduct or language whilst attending at a match in
 )which it is involved, whether on its own ground or elsewhere;

           (b) that no spectator or unauthorised persona are
 permitted to encroach on to the pitch area or to throw
 missiles, bottles or other potentially harmful or dangerous
 objects at or onto the pitch.,.”

 Rule 24(ii) provides that any Association or Club which fails
 effectively to discharge its said responsibility in any respect
 whatsoever shall be guilty of "misconduct and liable to be




*d                             T0GE8W.T0 s c r a u H s a a j a y y x n d T 0 0 :1 2 e a , a t wnr
           dealt with therefore/ save that It shall be a defence if it can
           show that all events/ incidenta or occurrences complained of
           were the result of circumstances over which it had no control
           and that its responsible officers or agents had used all due
           diligence to ensure that its said responsibility was
           discharged.

           Rule 26(a) contains a definition of misoonduct.
                                                              fL_
       2,     5. Prom time to time. The PA issues to Football— League-Clubs
       a Memorandum of Crowd Management.   The current Memorandum was
       issued on 18th November/ 1985.   (Annex B) The emphasis in
       this document is on measures designed to control the supporters
       and prevent disorder.  This is consistent with the powers
,      contained in Rules 24 and*\6. Of course/ both The FA and The
^      Football"League are concerned to ensure that crowd safety
       standards are the highest reasonably practicable.   It is felt/
       however^ that neither of these authorities should be charged
       with the responsibility of setting detailed safety standards or
       enforcing them. (See further paragraph 3/ below. )

       2. 6. On the 26th March, 1988/ York City played Sunderland in
       the Barclays League.  Supporters climbed over the perimeter
       fencing and play was held un.. The matter was reported to The
       FA Disciplinary Committee. W o t was decided as follows:

        "As far as the ... incident is concerned, it would appear
    that this was caused by serious congestion in one of the areas
    allooated to the Sunderland supporters but that the spectators
A'kXwho climbed over the fencing onto the perimeter of the pitch
    did so only to escape the crush and were not intent on
    interfering with play.

          "No disciplinary action will be taken against either of the
      Clubs as far as Football Association Rule 24 is concerned/ but
      the Members are concerned at the breakdown of control end the
      resultant inadequacy of the monitoring of visiting supporters
•     into the Ground.  The Members recommend that more attention be
      given to pre-match planning and to the smooth entry of
      spectators into the Ground Qn the occasion of future matches
      played at Bootham Crescent. * 7

      This incident well illustrates the role assumed by The FA in
      relation'to crowd control problems.        Xf the incident had been
      caused by disorder then (subject to the defence contained in
      Rule 24 (ii)) t h s jc h ib would have been liable to be punished




                                        - 3 -




    9 ’d                             i0e£8Pim seraiJHSBaj aybxaiy-f 00:12 68, qt m r
     for miaconduct.   If la $ was th« case) the incident was caused
     b y a failure of crowd control not resulting from disorder, than
     it was not a case of Club misconduct.    The PA would, however,
     express its concern and make such recommendations to the Club
     as it felt able to make.

     2. 7. The                 Regulations stipulate that all clubs
     shall implement certain crowd control measures as laid down in
     the Regulations.  Failure to carry out the measures renders the
     club liable to a fine or other penalty as the Management
     Committee shall think fit. The measures currently included in
     the Regulations are as follows:

         1. All clubs shall submit a copy of their Safety
 Certificate together with their plans for. crowd control (local
 plans) to the League office before the start of each season.

         2.  All clubs shall have a closed circuit television
 surveillance system approved by the Management Committee.

         3. No club shall charge higher admission prices for
 visiting supporters for comparable accommodation to that used
 by the home club.  This requirement does not appertain to
 special local arrangements for members, family enclosures,
 senior citizens and children.




 3.     CROWD CONTROL:   DISORDER AND CROWD SAFETY


 3. 1 For a valuable summary of the respective responsibilities
 of police and club, see The             Reports, especially
 paragraphs 3.4 to 3.8 (Interim) and 4. 13 to 4. 19 (Final). To
 soma extent, the classification of crowd control functions into
|(i) public order (police) and (ii) safety (club and local
 authority) is artificial! if there is disorder, the safety of
the crowd may be threatened.    Hence the need for co-operation
between club, police and local authority.    In this Submission,
recommendations are made for a number of specific changes
which it is believed will reduce the dangers of disorder and
improve crowd safety.    Before these are discussed, however, it
is necessary to provide some data as to the extent and trend of
the problem of hooliganism.




                                      4“




'd                             I 0SE8W.T0 sc ra u H S B y j c m > o iy r 10:12 68, a i m r
       4-   TREND AND EXTENT OP THE PROBLEM QF HOOLIGANISM IN FOOTBALL


     4. 1. It haa become fashionable to point the finder at football
    and to blame the game, or those who are responsible for its
    administration/ for the behaviour o£ the tiny minority of those
    attending matches who create trouble out of all proportion to
    their numbers.   Government figures show that/ in season
    1987-88, 6147 peoajLe were arrested in connection with matches
c   involving-geetbalj TTsagua dubs.   According to the information
    the football authorities have to hand/ only about a third of
    these were arrested inside grounds.   The courts are entitled to
    make exclusion orders under section 30 of the Public Order Act,
    1986, against persons guilty of offenoes connected with
    football within the meaning of section 31. In the period
    August 1987 to May 1989/ only 1/ 760 such orders were issued.
    The arrest figures mean that only three arrests were made in
    season 1987-88 for every 10/000 people attending a football
    game.

    4x2. The PA and The Football League accept that one arrest is
    oneNfcpo many and unequivocally condemn the conduct of this
    seotiohvgf so-called football supporters.    Football is,
    however, tm<Ldled with a problem not of its making. Cjlaming
    football for^hpoliganism is akin to criticising the householder
    for the crimes "‘‘
                     of the burglar, to apportioning guilt to the
    victim instead ofN^ie mugger?/ Nevertheless, the football
    authorities recognise^tha£*^ney must continue to take the lead
    in tackling the problem Although it is not of their making/
    They have accepted this bi^sponsibility. They have already^
    achieved considerable success.
                     Of-
    4. 3. The problem , 1 s; howe-vear, complex. There are no easy
    answers.   There are considerations of safety as well as of
    behaviour.   We need to find long-term educational solutions as
    well as adopting immediate, effective crowd control measures.

    4, 4. Every ■jfoe^riaal-l■■-Le-agtte club is required to lodge with The
    League a "local plan”, detailing the measures it takes in
    ensuring the orderly conduct of matches at its ground.
    Appended, (Annex C), as an example, is the local plan for
    Sheffield Wednesday.         Before every game in the Barclays League/
    FA Cup or one of the other senior competitions, the police from
    the areas of both competing clubs (and from the area of the
    staging club if the game is to be played on a neutral ground),
    the clubs themselves and the transport authorities decide the
    arrangements that will apply. The police decide the number of
    officers that will be deployed both inside and outside the




                                      -5-




8 'd                              laeeaw jB scrauH saaj aaaxDiaT 10■.i z 6 8 , 31 Nnr
                                                                         ') C..Q S'
      ground.     Tha olubi pay an agreed fee for*e&«li polioentst,
      ■ope^etekft# within the atadium.  The olub«Sr« obliged tojaooept
      the decision of tha police on the number of officers Wm should
      be deployed for eaobrgame,     In 1987-88, the total police
      charges paid by            ■League clubs for the policing of
      League games was B3# 335, 000 - an average charge per match of
      £1,650.     A club such as Liverpool could expect to pay anything
      between £8,000 and E10,000 per match. This burden is lightened
      somewhat by the payment by The Football Trust of 35% of the
      charges, excluding VAT.     The balance borne by clubs represented
      4. 2% of gate and season-ticket receipts. An explanation of the
      role of The Football Trust appears below.      (Paragraph 3. 24)

      4. 3. Tha single most effective contribution to the fight
      against hooliganism in the last decade has been close-circuit
      television.   It was a recommendation of the Pop'gRtmw&k Report
      (Pinal) that followed the fire at Bradford City football club,
i     that such systems be introduced at Feetoictl--League grounds In
      England and Wales (paragraphs 4. 92 to 4.101).   The process had
      already begun prior to               It has now been completed.
      The large majority of-^sWfrbelf^Seagwt clubs have permanent
      systems.   Those that do not have access to a mobile one.

     4. 6. All Football League grounds and Wembley Stadium are
     "designated" under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.
     This legislation was introduced following the Ibrox disaster in
     1971.  The FA and The Football League co-operated to the full
     with the Inquiry                   following that disaster.
     They concurred with the introduction of standard safety
     procedures.   They welcomed the extension of the designation of
     clubs to those in the Third and Fourth Divisions after the
     Bradford fire.

       4. 7. The installation of close-circuit television and the
       ground alterations made necessary by the Safety of Sports
      Grounds Act have, of course, absorbed significant amounts of
      money.    From 1978, much of this expenditure has been met by The
      Football Trust and by Tha Football Grounds improvement Trust.
    Cfi2, 775,000 has been spent on the installation of olose-oircuit
    ^television orowd surveillance systems in England and Scotland.
    ^£43,500, 000 has been allocated for safety and improvement work,
      also in England and Scotland.    The total amount spent on safety
      at English Football League grounds, including the clubs' own
      contributions, is estimated at almost £50,000,000 in the last
     '(ten years.   A substantial addititm^l“*sum, running to millions
      of pounds, has also been spent on ensuring proper segregation
      of supporters within grounds ang^jafl^thar security measures.




                                    -   6-




                                T0££8frzi0 scmuHsayj aauxoirr 20:12 e a , si wnr
         4. 8. Tha net result has been a dramatic decrease in the
         number of inoidents within grounds reported to The Football
         Association by referees, by its own officials or by the police
         as the table below shows.   Referees are obliged by FA Rule^S-
         to report any misconduct that comes to their attention.   The
         figures cited will, therefore, contain some cases that might be
         considered relatively innoouous


                table 1   Cases of misconduct involving Football
                          League clubs reported to The FA


                          1981-82               42
                          1982-83               42
                          1983-84               41
                          1984-85               41
                          1965-86               20
                          1986-87               19 ^
                          1987-88               19
                          1988-89                9


                          (Total matches approx 2,300 per season)


         4. 9. These figures are entirely consistent with the almost
         universal view of the clubs that there has been a marked
         decline in football hooliganism over the last four seasons.
         The view of most club secretaries is that this encouraging
         trend is the result of tha growing sophistication of clubs and
         police in coping with the problems of crowd control within

         u s 1? .                                              s s : g a s s v lta l
         authorities will substantiate our view as to the trend and the
         reasons for it. It is true that there has been a slight upward
         move in arrest figures.  (See Annex D - Source*  Digest of
         Football Statistics) In our view, this can be ascribed to/the
         effectiveness of cloae-circuit television systems within and in
         tha area of grounds^n identifying and bringing to court those
                                                                                            r

     the twin' problems of hooliganism and outdated facilities.   As
     the attendance figures cited in Annex A indicate, the game
     enjoys a vast and growing support. Increasing numbers are also
     playing the game.   The figures overleaf indicate the steady
     rise in participation since the Second World War.




                                          -7-




0 i -d                              T0EE8WT0 SCTQIJHSaaj ddUXOiy'f £ 0 :1 2 6 8 , 81 Nflf
/r




                         table 2   Number of clubs in England, registered
                                   with The Football Association


                                   1948                17,890
                                   1961                22,680
                                   1972                36,904
                                   1975                37,641
                                   1980                39,730
                                   1985                41,173


                NB The dramatic rise between 1961 and 1972 ia partly accounted
                for by tha legitimisation of Sunday Football in 1960 and by the
                upsurge of interest following England' a World Cup victory in
^               1966.

                4. 11. Following Hillsborough, The FA and The Football League
                perceive their task as being to reconstruct general public
                confidence in the game on the foundations already provided.  In
                the following pages, we discuss the lead that we shall be
                taking and the recommendations that we have to make in order to
                redupe yet further football hooliganism and to improve crowd
                safety.



                5.   SEATING


                5, l. It has been suggested in some quarters that the
                conversion of stadia capacity to all-seating will automatically
                solve all problems of crowd safety and hooliganism.   Below, we
                examine the experiences of several clubs that have gone either
                to all-seater, or who have more seating than standing.

            5. 2. There are three clubs in Scotland, with all-seater
            stadia.   The first is Aberdeen. Aberdeen FC converted their
            Pittodrie Stadium to all-seater as long ago as 1976.   The
            capacity ia a respectable 23, 000 and, while the club does not
            enjoy the massive support of its Glasgow rivals, it still
            achieves a healthy average of around the 14,000 mark.   More
            significantly, perhaps, the statistics for arrests in
            connection with Aberdeen's home matches are remarkably low, as
            the table overleaf illustrates.




                                                   8




     I T ' <4                              T0££8t?ZI0 S a i3 U H S 3 y j OyWHOiaT £ 0 :1 2 6 8 , 8T Kim
              table 3     Comparative arrest statistics
                          at Aberdeen matches (per season)


                          1983-84                36
                          1984-83                25
                          1985-86                36
                          1986-87                30
                          1987-88                34
                          1988-89                16



    S. 3. The second is St Johnstone, a club situated in the town
    of Perth,  They have the first purpose built stadium in
    Scotland . The new ground is all-seater, with a capacity of
    10,000, adjacent to a Motorway.  The Scottish police believe
    there is a significant Improvement in behaviour since the club
    moved to the new stadium,

    5, 4. This is to be contrasted with the third all-seater ground
    in Scotland at Clydebank PC.   This is unofficially described by
    one Scottish police officer as "an old stadium, revamped by the
    addition of bench-type seating. '* He goes on to say that the
    fans simply stand on the benches anyway.

 5, 5, One of the biggest clubs in Scotland, Glasgow Rangers,
 converted its Ibrox Park Stadium, between 1978 and 1981, from a
 65, 000 capacity, of which 20,000 were seats, to 44, 000, of
 which 33, 000 were seated.  At more or less the same time, the
 Criminal Justice Act was introduced in Scotland.   These
 factors, together with the suooess that coincided with the
}arrival of new manager*8©              in 1985, have led to a
dramatic increase in average attendances, as the table overleaf
indicates.    The olub has some 20,000 season-ticket holders, all
of them seated.    The standing accommodation consists of two
paddocks, in front of the Main Stand seating and separated by
the players' tunnel.    No standing accommodation is provided for
visiting supporters, except in the case of Rangers v Celtic
matches. 1

     V. s c




                                      9




d                            w £ £ 8 P iw   scrauHsayj aat&oia’r   m - . x z ea<   ei wnr
                   table 4 Comparative average attendances
                           at Glasgow Rangers matches


                           1980-81          19,000
                           1981-82          17,000
                           1982-83          18, 000
                           1983-84          22, 000
                           1984-85          21,000
                           1983-86          25,000
                           1986-87          37, 000
                           1987-88          38,000
                           1988-89          39, 000


       The Strathclyde police report that most of the arrests made at
       the ground nowadays are in the standing sections.  It is
       difficult to assess whether the trend in total arrests is up or
       down, as the police and the relevant Government bodies seem
       reluctant to divulge comparative statistics.  In 1987-88
       season, 407 people were arrested in connection with matches at
       Rangers.  There is no doubt in the mind of the police, however,
       that Rangers has become a much easier stadium to polioe since
       the advent of the new seating arrangements.

      5. 6. The only club in Bngland to have gone all-seater is
      Coventry City.   This work was carried out during the summer of
      1981.   The capacity was set at 20,500,  The club received
      enormous criticism from its supporters and has felt obliged,
      over a number of seasons to revert to a stadium offering mixed
     accommodation.    The present balance is 18, 496 seats and 11,304
     standing places.    A letter from Coventry City ie appended.
      (Annex E) It will be noted that one of the major problems
     encountered by the club was the unwillingness of spectators to
     sit in uncovered seating. Another faotor in the decision to
     revert to a certain amount of standing has been the action of
^ ^ s o m e visiting supporters in ripping out seats to use as
t^pweapons   .
   5. 7. The experience of two clubs in Holland, a country that
   has suffered as much as England in recent years from
   hooliganism, is worthy of note.    Utrecht football club has
   recently moved into a new purpose-built stadium on the
   outskirts of the city.    Interestingly, it has chosen not to
   make the stadium all-seater.    The old ground had 13,000
   standing places and 7, 000 seats.   The new has a ratio of 14,000
   seats to 6, 000 standing.   The standing accommodation is in the
   corners of the ground.




                                     -la­




st'd                            T0££8t7ZI0 Sa~DIJHS3aJ OatWDIdT (70: T2 6 8 , 8T Ktni
     5 , 8. Peyenoord, a big club in Rotterdam/ continues to use an
     established ground that has 51,000 seats.   It has ahosen to
     keep, however, two small standing sections of 1,500 places
     each.   Here, the standing terraces arc immediately behind tha
     goals.

     5, 9. It is the view of                  . the Security
     Officer of the Dutch PA, that all-seater stadia do not
     necessarily bring better behaviour,  He sees the provision of a
     preponderance of seats as desirable, but he points out that
     those who are likely to cause trouble are not reformed
     overnight simply through their being put into a seat.   He
     believes that a small section of standing is desirable and will
     remain so for the time being,

    3. 10. West Germany is a countrythat hasenjoyed much football
    success, both at club and representative level.   It is also a
    nation that hasjbeen forced to rebuild many of its stadia since
    thesestruction         Second World War.   There is no First
    Division soccer ground in West Germany that has all seats.
    Many, but by no means all, grounds have a preponderance of
    seating.   According^
                                      'we are encouraging our clubs
    to inorease the proportion of seating on their grounds.
    Eventually, we would like our stadia to be all-seater, but that
    is a long way into the future."

     5. 11. It may be worth noting what Mr Justice              said
     at paragraph 6. 16 of his Interim Report. He said: "One of the
     ideas for controlling violence was to introduce "all seating. 11
     That appeared on the face of it to be a sensible idea.   It
     failed however to take account of the idiosyncrasies of
     football fans,   a lot of them it seems do not wish to sit down;
    kthey wish to stand.   They wish to stand, apparently, because
m     here is for them a special atmosphere in being on the'
    terraces.   If seating is provided for them, they may well tip
    back the seats and stand in front of them; then stand on the
    seatsi and finally rip up the seats and use them as weapons.
    Coventry City, between 1981 and 1984, tried an all-seater
    football ground.    It was not a success for a variety of reasons
    and it may be that the experiment should be pursued.    Certainly
    at Aberdeen and Ibrox Park it has proved a success.    But all
    the evidence from the football authorities is that it is by no
    means a complete answer to the problem."




                                 -   11




t?T"d                          T0££8PIT0 SCTQIJHS3MJ dytDOIH'f S0:T2 68, 8T Nttf
 5. 12. The point about people in seats not necessarily wanting
 to sit in them haa been illustrated once more in season
 1988-89, when Millwall supporters travelling away to watch
 their team, which was playing in the First Division for the
 first time in the club's history, regularly stood on seats
 throughout games.

5. 13, These varied experiences together with the remarks of Mr
Justice m          indicate to us that, while there is certainly
benefit to be gained by a move to more seating, all-seater
stadia are not the panacea many believe them to be. Neither
would they be acceptable to a large proportion of the present
football public.  As             stated, many people believe
that stadia without significant standing sections are bereft of
atmosphere.  We believe that it is possible for spectators to
stand and watch football safely.   It is the general view of the
police, however, that seated spectators are more easily
controlled.  The tendency to taunt and gesture is less
prevalent amongst seated spectators.   m a t wa have to do is
find an acceptable balance between Basting and        standing
ac co mmo dat ion that delivers the requirement ot    aafs stadia
wblla sat isfying tha wishes ot the public. []/a      are
prepared to commit football to tha achievement        ot this balance
over a period of timej

5, 14.  The present ratio of seating to standing within The
Football League is appended.   (Annex F) We recommend that it
be made a condition of the isaue ot a Safety Certificate under
ch* Sa fet y o£ Sports Grounds A c t , or any legislation replacing
it or amendi ng it, that the proportion of seating to ground
capaci ty listed overl etaf be achiaved wi thin the sta ted
time-sea 1 a.

The reasons for our suggesting this legislative approach are

^       i ) that it is as convenient a way as any of making the
proposals mandatory and

       ii) there are beneficial financial implications.           (See
paragraph 5. 23. , below).




*d                          T0E68W I0 Sai3IJHS3yJ CWUMDia'f S0:I2 68, 81 Nflf
                                                lf\>n>nnu/'rs            Jlj      o ^ o o ^ C a p o <T
                                Pere 4ttfr*£a 0 / tfejcing jper ffrouiia                        |                 j
                                                    ^i>
                                                                                                                  i

                     Season                          92-3             95/6              98/9

                     Division 1                       30              66. 6               75

                     Division 2                       23              37. 5               50

                     Divisions 3 & 4                12. 3              25               33.3



           >75  Theme percentages ate ot C/>« total resultant ground
           capacity.  An y promoted elub would be given three years from
           the season ot promotion to meet the requirements ot
           the division concerned at the time ot promotion.   It is not
              considered necessary to apply the same oritsria throughout the
              four divisions in view of tha smaller attendances in the lower
             divisions and also the relative inability of the clubs in the
             Third and Fourth divisions to flnaryse large-scal9/cha.ngaar/to
                      grounds.           £& "~L ■frJt'r.SX: , SC.cd&Ji ;/o.VAi,    Qj                 *pv,s
                          ipir/ij,.xr.' O ei..^ ygC.I>ja/ Ot
                          ,                                                                              '‘
J L•KSff"                    mn'rim
                        Jhe'bjperatTo'n wL t i n e ooatl yp^ It *te. ea ti raated^at'sT
             cost of approximately £35 per seat, that it would j&e^uire
             £30,000,000 to seat the entire Football League. |j£jrhia is--apt
             t-he-ead       -fehe— s-toxy, 'IkwiVtft. ^Phe Coventry experience                        k
             indicates         that people will not sit in uncovered areas. ^fTo-
             oover the new seating would take an estimated further
             £100, 000, 000. A letter on this subjeot from the Chartered
             Quantity Surveyors, Oeorge Corderoy & Co. is appended.
             (Annex 0)
                       Sn£i~Hj>ww1 *-                                                 ■■--■.              ^
             5*4-6,— J in      view of the abuses of some new seated areas, when X \
    jj^seats haVe been stood upon/ or deliberately broken, it will ) j
     '^^almoat certainly be necessary to agree onjjf_msa£a_xabufl.t--- ..^ y J
           V^peci fi oati on.                                  v 1byiTOMrtfig" ggtlTnatre- of'~£3S' per >
            ffS v m S ^ S ' 'quia^ijQn. Mll^rS h a u i a s s U m s ' d that"tTTf^Sices
          ’''that "can be charged for the "new seated accommodation will
            automatically compensate for the reduction in total oapacity.
            Liverpool PC, for example/ the most successful English club in
            the last125 years, does not believe that it would be able to
            charge for the new seating it is contemplating installing
            substantially more then the present standing admission price.
            We discuss below, (paragraphs 5. 21. to 5. 26. ), the financial
            implications.




                                                   - 13 -




   9T 'd                                        t0££8t?zT0 scr auH s a y j a a y x o i y r ge.-TS 68,   qt   mr
     5. 17. As we are proposing that standing accommodation should
     be allowed to remain/ although at reducing levels,
     wa consider it a s s e n t i a 1 for tha criteria applied to tha safety
     of standing spactators to be re-assestted.         Tha FA sad Tha
     Football League will be p r oposing, (Station 6., below), tha c
     crucial araaa of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds bs made
     mandatory.

     Nucleus of all~seater stadia,

 5. 18. It is now 23 years since Bngland staged a major
 international football tournament.      (The 1966 World Cup). It
 is 11 years since we were asked to find a venue for the final
 of a European club competition.     (The European Cup Pinal of
 1978 played at Wembley between Liverpool and Bruges).                FIFA/
 the world governing body of Association Football/ has made it
 clear that they will, in future, only award Wo^L^Cwji# to
 countries that can provide flrJfJr-seats* 9 tadia. ’ ~ -T ^£ W -'£ x$ !4 £ t
 criteria aret -


                 "A maximum of 12 stadia with the following
                  capacities (all seats}]

                  First Round matches        30,000 - 40, 000

                  Opening match/
                  Semi-Finals and
                  Final                      minimum SO, 000. "


 5. 19. At present/ only Wembley Stadium is capable of meeting
 the criteria for the second category of matches, it is
 expected that the ground will be all-seat, with a capacity of
Ip0, 000 within the next year or so. No other ground can meet
 /IFA requirements, even for the First Round matohes.   There
 are, however, at least 9 grounds capable of conversion that
 could provide the required capacities.   The table overleaf
 shows these grounds, converted on the basis of one seat being
 gained for every two standing places lost*




                                    - 14 -




'd                               T0EE8W.T0 SaT3IJHS3h J aattO IM T 90:T 2 W . ^   unp
           table 5    Potential capacity of stadia
                      converted to 100% seating


                      Manchester United           42,S70
                      Sheffield Wednesday         40, 374
                      Manchester City             40,223
                      Bverton                     39, 361
                      Arsenal                     38,925
                      Liverpool                   33,233
                      Aston Villa                 33, 657
                      Chelsea                     33,415
                      Sheffield United            30,324


 5. 20. This nucleus of all-seater stadia would also provide a
 pool from which Tha FA could draw the venues for FA Cup
 Semi-Finals.

 Finance

 3. 21. The Football Association has already made a direct
 investment in the installation of seating and the general
 improvement of facilities at Wembley Stadium.   It has made a
 direct payment of £1,100,000.  The Football Association and The
 Football League have made further contributions to the increase
 in the proportion of seating at the stadium by foregoing
 revenue from the new seating in respect of matohes under the
 control of both bodies played at the stadium.   The provision of
 a nucleus of all-seater stadia; the requirement by law for all
 grounds to have a minimum percentage of seats; the need to
 encourage clubs to build new grounds (see paragraph 9. 6.,
 below), all will require a massive further injection of cash.
 We understand that it will be expected of us that we make every
 attempt to find this revenue from our own resources.

^Sponsorship

5. 22.  Sponsorship is one obvious area in which we can seek
extra revenue.    The game as a whole depends for its survival on
the £17, 500, 000 per year it ourrently receives from sponsors.
The F A ’a aim will be to supplement this with an acceptable
sp o n s o r s h i p of its moat valuable commodity, the FA Cup
competition.           The Football Association has already set in
motion a search for a sponsor, with a proposal that offers the
prospective company a unique opportunity to be identified not
only with a competition of world standing, but also with an




                                - 15 -




’d                            T0EE8W.I0 S ai3U H S 3yj ayUXDia'f Z0:T2 6 8 , ST MRf
         initiative that oan result in the World Cup's coming to Bngland
         in the not-too-diatant future.  The sponsor will be invited to
         pay an annual sum as is usual in such agreements.  He will also
         be asked to provide a lump-sum figure of substantial
         proportions in the form of an interest-free loan. This sum
         would form the basis of a fund to assist clubs with the
         installation of seating and the improvement of facilities.

         TheJ?ootball Trust and The Football Grounds Improvements Trust

J         2^fy* The tiae-aeale tor theae measures ean be aeeelerated
L    ■^~a*8i»tanc9 ia available from elsevhere..^YK'ts""Mr'srfitFT7> fe
        Football League WTJY""pr¥fSlfW^WM nrS''^:ooeball Tr uat /Footba11
’       Groun da Improvement Truat, that aueh aaaistajn^-Jte given.       A
    Offurther reason for giving the proposals as to increased seating

»
      and those relating to safety on terraces as recommended in this
      submission the backing of law, is that The Football Grounds
      Improvement Trust is entitled by its deed to grant aid work
      necessarily carried out as a condition of the issue of a Safety
      Certificate, up to 73% of the total cost.
/         5
      S.      2f.   The Football Trust is funded by a donation by the three
      major pools companies (Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters) from
      the Spotting-The-Ball Competition, at the rate of 21% of
      turnover, i.e. over £9, 000/ 000 a year. The Trustees are
      empowered to use their funds to promote measures for the
      control or suppression of hooliganism; to assist clubs to meet
      obligations under the 1975 Act; to improve ground facilities;
      and for any other purpose beneficial to football.   The Football
      trust allocates just over half its income to The Football
      Grounds Improvement Trust for the purpose of assisting
      expenditure by Football League clubs on ground safety and
      improvements.   An explanation of the role of these bodies is
V     appended,   (Annex H)
       *Sn
       Reduction in Fool Betting Tax

       S.   25. Given The FA and The Football League1s willingness to
       seek a substantial part of the finances necessary if we are to
       have the desired changes/ there ia a atrong case tor the
    f~)Gova rnjaen t to p a ^ e ^ a . ^ o n ^ i t ^ f i o n by reduoing Che pool betting
     V tax             &Se^5fiE^^^i»fwould release £16, 000, 000 per
     ) annum thirt could be allocated to safety work and for ground
    C improvements.    The contrast with the Horse Race industry is
     ' stark in this context.   Under the 28th Horserace Betting Levy
       Scheme, determined by the Home Secretary, which began on the
       1st April, 1989, assuming a leviable betting turnover of £4,000




                                            -16-




    6T ‘d                                 T0ee8i7ZT0 scrauHssyj aatDOiyr z e a s 68, 8i Nnr
                      3) t j U n j ' , OjI1'/_<P%   i   j   l   j    flo l L .-~j>

                                         ^C^-»-J‘-| (o              '^, :*/''/V.O K # d   ^-.C( l

    million/ the total estimated yield (i. a. the total levy) will
    he about B34, 500 , 000 (8 . 6 % of turnover. ) Should turnover
    increase beyond £4, 000 million/ the levy yield will increase by
    a greater amount.     The Government abolished on-coursa betting
    duty in 1987. There la a tax of 81 on off-course bets.          0, 86%
    of the turnover goes to the Levy, which is used for the general
    promotion of the sport.       We are not proposing the creation of a
    Football Levy Board.     We believe that The Football
    Trust/Football Grounds Improvement Trust already act as a
    suitable vehicle with proven track record and would be the
    ideal recipient of any money given'TanSt-to the game from a
    reduction in the Pool Betting Tax or from any other source
    prepared to provide grants or interest-free loans.

       apltal Allowances

    5. 26. Much criticism is levelled at football for what ia seen,
    by many as wasteful spending on transfer fees, Thi* criticism
    ignores the basic fact that transfers fees are a "circulating
    fund" that enables smaller clubs to derive much needed income
    by investing in young players and realising the investment by
    selling on the asset to one of the bigger clubs. For example,
    in the summer of 1988, Tottenham Hotspur bought lisis
    from Manchester City for £1,700 , 000 . Manchester City then
    purchased                 from Wimbledon for £323, 000 , <AO$^f)4bb&$
    from Luton Town for £ 250 , 000 and                  from the same
    club for £ 650 , 000 . Luton and Wimbledon then went on to buy
    other players for smaller sums, and so on. All of the transfer
    fees added together might make ten times the original figure of
    £1. 7 million.

  Tha success of a club on the field of play is the major
  consideration for moat supporters.    A team that is winning
 attracts more spectators than when it is not performing so



•
 well,   The attendance figures quoted above for Glasgow Rangers
  latches (paragraph 5. 5. ) indicate what can be achieved when a
  blub is playing well and at the same time gives its public good
  facilities.   Glasgow Rangers have invested as heavily as any
 club in the transfer market in recent times. Clubs must,
 therefore, look to their playing strength as well as to the
 comfort and safety of their grounds.     No club shies away from
 expenditure on essential safety work.     Each club does# however,
 have to decide for itself tha appropriate balance between It fL _
 spending 'on players and on the improvement of facilities. L „ T m '
 qurrent tax system, regrettably, nudges clubs in the direction       t
 o f the formerly Capital allowances are usually unavailable to       I ’<>
 clubs for ground improvements.     The case of Brown(Inspector of
 Taxes) v Burnley PC established that expenditure on a new stand




                                         -17-




03’d                                  I 0££8w , i0 sa i3U H S 3a j a a u x o ia T so.-ts 68, st wnr
f-




              to replace an old on® did not qualify as a repair, nor did it
              qualify for plant and machinery allowances.                     Safety work is
              only allowable if it is carried out aa a condition of the issue
              of a Safety Certificate.                 Transfer fees, on the other hand, are
              treated as revenue expenditure.                   The Government would
              a u t o m a t i c a l l y stimulate greater ax pendi cure on i m p r o v e d
              f a c i l i t i e s i.£.*J-t,stajcM. to si ve ea oi tal a 11avaneea for lii meJi
                               — £he present system^ives strong fiscal inducementff~^'. X
      \       to cluba to spend on players rather than on improvements.

 P
     /•f
              6.   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1973

                                                                          Jcf'
                                                                             - CX.        t            Cod- •
              6. 1. The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds 4 ees--^<yfc-kava~tks~ (
             - £ © * a e ~ e At paragraph 3. 84 of his final report, Mr
             Justice             said;  "I am satisfied that the Guide should
     m       continue to be voluntary and not form a statutory code; but it
             is important that all those concerned with sports grounds
             should read and understand the contents, and apply the lessons
             relevant to their own sports ground," It is the recommendation
             of The FA and The Football League that certain parts of the
             Guide should be made mandatory.    (See paragraph 6. 5, below),

             6. 2. At paragraph 3. 81, Mr Justice                aid: "I have
             seen a number of Safety Certificates,      They vary enormously as
             to their detail.   It would be useful if the local authorities
             could draw up a document which contains the conditions which;
             most generally need to be included.      They will have to avoid
             the danger of their model being treated as containing only
             minimal conditions or of a local authority treating the model
             as of universal application; each ground has different problems
             and a flexible approach is necessary.      But guidance is needed,
             and I hope that the Association of Metropolitan Authorities,
            Association of County Councils and the Convention of Scottish
            |Lpcal Authorities will be a,ble to draw up a suitable model, "
             1t,-
                ' Sk-'f- f\   Ac K     At ®'—  <•:j’^.
            The need for flexibility to take account of local variations is
             clearly recognised by us aa it is by the Guide to Safety at
            Sports Grounds itselfi see, for example, paragraphs 6, 12, 37,
             45, 214, etc.  There does seem to be a wide variation of view
            in relation to important matters affecting safety which cannot
            always be accounted for by variations in local conditions.
            This has been borne out by the M -J-cHifc varying attitudes to
            perimeter fencing expressed following Hillsborough.       The
            problem is aggravated by the fact that, depending on the local




                                                 -18-




          13 ‘d                               im m v im   scraunsayj aay>oiyrr   m -.iz   68, ei wnr
         authority in question, the person responsible for the issue of
         a Safety Certificate may be a Building Inspector/ a Fire
         Officer or a Planning Officer: these are persons with differing
         experience and expertise.  Further/ even officers from the same
         discipline have differing views.  For example, it is not
         unknown for a Planning Officer to make perimeter fencing a
         condition of the grant of a Safety Certificate/ and for his
         successor to require the fencing to be removed or altered,

         ft. 3.   We recommend       that:

                     (i) a degree ot standardisation bm introduced by
         making it a condition of the issue ot a Satety certificate that
         certain specific requirements ot the Guide that are objectively
^        ascertainable axe met} and       .           .
|P                C       c     y     r   \   «/i3 As>        A °U' o          Vic..4.
                    (ii)tjLt should be a condition ot the issue of a
         Satety Certificate that a suitable professional person shall
         have certified that in his opinion -y&tr cadn. other ^ Bejiijfjd.a^ J ^ f
         requirements of the G u ide ** *    jii f)                           jnd

          jwrfgnffTffn t. w r - ^ r r O T g y w t ^ i H i r T - ~avri't*~bTe~pr-o f sttsi-omrl
       — pa r so F v o in 2T"&a"'"w               -Sitrve-yo r-■,- a I though •y«»- aceept~th4 1
         rf.or. some purpo-s ea h a wo-ulzf'/rswxt to e&vteit&t--a^-eeo-sul sing
       . engineer,

         Examples of (i) are to be found in paragraphs 92 and 93 of the
         GuideJwJiich provide:
             jjr
                   ••92. A terrace step should not be less than 280mm or
        /more than 380mm wide. The preferred dimension is between 355mm
      f* and 380mm.

,     /            93.  The height of risers should be between 75mm and
f    { A 180mm. 75mm is related to the minimum width of 280mm.   If the
         riser height is greater than lSOgun, a crush barrier should be
      i provided at the top of the riser7J

      '"-'An example of (ii) is to be found in paragraph 31, |Jwhich
         provides:

                  "31.  When walls, including perimeter walls, and
        fences are to withstand crowd pressures, they should be
        designed to withstand such pressures safely and allowance
        should be made for forces simultaneously and independently
        induced by oth^r factors eg wind forces or attached
        installations. " j




                                                  - 19-
     6. 4. We do not consider that a central authority needs to be
     established to lay down the standards and issue safety
     certificates.   Local knowledge of local conditions is
     important.   Thus, certificates should continue to be issued by
     local authorities.   But local authorities need to have certain
     minimum standards laid down for them, and need to be assisted
     by technically qualified persons.      The Guide is, in our view, a
     valuable document and is d e a r l y the right vehicle for laying
     down common standards.   The events of Hillsborough have
     demonstrated the need for changes in it, as did the events of
     Bradford before.   We make some proposals in paragraphs 6. 6. to
     €.11. below. -The ■Home Office/ScettlgW^gigi-ee who publish""'m
     Guide should be encouraged constantly to keep the Guide under
     review.

     6. 5. We do not think it is appropriate for The FA and The
     Football League to provide a comprehensive list of those
     requirements of the Guide that fall into the two categories
     identified in paragraph 6. 3., above. We do not have the
     technical expertise to consider such matters, nor have we had
     sufficient time to take independent advice on the point. We
     recommend that a Working Party be set up to draw up a list of
     those requirements of the Guide (amended as may be in the light
     of the Inquiry) which must be satisfied as a condition of the
     issue of ajgafety Certificate in the way that,we have; / / , -v
     suggested.          -..j .ite-a/T/ ^A«c_jAr.r             >ty ^ f «
     b ^ o f o c S / o / K ' v ./                      I /VC’ijlO . -f&>   C x rilT f <a>.m.   <Sf S & T .tfrx f,'b / \
                         tS"‘% n a   Alffi£ra^?i'&ne    to   the   Guide     to S a f e t y    at    Sports
     Grounds

     6. 6.         Increased          seating

     We have            already discussed              this.    (See paragraph 5.14.                above).

c*. ■>.            Sections 3&6:Ingress and Egress

 Each turnsfiile^group of turnstiles should give access to one
 nMtpt11*a fl-            S tA<t7ta stadium only,       Thm                jg—/i£~ rh a *
 s &errpSTr-^aiLetu 1 d be t           — k-iiov n . Hh e ^ t uTirsZ i 1-e-fs-^-AhoU 1 d be
 closed w B i i m i * eX'psci t y h a s BTiv^t^e-XJlSSS^*" ■ Be eh o u 9ii~_/sejzsLLo»n
 should bm capable of being a-ntt-'-b-e1 closed when that capacity has
 been reached.          Entrance and exit routes should be marked in
 colours dist inctly different from the home club c o l o u r s .




*d                                                T0ee8W.T0 sa"i3UH33yj aau>Dia*r 01:12 se, ai m r
 . .
6 8     Section    lliFire Safety

Paragr aph 189 should be emended to make it clear that there
should be aeceaa eo the pitch aa veil aa to the buildings,


6.9.    Section    12: Communications

The requirement: to provide an effective system of
com munications should include the provision and affective use
of an adequate public address system.   There should be a
separete PA ayatem capable of being heard by supporters outside
the ground,   All grounds should be equipped with cloae-circuit
cameras covering the outside of and approaches to grounds.

6.10.    Section    lStPitch Perimeter Fance/ttall

Paragraphs 214 and 215 of the Guide refer to varying
specifications and the need for fencing at "most major stadia".
4^1                          ,~~fcheneed to prevent apec cat or
encroachment onto      the pitch must be spelt out.     The Cup Final
on the 20th May has shown that supporters oannot be trusted
100% to respect calls not to come onto the playing area.  in
the light of the Hi lls borough tragedy, it may be tempting co
conclude that perime ter fences/wells should be banned.   In our


to take steps to prevent such inoidents is recognised
internationally as well as in the United Kingdom.  Thus, in
1986, UEFA issued "Binding Instructions and Recommendations to
avoid orowd disturbances" which included the following:        f

        11 Measures at the Ground

         6.   Protection of the playing field by means of

         a) a fence of at least 2. 20m in height or a moat or
            else

         b) a barrier with adequate policing so as to make it
            impossible for spectators to enter the field of
            play.

         Fences must have sufficient security gates opening
         towards the playing field and in the oase of moats or
         a combination of moats and fences adequate other
         security passages should be provided."




                                    •   21   -




                              T0EE8t^T0 SCraiiHSBaj d atfcO iaT I I :T2 6 8 , 8T NOT
    The same passage appears in the publication issued by OBFA in
    July 1988,

    The task, therefore, is to find a system that affords ready
    access to the pitoh in an emergency, while protecting it from
    invasion in all other circumstances.  The FA and The Football
    League have already inspected 4 self-opening system in Nimes,
    France (Report appended * Annex I)

            New Section; Medical Provision

    To make adequate provision for a large-scale disaster a club
    would need to have a fully-equipped casualty ward at its
    disposal.  This is clearly not feasible. It is also not
    reasonable to expect clubs to have at their disposal large
■   numbers of trained people capable of using resuscitative
    equipment.  Such equipment in untrained hands can be lethal.
    However, a reasonable level of preparedness should be
    required sad the need tor this should be included in the Guide,
    The tollowing is our recommendstion,

    a) Bach club should have a designated first-Aid room, in
    addition to the club's medical room.  The First-Aid room should
    contain at least two beds, a sink, a work-top and a curtain to
    give the necessary privacy.  The room should be supplied with
    power, light, water and a direct line telephone.  There must be
    ready access tor emergency vehicles.

    b) The first-Aid roo m should hsva a well-stocked cabinet
    containing a n t i s e p t i c s , analgesic, bandages, etc. Management
    should designate one person as being responsible tor the
    up-kaep ot both room and cabinet.

    e) Stretchers,       a carrying chair and oxygen should be available,
                                f\              %   J AXL.            1
    d) -In flddi-friiMB—    tha ■^iu-b--d octor, who is autemn eica'liy- present
    at all home games, *h+~-p*.&SMnjtti o t a t legation a .n.ther— .ajLaJit^i«d
    person should be required.            The locstion o f t hi tL-j&Asw&n-vrt't hi n
    tha ground should^ be noted cla^£^y— trr"ffre^First-Aid roam.

    e) At least one tully-equipped ambulance should be in
    attendance at all matchea with an expected attendance ot
    5,000+.   The ambulance should be equipped with defibrillators
    and resuscitative equipment and be manned by personnel trained
    in their uae.   An ambulance can be hired tor around £90 per
    match.   Siring in the equipment would further relieve the club
    of the' problem ot keeping the expensive equipment referred to
    secure and in good working order.




                                         - 22-
 f) All first-aiders serving at ground* should be fully crained
 and experienced.   Clubs should be furnished with a complete
 list ot trained staff by the organisation providing their
 first-aid service.   The mini m u m number ot first-aiders present
 at a match should be 1 per 1,000 spectators,      Xt should be the
 responsibility of the alubs to ensure that the required number
 of trained personnel is in attendance.      The elubs might n e e d ,
 in order to achieve this, to arrange tor the training ot
 members at their own staff,



 7,   MEMBERSHIP


 Compulsory National Membership Scheme

 7. I. Tha Government is convinced that a national, compulsory,
membership schema is the prime need in the quest for a solution
to the hooligan problem.   In 1983, the Prime Minister asked The
Football Association and The Football League to tell her what
 football was going to do about implementing a 100% membership
aoheroe. We append the reports of The FA and The Football
League to the Prime Minister,    (Annex J) It will be noted
that, among the other concerns expressed, was the worry that
the verification of membership oards at turnstiles might add to
congestion and thereby produce danger for the public.    Further
incidents of crowd misconduct have persuaded the Government
that it is necessary to legislate for the introduction of a
compulsory national membership scheme for football.    Football
remains opposed to the concept, [it has stated, however, that
it. would wish to be responsible for the implementatic    £ the
scheme should the legislation be accepted by Farliam<

7. 2. The principal grounds on which The FA and The Football
League oppose the idea of a compulsory national membership
scheme are:

        (i) it is probable, if not certain, that additional
congestion will occur outside turnstiles with the attendant
dangers illustrated by Hillsborough;

                                           pporters;
               CO''rW c *■‘U'i \   n > »..(
      (                                     what is now the real
problem of football hooliganism, the behaviour of supporters
away from grounds.




                                     -23-




                                   T0EE8WJ0 SaT3IJHS3yJ QW >Om‘£ 9 S :6 0 6 8 , 6T Mflf
