NOTES OF A MEETING HELD AT THE HOUSE OF COMMONS ON THURSDAY,

15TH JANUARY 1981.

PRESENT:-   Mr.J.J. Dunnett (Labour, Nottingham East)
            Mr. W. Whitlock (Labour, Nottingham North)
            Mr. T. Bradley (Labour, Leicester East - also Chairman of
                                                  Kettering Town F.c.)

            Mr. E.A. Croker     The Football Association
            Mr. R.H.G. Kelly    The Football League


The meeting had been called following the possibility of Mr. Whitlock
putting forward a Private Members Bill to the House of Commons dealing
with legislation to improve crowd control at and around football matches.
The Football Association had submitted a list of points for consideration,
basically those discussed with the Home Secretary at a meeting in December.
Mr. Whitlock had come twentieth in the draw for the Private Members Bills.
Only the first six automatically had a Second Reading and, therefore,
for his Bill to stand a chance of succeeding it was important that it
was not controversial in any way.  The suggested title of the Bill was
"Football Crowd Control Bill - a Bill to make further provision for the
control of spectators at association football matches and other
connected purposes".  The Second Reading of the Bill had been set for
20th February, which meant that it had to be in printed form by 13th
February.

It was agreed to consider the following as clauses for the Bill:-

(a)   Alcohol

      Section 69 of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980, concerning
      the ban of alcohol and a vechicle travelling to or from a sporting
      event, should be extended to include England.

(b)   Attendance Centres

      Some of the 100 centres at present used for junior offenders, but
      not to capacity, should be converted for the use of senior offenders
      i.e. those between the age of 17 and 20. This would not increase
      Government expenditure in connection with these centres.

(c)   Period At Attendance Centres

      Magistrates to be empowered to set specific times at which offenders
      should report to an attendance centre, i.e. from 2.30 to 4.30p.m.
      on a Saturday, rather than a period of 24 hours.  It was believed
      this would be a far more effective punishment.

(d)   Passport

      If an individual was convicted of an offence by a competent court
      in another country arising out of a sporting occasion, that person
      may have his passport with held for a period not exceeding so many
      months.
Banning from Grounds

Magistrates to be empowered to ban anyone convicted of an offence
related to football from any Football League ground for a certain
period of time.  If the offender is found at a league ground
during the period of his ban, he has committed a further offence
(legislation for this could be taken from the licensed premises
exclusion of certain persons act 1980). (Copy attached).

It was agreed that Mr. Whitlock would approach the Home Office,
inform them of the proposed contents of his Bill and ascertain
whether there would be any objection to any of the clauses. He
would also make enquiries through the House of Commons concerning
the drafting of the Bill.



19th January, 1981
