      EAC,                                           4th Ausrust, 1973




Mr. A. Hardeker, O.B..E.,
Ths Fcotball League,
Lytham St. Annas,
Lancs.
FYfi 1.15


□ear Alan,

       Reference Minute 16 of the Joint Liaison Committee of the
30th June, I at?, concerned that this item was not fully explored on that
occasion simply tecause of the pressure of time that we were faced with.
Ilo doubt vary strong feelings that exist in the Association of Football
League Referees and Linesmen concernin’ pitch invasions, many of
which involved incidents surrounding the referees, have been made clear
to you.

      We received numerous reports laat year of supporters who were
involved on the pitch with referees and there seems little doubt that
unless fencing is erected a serious accident will occur. The considerable
expense of erecting fences at ninety-two Football League Grounds is
appreciated, and I realise that it would be difficult to be selective
with the grounds as it seems that the incidents that occureed were wall
spread over the four Divisions.

      When this was first discussed, albeit briefly, at the Joint Liaison
Conmittee. I ashed whether it was considered that police costs would be
reduced if there was fencing at grounds. I believe the reaction was that
it would not. I am still of the opinion that the police presence could
be cut down as we know for a fact that it has been at Wembley Stadium,
but whether it would be significant may be harder to say.

      Assuming that fencing was Insisted upon, and the letter from the
G.L.C. certainly indicates that this could be the case, could the clubs
receive any assistance from the Sports Grounds Improvement Trust, even
if they were not designated grounds}

      Possibly there Is some compromise between fully fencing grounds
and offering some protection to match officials, such as Tenclng In
front of standing terrace areas, say thirty yards from the tunnel,
bearing In mind that we do now Insist on protection of the tunnel Itself.
'fir. A. Hardakar, O.B.E.   - 2 -                     3rd August, 1978



      Attachad harawlth, is a list of tha incidents involving ground
Invasion, many of which you will saa, included match officials.

                               Yours sincaraly.




                              E.A. Crokar,
                              Sacratary.
