                                                           !
                                                           (v -J p
                                                   27 April !bag9

                           ?A » HILLSBOROUGH




1.         AT had been involved in the competitions
department at the FA for 15 years,   There were a number of
clubs that had been used over the years as venues for FA cup
semi-finals and consideration would be given first and
foremost to the capacity of the grounds.   From London would
Arsenal, Tottenham and Chelsea; from the Midlands would be
Villa Park, Nottingham Forest, West Bromich Albion and
Birmingham.   From the north would be Everton, Liverpool ,
Manchester City and United Sheffield Wednesday, Sheffield
United and Leeds United.   The existing administration would
be a very important consideration.   AT would never use a
club if he was not confident or the secretaries being able
to organise the event. Also, whether or not the club was
doing well financially would have a bearing.   This would be
on two bases, first of all clubs may not have the resources
to properly set up a semi-final if they were struggling
financially and also GK mentioned that there was a
subconscious thought in his mind that the big five clubs
ought not to get all the proceeds of football competitions,

2,         They would also look at the personnel involved
quite closely with a view to whether they got on with them,
 for instance j         at Chelsea was particularly
difficult.

Events of 2 0 March 1989

3,        We took    . a Clarke1 through the detail of the
events of the week of 20 March.    We highlighted the
telephone call from f’et'er Robinson at Liverpool of 10,00am
regarding the possible selection of Hillsborough and the
request to foe allocated the Penistone lane and of the ground
and not the Leppings Lane end.    When he spoke to gmeAamr
Packers11 at 10,05 he mentioned swapping ends and
said that he would have to speak to the police about
swapping from last year,

i,                      was clear chat when Feter Robinson
,nade his request at 10,00 on Monday 20 March regarding the
possible allocation of the Penniston Lane end Clarke said
he'd check it out and get back to him,

5,          iliiirstressed that the call made by
had been   a reasonably friendly call,     He put iton the basis
that theFA would be getting quite a few complaints in from
                            ob 3103 OL




 Livarpool supporters.   No correspondence had ensued. There
 had been a sports bulletin at 5.00 or 6,00pm in the evening
 on that day on BBC 2 that Livarpool had voiced objections as
 to allocation.   However, they would only get 50% of the
 tieket s anyway.

5.       Ha then got a call from Ifeiiegsfllll at 10.55 saying
that if Hillsborough was chosen then the police would
allocate the Leppings lane and to Liverpool as per last
season's arrangements due to avoiding a clash of supporters
approaching the grounds.

7.         The challenge cup sub-committee meeting was
sitting at 11.00 to talk about artificial pitches.       He had
had various discussions with fteaham Kelly with regard to the
first two choices of Hillsborough and Villa Park.      There had
been no problems last season.      There would be about four
people present at the challenge cup sub-committee meeting.
Steve ciarke did mention his conversation with Father
gpbinsCJn' to SEaham’-®ei,ly prior to the meeting.  They
described it as a token objection.      There was real
alternative once the police had said no.

8.        There were no complaints whatsoever about last
years game with regard to supporters, police or HP's etc.
There was some speculation in the press about
dissatisfaction with the Leppings lane end but the FA had
not received anything.

9.        The challenge cup pool committee meeting started
at 11.30 and were not told about the phone call from f*ster
foMijs#;. 1f^teWi.seiaaii came into the meeting and gave a
strong recommendation for Hillsborough for the Liverpool
game and Villa Park for the Everton game,    There was not
more than 10 minutes debate on the subject.    He was the
chairman of the Matches and Grounds Committee which is
responsible for arranging grounds and venues. The chairman
vas on the Challenge Cup full committee anyway so it was
quite convenient to have his experience.

10.         Other potential venues were discussed, Manchester
was discussed as a passing reference.      That was the United
ground at Old Trafford.
ths'-^ftalrienge^                   -meeting and he was keen on
having Hillsborough.     They would not look at any papers
before arriving at their decision but would be relying to
some extent on a "steer" from the two chairmen,

11-       Staff were present and were quite happy that the
decision had gone that way and to an extent pointed them in
that direction but they would have been happy with a
decision to play at Old Trafford likewise,
                            ob 3103OL




12.       ^SrateaMf'^KeaFlrf said he had discussed the call from
Pater- Robinson at Liverpool with Wiseman bafora the meeting.

13.       'There was some preliminary work done to ascertain
whether Manchester would be suitable and Jim Greenwood? of
that club had mentioned that the police were quite happy to
stage the semi-final.

14.       The meeting lasted about one hour and we would be
given a copy of the minutes of the meeting which had just
been typed.   The rest of the meeting was taken up with
administrative details,

15.      Prices for tickets which want up by £2.00 were
discussed at 1,2.35.

15.                    than said that they would get through
to Liverpool as quickly as possible, ia before the prass d#d
to let them know about the vanue and let all the other clubs
know.  He would leave a message with the secretary normally,
as the relevant authorities at Livarpool were difficult to
get hold of.

17,       The way in which it worked from then was that the
club would get on and make all the arrangements necessary
is police, issuing of tickets, medical ate and the FA would
not bother them too much unless they needed help.  They
would not interfere.  They would sand their pamphlet out
explaining what the rules of the challenge cup were.  The FA
was not expected in practice to sort out any details at all
and would not normally be invited to meetings to decide the
arrangements.

■General

18.        fllf did as a matter of chance go to a meeting last
year where he acted as !,an observer” at which the matter of
swapping the ends of the grounds was raised with the polica.
-Ie did not think he had kept any notes.

19.          mentioned that the Manchester Police wera much
lore willing to be flexible and solve any problems thrown at
them, than perhaps some other polica authorities.

20.       The clubs were used to staging big matches.  Their
yanues were chosen for that reason.   They have the
facilities and staff to do so.  It was not practicable for
the FA to become involved with averydav decision taking.
Sheffield Wednesday had great experience in handling
semi-finals and knsw what was wanted.

21.       Geographical considerations would have a part to
play with ragard to selecting a venue and one did get
representations from tha clubs prior to a decision being
mads,  For Instance #ater Swailes who was a council.member
and also phairman of Manchester; City always asked whether
Maine Road would be used.   It was also important to get on
with the people you were choosing to host the FA
semi-finals/ personal preference did play a part.

22.       Clubs are normally asked to provide details on
spectators segregation capacity (seats/standing) and safety
fencing if it is provided around the pitch.




24.       It was clear that there was no particular reason
for turning Old Trafford down as a venue.  Rather that
Hillsborough was preferred as it was so successful last
year.

25.       We discussed the geographical suitability of Old
Trafford as opposed to Hillsborough with regard to
travelling between Liverpool and those two grounds and
Nottingham Forest and those two grounds.  The advantage of
Hillsborough would be that the fans would be coming from
different ends of the city and could be properly policed.
One should bear in mind that the Hillsborough has been
greatly revamped over the last few years and a lot of work
has been done to the ground.  However, it was true to say
chat the standing area at the Leppings Lane end was
considerably  less than the standing area at the Penniston
Road end and everyone in football knew that Liverpool had a
famous tradition (the Kop) for wanting to stand at matches.

25,       A profit of about £60,000 would be made from
staging a cup semi-final so it was quite important for a
3lub to get the decision.

27.       No   real consideration was given to whether or not
people would   turn up without tickets. However some
consideration was given to the possibility of people from
Liverpool turning up and trying to infiltrate the other end.
There was some discussion as to the deviousness and
resourcefulness of the average Liverpool supporter.    It did
not help that both clubs played in red and white for
segregating the ground.

28.       vfith regard to a .vT-'s meeting last year at
Sheffield Wednesday and the subject of allocarion , the
polica had said no for purely geographical reasons.     They
wanted to keep the emphasis on segregation.

29 ,          ,GK'.nentioned that on the way to Sheffield last
y e a r , he had been stopped in his car for the ticket to be
checked but this year he had not been stopped.
30 .       'm b confirmed that these matches were all ticket
matches, in other words tickets were not officially on sale
at the ground although there would be some touts.     The
philosophy was that you would not gat in without a ticket
although it was common knowledge that if you turned up with
a mass of people without tickets, sometimes to prevent
clanger occurring outside the ground, they would be forced to
let you in,     It was commonly known as well that Liverpool
have larger support than Nottingham Forest.     The FA would
have no input as to the decision of which end to allocate.
They relied entirely on the club being advised by the
police.

31.       >7e would need to look at FA policies with regard
to all ticket matches quite carefully because it was clear
that all ticket did not mean all tickets in practice.

32.       The FA have asked the police to keep out people
without tickets and a letter had gone out to the Association
of Chief Police Officers with regard to correspondence
concerning Leeds United. ___________ will dig that out for
LIS .


33,       GK asked whether the football league
considerations would apply to selecting a ground because of
the staying club playing a home match in the football league
and the season was supposed to and in the last week in May.
The football league would be a bit upset because of the
play-offs scheduled if matches over-ran.  AT mentioned that
the first and second divisions did not have play-offs these
days but that was not a consideration.

34.       O'ofcn Dvson OC phoneu JP.1K 'uring the meeting ha
reported  n '.t Lord Justice Taylor 'nay deal with policy
issues on written'submissions rrom the parties and have the
oral evidence at the enquiry to deal with first of all with
what actually happened as a factual matter,

Ticket Allocation

35.       We referred to FA Rule 2 6b of the Rules of the
Challenge Cup Competition relating to Semi-Final ties which
stated that the two competing clubs shall be entitled to 50%
sach of the tickets for sale.  The FA in its absolute
discretion could vary those allocations. vva were told that
in practice the PA never did vary those allocations.
Previously, clubs got less than they currently received.
The FA would take say 3-8,000 tickets for dignitaries and
special guests and the like, and the rest of the tickets
were divided equally between the clubs. The FA would not be
clear as to the detail of the layout of Hillsborough so they
had no input as to how much each club should get.   >7e said
chat the argument may well be at the hearing that the FA are
running the semi-final and have direct organisational
                           ro ■)i03 OL




responsibility albeit delegated in practice) and it was they
who issued the    tickets. They knew Liverpool were unhappy
with the allocation why did they not exercise their
discretion? The answer was that the discretion was never
exercised unless they were told to exercise it by the
police,

35,      They would take matters relating to segregation
directly from the club and the police.  It was not for the
FA to go and speak to the clubs independently.  In fact, the
club itself issued the tickets, not the FA.

37,       AT thought that the rule was to stop clubs getting
more than 50%,    It was not to give the FA an initiative to
do anything.

Organisation of FA Cup Semi-Final Matches

33,       In practice the FA had no direct control over
semi-final arrangements,

33.       There were quite a few logical reasons for
delegating entirely to the clubs who would have the
necessary relationship with the police and experience with
dealing with these matches.  They also had the resources
with which to do so.

40.       Thera were 21,000 standing places at the Penniston
and of the ground and only 9,000 at the Leppings Lane end.
Both ends were full.  The basic philosophy was that the FA
sanctioned the ground venue and would arrange for its own
tickets to be properly distributed but other than that they
would leave the people who were good at setting up the cup
semi-finals to do the job.

41.       ?or instance there would be no FA decision as to a
delayed kick off but they would merely sanction whichever
recommendation they got from the polica.

42.       Exactly the same considerations applied for the
Villa Park semi-finals.

43.       The real reason for selecting Hillsborough was
that there were no complaints from Liverpool last year and
everything went very well with an excellent organisation.

44.       With regard to the different role the FA plays on
che staging of matches at v>7emblev there is a distinction
between matches played as internationals and matches like
che cup final.  We understood that for internationals the
FA's role would be slightly more to the fore with regard to
setting the event up.   With regard to cup finals there was a
much higher involvement of the FA because           --|frafl
taken a more dynamic approach to matters and had made sure
she attended all meetings and gave an input on ail the
administrative arrangements.    That was partly due to the
.FA7.3 relationship with Wembley,  Those meetings all had
detailed agendas and would involve the local authority the
police and Wembley stadium itself.

45,       'This was in stark contrast to the FA's role in
connection with cup semi finals which was delegated out
almost entirely to the clubs with hardly any feed back to
the F A .

4 5^                    and                            the
advisers to the FA both high ranking former police officers
would also get involved with a Wembley final.
FA on the day at Hillsborough would only be asked to deal
with major problems.

48.       Some problems with Wembley stadium were mentioned
with regard to cost cutting and security arrangements and
changes in personnel.  The FA's role in’under 21
international matches was more like their role in Wembley
than in semi finals because of the overseas support and PR
element.

Ancillary points

49.       Anfield was not a consideration because of its low
capacity and obvious home advantage,  The same applied to
Goodison Park.

5.0.      We said that we would need quite a lot of guidance
from the FA with regard to what lead they wanted us to take
on such issues as

     (i)     perimeter for fencing

    (ii)     all seater stadiums

   (iii)     ID cards

    (iv)     anti hooliganism

     (v)     the future role of the FA and semi finals

    (v i )   the FA's view of the behaviour of the Liverpool
             supporters on the day

5 L.                said she would dig out some detail on
FIFA UEFA regulations on perimeter fencing and some of the
other issues and also look at the disciplinary department
files on fencing etc.  All paper would be welcome'.
                              Jd b 310 3 0L




    52.        We also said it would be helpful to get the FA's
    response to the football supporters association complaints
    about Wemblay stadium for last year's FA cup final.

    53.         It may also be helpful to get any feed back from
    how Sheffield Wednesday were approaching ask the hearing.    We
    said that we were in touch with the Treasury Solicitors and
    it was likely that directions would be made tomorrow with
    regard to witness statements and discovery,     We were not
    clear as to how the West Midland police enquiry would link
    up with the Cord Justice Taylor enquiry,     Masses of witness
    statements were being produced and there was an estimated
    .9 month  time factor in the police enquiry.

    54.         It may be helpful to get the FA's view on minor
    issues like secondary screening processes as well as on
    crowd control.

    55.       We mentioned that we had received a latter from
^   Herbert Smith and it was likely that we would respond on the
    basis that we would make two sets of documents available to
    the Treasury Solicitors having weeded them out for
    relevance, privilege and ex-post facto items. We said that
    it would be helpful to give adequate notice of circumstances
    to the insurers in case there is any dispute as to liability
    at a later stage and it may be that we give them the papers
    chat we were sending to the Treasury Solicitors for the
    enquiry which had not been marshalled yet.  They would have
    to wait,

    55,       We asked for papers for the last five years semi
    finals from S^iSWi’BlarK who said he would dig out what he
    could.




    Time engaged:        ik hours including travelling waiting
                         and dictation




     3103 0L)
