                                                                                                    REG. NO. 6 0 0 1 2
    TELEPHONE:
S T. ANNES 7 2 9 4 2 1     THE FO O TBA LL LEAGUE LIMITED                                              ENOUANO

     (STO   0293)


                                                  R E G ISTER ED   O FFICE


       telex     :
                                           LYTHAM            ST. A N N E S                              secaeTABT:
      67875                                             LAN C S.                                   R. H. G. KELLY. F.C.I.S.

                                                       FY 8 1JG.


  1/27                                                                           5th March, 1987


 TO ALL CLUBS


 Dear Secretary,                                                             !    J ............

                                         Anti-Hooliganism Measures

     Further to the Divisional Meetings on 29th January, 1987, and a further
 meeting with the Government officials on Monday, 23rd February, I car. now
 inform you that the Government Ministers, Mr Richard Tracey and the Hon.
 Douglas Hogg have endorsed the proposals embodied in the League's comprehensive
 Report of November 1986 - save that they required specific action tc be taken
 by the Clubs on'the subject of Membership Schemes.

     This action is along the lines detailed to Clubs at the meetings cn 29th
 January, and is as follows:-

            1)           All Clubs are asked to develop and introduce membership schemes
                         for specific designated areas of their grounds by the beginning
                         of the 1987/88 season. These areas should be reserved for
                         members only.  Non-members would not be admitted. The schemes
                         should cover at least 50 % of each ground's capacity as determined
                         by the conditions of the ground's safety certificate.   Clubs which
                         cannot attain 50 % should identify the percentage they can meet.
                         Advice may be obtained from                  re Doints of detail.

            2)           Clubs who feel that they are unable to meet the requirements for
                         50% Membership Schemes will be able to make representations to
                         a Special Committee consisting of representatives from the League,
                         The Football Trust and independent advisors.   If, after discussion,
                         it is agreed by the Special Committee, the club and the local
                         Police that they are unable to meet the 50 % requirement, then the
                         Club will be expected to show that they are taking adequate
                         alternative measures.  Should this be the case, their position will
                         be accepted by the Government.  If the Club is not able to convince
                         the Committee, they may become liable to a charge under F.A.
                         procedures for failing to implement the recommendations on
                         Membership.

                                                                                            /Contd.2




                                   All Correspondence to be addressed to THE SECRETARY
                                        -   2   -




        Whilst appreciating that the principle of membership schemes is a complex
    matter, there is a requirement for all Clubs to respond quickly so that
    designated areas are identified in time for sale of season tickets, etc., for
    next season.

        In addition to the above, the following points were also agreed between
    the League and the Government:-

        a )    All Clubs are required to submit detailed local plans-for dealing
               with the management and control of home and away supporters as per
               the attached document. These plans must be produced as soon as
               possible and they must be drawn up in consultation with the local
               police, local British Transport Police, the local authority and
               other relevant organisations such as local coach operators and
               recognised supporters clubs. These plans will be available to the
               F.A. in the event of a disciplinary commission.

C       b)     The League, the Football Association and the clubs, with advice
               from the local Police, will consider the need for all ticket
               arrangements at particular matches.

        c)     The League will commission a study by independent consultants to
               report-on the scope, costs and benefits/disadvantages of a
               reciprocal membership scheme embracing all 92 League Clubs. The
               Association of Chief Police Officers have agreed to assist with the
               advice on this study.

        d)     Football Trust grants will be made available to Division Three and
               Four Clubs for the installation of closed circuit television
               depending on the particular needs of individual clubs. Clubs who
               have not yet applied should review their requirements.

        e)     The League and the Football Association will support and promote the
               development of family enclosures and other initiatives designed to
               establish closer links between clubs and their communities.




        The Management Committee need your urgent co-operation in order to be able
    to report back to the Government at the earliest opportunity.

                                   Yours sincerely,




                                        ere.
