                LONDON FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS


                 MEETING - CONFERENCE ROOM


                  WEDNESDAY 14TH MAY 1986




                   REPRESENTING - POLICE



A. YOUNG Esq. LIB                       Commander A8
J. LAWSON                               Superintendent A8
                                        Police Constable A8
                                        Deputy Head of Finance
B. KING                                 Chief inspector BTP (LRT)




          REPRESENTING LONDON FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS


                                    -   Charlton Athletic F.C.
                                    -   Chelsea F.C.
                                    -   Crystal Palace F.C.
                                    -   Fulham F.C.
                                    -   Millwall F.C.
                                    -   Orient F.C.
                                    -   Orient F.C.
                                    -   Tottenham Hotspur F.C.
                                    -   West Ham F.C.
                                    -   West Ham F.C.
                                    -   Wimbledon F.C.
                                    -   Wembley Stadium
                                        (Chief Security Officer)
                                    -   Wembley Stadium




ABSENT - representatives from Football League, Arsenal F.C.,
Brentford F.C., and Queens Park Rangers
The meeting opened at 2.40 pm with an address by Commander YOUNG
on the statistical information on disorder with arrests being
down by 41% over 1984/85 season.

He continued with a brief outline on operation "Own Goal" at
Chelsea F.C.- and a noticeable decline in Hooliganism since the
arrest of ringleaders.  At present they are in custody awaiting
committal proceeding on various conspiracy charges.  Their
passports have been seized - which should preclude their atten­
dance at the World Cup in Mexico.

Commander YOUNG thanked Chelsea F.C. for their co-operation with
local Police during the 'Own Goal' operation, expressing the hope
that other clubs will be similarly helpful if required.

CCTV

Superintendent LAWSON addressed the meeting on the installation
of CCTV, at those grounds eligible.

All Clubs should have, by now, put out tenders for the work to be
done.

Those who are awaiting replies, p lease 'chase up' the tenders,
and inform                      |, of the results.  Work, we
understand would take about two weeks to install the equipment.

CONTROL OF ALCOHOL

Commander YOUNG spoke of the speculation in the press about the
relaxing of the alcohol bans at Football matches and emphasised
it was mere speculation.  There are moves afoot to relax the
Control of Alcohol - but only before and after games.  NOT During
matches.  Commander YOUNG emphasised that the amendation of the
Bill was, at present, in the Committee Stage so there is a long
way to go before it becomes law.

One Club who erected curtains in Executive boxes are NOT within
the spirit of the act and as other Clubs were complying with
instructions, so must ALL Clubs.

         I
         - Millwall - queried the boarding up of their Exec,
boxes, the query was answered by Commander YOUNG.

EXCLUSION ORDERS

Mr. YOUNG informed the Forum there is to be an Exclusion Order
introduced as a statutory instrument in the forthcoming Public
Order Bill, which will give Police a power of arrest for those
Hooligans banned by Court from entering ANY football ground.

_____________ (CPFC) asked if this applied to away Clubs.
Mr. YOUNG answered this would be the case.
                                     -3-


    WORLD CUP ~ MEXICO

    Mr. YOUNG addressed the meeting briefly on what the U.K. Police
    Forces were doing to stop the Hooligan Element travelling to
    Mexico  for the forthcoming World Cup.

    SPECIAL SERVICE AGREEMENTS

    Mr. YOUNG i n t r o d u c e d | -      Deputy Head of Finance to
    address the meeting on the Force's Special Service Agreements
    with London Clubs.               Opened his address by informing
    the meeting that the Metropolitan Police charge the following
    venues for use of Police - those being the Palace of Westminster
    - Houses of Parliament, Heathrow Airport among others, Football
    Clubs.

#   He stressed that changes made to Clubs were set by the Home
    Office and were direct instructions to the Metropolitan Police,
    who had no choice in the matter where as with County Forces, The
    Chief Constables had the last say on Special Service Agreements,
    having been advised by the Home Office.

                  :ontinued by informing the Forum he had been tasked
    to recover as much of the Costs as possible.   The Annual cost for
    a season is about £1,000,000.   The Force was still owed some
    £150,000 which was why the Interest clause was inserted into
    contracts to deter 'slow payers'.

    The Commissioner   had been given permission by the Home Office to
    take 'persistent   offenders' to Court for the recovery of payments
    due, and the end   result may be the application to the Courts for
    the 'winding up'   of such Clubs.

    Should Clubs wish to apply for changes in charges they must apply
    to the Home Office. As far as the numbers of Police Officers
    solely employed inside a ground, this was a matter for discussion
    between the Clubs and local Chief Police Officers.


    ALL TICKET GAMES

    Mr. YOUNG expressed the view of Police that all ticket matches
    did not work, and placed an additional burden on manpower resour­
    ces.  He stated he had let the F.A. know these said views.

    He went on to congratulate both Wimbledon and Charlton on their
    promotion to the 1st Division.

              ^Wimbledon) pointed out there would have to be changes
    and because of the ground at Wimbledon, there would have to be
    certain ALL TICKET games in the forthcoming season.

    This was accepted by Mr. YOUNG, and any changes would be a matter
    for agreement.
______________(Chelsea) asked the Chairman if it were possible
under the Special Service Agreement to have a three tier category
of matches i.e. problem matches, possible problem matches and
normal/low matches.

Mr. YOUNG stated that the Home Office felt this was unnecessary,
and that the two tier category would stay.

All representatives of the Clubs, present, believed the liaison
with their local Police was good, due to the fact that most
Senior Officers had been stationed in their areas, long enough
for good relationships to have developed.


MORNING KOs

Mr. YOUNG asked those present for their assistance in the
forthcoming season when arranging Bank Holiday matches.
All all matches in London should be morning kick offs if this
would help re the deployment of manpower, especially when other
Public Order events were taking place.  He cited Easter as an
example.  Mr. YOUNG also asked that consideration be given to
other London Club fixtures when rearranging postponed matches.


BRITISH TRANSPORT POLICE   (LRT)

Chief Inspector KING addressed the forum on the problems facing
the Policing of the Underground railway system, when evening
matches are being played.  He urged Clubs to consider other Clubs
fixtures, as mentioned by Mr. YOUNG when rearranging postponed
matches.  He cited February 1985, when Wimbledon were set to play
West Ham on 16.02.85 in the FA Cup 5th Round.   (This game was
postponed due to snow and ice.   It was eventually played 4th
March 1985, as was Chelsea's game with Sunderland in Milk Cup
Semi-Final - also a re-arranged fixture, causing disorder around
the Earls Court and Parsons Green areas).

OTHER BUSINESS

          uestioned the type of information being passed in
respect of MILWALL'S away fixtures,            explained the
rationale behind his work.

After some general discussion the meeting closed at 4.00 pm.




PREPARED BY
