                                                             0(-\AU.t       <£ Cu/
                                                                 '      LK/i/i'T
                               who had lost the tie by six goals, to one,
                              sed to their Goalkeeper by a spectator.' ^

                  .....cuiuers or'the Protest Sub-Committee were" of’(the';^ Vst
         opinion that the result, of. the match was influenced ^bjrthe
         action of a spectator that caused injury; to the Burton, Albion FC
         Goalkeieper and the decision to order that the match be
         replayed behind Closed Doors at Derby County FC on Monday
         14th January, 1985 was confirmed.                         :          .
 ;d) ‘That the match was postponed due to the Derby;Co FC .Ground
      being unfit-and was subsequently played atyCoventry.City FC on ,
      Wednesday 16th January,.1985 behind Closed Doors; Leicester • ■
      City FC defeated Burton Albion FC by one goal; to nil;

SEMI-FINAL TIES

    a)   The following Minutes were received from the Match & Grounds
         Committee Meeting held on 17th October 1984.

A        MINUTE 17b - SEMI-FINAL TIES - FA CHALLENGE CUP

         "The Committee considered financial returns in respect of the
          Semi-Final Ties in the 1983/1984 Challenge Cup Competition.
          Following a lengthy discussion it was agreed to recommend 1that the
          payment to the staging Club for such matches be reduced from
          15% to 107o and that an Agreement be drawn up by the Office setting
          out the exact terms of the hire of the Stadium."

         "The Committee again considered venues, for Semi-Final Ties but
          reiterated its view that the current system was preferable to any
          alternative which had been put forward. While it was felt that
          playing both Semi-Final Ties at Wembley Stadium would affect the
          unique appeal of the FA Cup Competition it was agreed that the
          possibility of playing one Semi-Final Tie at Wembley if other
          suitable venues in the London area could not be found should
          not be discounted."

          MINUTE 28 - GUESTS AT FA MATCHES
          "That, notwithstanding Club practice, The Football Association would
          inform any Club staging a match on behalf of The Football Association
          that provision be made for a mixed tea room."

    b)    The Committee agreed with the above minutes but could not
          support the views contained in the last sentence of the second
          paragraph of(Minute 17b regarding the playing of a Semi-Final
          at Wembley Stadium if no suitable venue was available in London
          as this vjould create an unfair advantage „for the Final Tie.

MILLWALL FC
          Correspondence from Millwall T C concerning visiting Clubs'
          supporters attending Challenge Cup Ties was received.
          The Committee were satisfied that the Competition Rules should
          not be altered to restrict visiting;Club supporters attending
          Challenge Cup Ties.                                           -
