                                                                                             London EC4M 7JA
                                                                                             Telephone 01-606 6677
 Fax Transmittal Form                                                                        Telex 263396



 To:                                                                                          Date:     2 Ju n e 1989

 Company:                  Football Association                                               Time:

 Country:                                                                                     Fax No:

 From:

Direct fax lines:

TCyou do not receive all the pages, please telephone or telex immediately




      Please find attached a suggested draft letter that can be sent by
      the FA to the secretary of the enquiry.

      I hope that the suggestion of a joint submission will not prove
      to be a stumbling block for the Committee. Please let me know if
      you have any comments on the draft.
      Regards




A l i s t o f p a r t n e r s ’ n a m e s i s a v a i l a b l e at t h e a b o v e a d d r e s s
DRAFT LETTER TO SECRETARY TO INQUIRY


Dear

Thank you for your letter of 23 May. I confirm that the
Football Association wishes jointly with the Football
League to submit written material :.r. ■  •■.-tion with the


 We^note the suggested timetable. May we enquire whether
 Lord Justice Taylor intends to make any recommendations
Tn~a**‘report to be issued after the conclusion of the
 first stage, and if so whether he will take into account
          material submitted for the second stage. If-'Effect
                 intends to issue a report after the first
■stage wETcn“ c3ntains no recommendations, then we would
 prefer to have more time for our written submissions,
^say, until the end of June. If on the other hand,
        --            intends that his report on the first
 stage"sfiould contain some recommendations, then we would
 respectfully ask him to take account of the written
 submissions. For example, we are preparing submissions
 on issues such as perimeter fencing, pre-match
 entertainment, increased seating, ticket touts as
 veil as membership schemes and ID cards. If
         Is willing to take account of our writfferT
 submissions in his first stage report, then we shall do
 our utmost to meet the proposed timetable, although we
 think that we may be a few days late. You will
 appreciate that until recently, we have had to
 concentrate on dealing with the statements required for
 the first stage, but we are now preparing for the second
 stage.

I confirm that the FA would be very pleased to discuss
with                     any points arising out of the
written submissions.

Yours sincerely
