                U N I O N D E S A S S O C I A T I O N S E U R O P 6 E N N E S D E FO O T B A L L
                                0 3 1 / 3 2 17 »                                                        A O T . T t L t a * . : U EFA
                T tL E X 3 3 T9! U C P A /C H                                   U K   P O » T A lX i e . C H - » 0 0 0 B E R N E 19




                                                                       To th t UEFA Ha^er Associations
                                                                       and to the clubs participating In
    No 23                                                              the UEFA Club Competitions 1985/86
                                          n
                                                         K.

                                                     h 'i 'j

                                                     -    . \ - :V .




V D tr* R M r i n e i                         Hoxm
                                                                                  July 24, 1985


   Security Measures to avoid croud Incidents at UEFA Competition matches

   Dear Sirs,
   Only a few days after the Brussels tragedy, th e J e rrib le scenes of which were
   presented 1n detail to Millions of television viewers, the Executive Committee
   of UEFA net for an extra-ordinary meeting and took various decisions which are
   known to you. Among others, the Committee announced measures in order to
   reinforce the security Inside and around the stadiums.
   UEFA’s 1nwned1ate action
   A Commission of Study for security matters was set up. The task of the
   Committee was f i r s t of all to review the existing security provisions. This
   work was tackled without delay and the drafts of the new versions of the
   booklet:
       1. Order and Security 1n the stadia - Final tie s and high risk matches
          (Category A Matches)
       2. Order and Security 1n the stadia (Category B Matches)
  will be submitted to the Executive Committee for approval on August 20; you
  will receive copies of the booklets early in Septaifcer.
  He wish to draw your attention to the fact th at the provisions have been made
  ■o re rigid and th at moreover the brochure which was applicable in the past for
  final tie s only, has now been extended also to Mjh risk Batches. This means
  th a t, especially as organizers of UEFA Competitions Matches, you will be
  vested with an even higher responsibility as th is was the case In the past.
  However, the responsibilities of the public authorities are clearly laid down
  at the same time.
In th is context we refer also to the provisions of Article 8, para 1 of the
Regulations of the UEFA Club Competitions, according to which the stadiums
must conform to the security prescriptions of the competent civil authorities.
These provisions are s t i l l of vital Importance. We hope that the stric te r
provisions of the brochure "Order and security In the stadia* will further
Intensify the required co-operation and the contacts between sports and civil
authorities In security M tters.
There cannot be any doubt that a decisive reduction of the risk of crowd
disturbances can only be achieved by an Impeccable co-operation between sports
and public authorities. Incidents such as in Brussels wist not be allowed to
happen again i f we wish to spare irreparable damage to football in general and
to our competitions in particular.

Co-operation UEFA/Council of Europe
At the beginning of June the sport section of the Council of Europe asked for
UEFA's co-operation 1n a working group entrusted with the elaboration of a
European convention to combat spectator violence in sport. The undersigned, or.
behalf of UEFA, accepted th is invitation and the document drawn up by the
working group was accepted immediately afterwards by the sports ministers of
the member countries of the Council of Europe. The convention will now be
submitted to the governments of the member states for signature and
ra tific a tio n . This document establishes the separate but complementary
responsibilities of governments and sports organizations for the undisturbed
organization of the sports competitions. The provisions of the convention were
to a large extent taken Into account by the above mentioned Commission of
Study when drawing up the new versions of the brochure "Order and security 1n
the stadia". Enclosed we are sending a copy of the convention to all member
associations of the countries of the Council of Europe.
In th is context we wish to mention that UEFA participated already 1n 1983 1n a
working group of the Council of Europe on the same subject when the
recommendation R (84) 8 was elaborated. This was done to a great extent on the
basis of the UEFA booklet being in force since 1976. The recommendation was
accepted by the Committee of Ministers 1n March 1984. The more
Incomprehensible and regrettable 1s therefore today the failure of the public
authorities at the final in Brussels.

Further measures by UEFA
In the future a Committee which has not yet been appointed, will study all
■a tte r s concerning stadium constructions and Installations, in particular with
regard to the security aspects and will also set up guide lines to be
followed.
Although, In accordance with Article 8, para 1 of the Regulations of the UEFA
Club Competitions the stadiums must conform to the security prescriptions of
the competent civ il authorities, 1t Is hoped that these guide lines will bring
about an Improvement of the stadiums. In many cases th is will not be possible
without financial help from the public authorities.
I t will also be the task of the Cowrittee to f omul ate concrete conditions to
be observed for the selection for the future final tie s of UEFA Competitions.
We are convinced that you will have understanding for these Measures. The
European Competitions are at stake. In order to safeguard th eir future
everybody's support 1s required. The UEFA President and the Executive
Committee thank you for your active co-operation.
Kind regards,

                                             Yours sincerely,
                           :    :           UNION KS ASSOCIATIONS
                               •*           EURpPEENNES DE FOOTBALL
                                            Tj>e Genyal Secretary,^_______


                                             nans uangertej


Enclosure:
- 1 Convention (to the associations of the countries of the Council of Europe)


Copy for Information to:
-   Executive Committee of UEFA
-   Organizing Committee of the UEFA Club Competitions
-   Organizing Committee of the European Football Championship
-   Juridical Bodies of UEFA
-   Committee for Non-Amateur and Professional Football
-   European Members of the FIFA Executive Committee
-   FIFA, Zurich
