                      OBSERVATIONS ON FA CUP SEMI-FINAL

                       LIVERPOOL -v- NOTTINGHAM FOREST

              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC - SATURDAY 15TH APRIL 1989




First thought, prior to the match starting was the small area allocated to the
Liverpool fans. The Kop was squashed with a good 25 minutes to go before the
match was due to start.

As the match commenced, the Kop moved en masse and police were taking out some
of the fans by the gate at the front of the Kop. It was not apparent why,
immediate thoughts were of trouble, but there appeared to be no violence. At
the same time, other fans were trying to climb the side fences to get out of
the Kop to the side stands. Others were being pulled up to the seated area.
The people coming out of the gate were dazed and limping and sitting down
trying to catch their breath. One policeman walked onto the pitch to stop the
match.

More troops of police appeared and people were spilling out of the gate. It
then became obvious to me that there were seriously injured people. Mouth to
mouth resuscitation and heart massage was being administered to many 'still'
figures. Some police were resuscitating, but many were friends. One St Johns
Ambulance was visible. Total chaos was evident.

More police marched in and after approximately 30 minutes, other ambulances
could be heard. The fans started to ferry the injured to the north gate end
where the ambulances were situated. They carried the injured on torn down
sponsor boards.

I could not see any medical aids, eg oxygen, stretchers or qualified medical
people, apart from 2 St Johns Ambulance people.

The only words over the loudspeaker were 'Could the fans on the pitch please
move off it'. They were not told where to go.

Once I realised the severity of the situation and that many of the fans were
dead, I did not want to stay, so I left. I followed                  FA
Regional Coach, North West) out of the stadium.

Leaving Sheffield, I observed the stream of ambulances coming and going to the
hospital.
