                       THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

                       THE F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL
                  PLAYED AT OLD TRAFFORD, MANCHESTER

                    NOTTINGHAM FOREST V LIVERPOOL
                  SUNDAY 7 MAY 1989 KICK-OFF 1.00 pm




INTRODUCTION: This was the re-scheduled semi-final abandoned at Hillsborough
after six minutes following tragic events in which 95 people died. One
minute silence in memory of those who died at Hillsborough was observed
with reverence after which the crowd burst into enthusiastic support for
their teams.

Irwas a fine sunny and warm afternoon.

GROUND CAPACITY AND ATTENDANCE: For this game the certified capacity
of 56,385 was reduced to 51,000. The capacity on the terraces was reduced
by 15% to improve the comfort for standing supporters. Liverpool returned
about 7,500 of their allocation of ticket and Nottingham Forest returned
about 5,000. The actual attendance was 38,000. The game was televised
live on BBC.

LOCATION OF GROUND: South West of the city centre adjacent to the A56
Chester Road in a mainly industrial area. The Bridgewater canal is a
boundary on the North side of the stadium and the Trafford Park Industrial
Estate is to the East.

ACCESS TO THE GROUND: The M63 orbital motorway, which links the M62 and
M56 to the South West of the Greater Manchester conurbation, has three
junctions giving access to roads leading to the stadium and the M602 spur
provides access from the M62 North of the stadium.

Supporters from Merseyside have a choice of several routes but I was told
the M602 was heavily congested less than 30 minutes from the scheduled
kick-off. Supporters from Nottingham area probably picked up the A6 to
link up with the M63 South of the city. The police received reports of
8 Nottingham coaches delayed in heavy traffic on the A6. People on these
coaches alighted at the ground to save the few minutes walk from the coach
park.

In the circumstances, the F.A. agreed to a request from the police to
delay the kick-off by 15 minutes. This was a sensible decision in the
special circumstances and as far as I am aware there was understanding
from the crowd already in the stadium.

There have been occasions in the past when the kick-off has been delayed
because of unavoidable and serious delays for large numbers of people
travelling to well attended games. It is right that this prudent facility
should be available. However, post Hillsborough, senior police officers
may be inclined to be over cautious and ask for a delay simply because
there are queues of people outside the ground 10 minutes before kick-off.
I believe the police decision to delay the kick-off at Scunthorpe last
week was ill-considered and unnecessary. At Bolton on 27 March 1989,
I noted home supporters were still in pubs near the ground shortly before
kick-off. The computer controlled turnstile counter showed several hundred
home supporters entered the ground after kick-off.
ACCESS continued: Three special trains (550 capacity on each) from Liverpool
into Manchester (Victoria) from where they were conveyed by ’bus to the
ground. One of these trains broke down but there was only minimal delay
on arrival. Two special trains from Nottingham to Warwick Road (Old Trafford)
station within a few minutes walk from the ground.

Coaches from Liverpool were parked on Trafford Park Industrial Estate
and those from Nottingham near the Old Trafford Cricket ground. The parking
areas are within easy walking distance from different directions.

LAYOUT OF THE STADIUM: It is fully enclosed and covered. The Main Stand
runs the full length of one side of the pitch and in front is the shallow
Old Trafford Paddock. Opposite is the United Road Stand and Paddock and
to the right the Scoreboard End Stand and Terrace. To the left of the
Main Stand is the Stretford End Terrace which is more like a Spion Kop
but there are 1500 seats at the back of the terrace. In the corner to
the left of the Main Stand is the Stretford covered paddock. It is an
impressive stadium which has been re-built in stages since it was severely
damaged during the last war.

ALLOCATION OF SPACE: This was determined by the direction of travel of
the supporters. Liverpool was allocated the Stretford End and United
Road side and Nottingham Forest occupied the Main Stand and Scoreboard
End. The capacity was shared equally between both clubs.

TURNSTILES: There were 93 turnstile entrance points in operation which
were adequate for this all-ticket game. At no stage before kick-off did
I see more than a dozen people queuing at individual turnstiles. Many
supporters were sitting outside the ground relaxing in the sun and according
to the computer controlled turnstile counter there were only 29,500 in
the ground at 12.50 pm - this figure increased by 1000 in less than three
minutes. At 1 pm I walked around the outside of the stadium and there
were no queues. People were walking freely up to the turnstiles.

The approaches to the turnstiles were filtered at two places by a line
of mounted officers and a line of officers on foot. They were checking
that people had tickets for the game and also ensuring that supporters
were not walking towards the 'rival' turnstiles. A mix of rival supporters
on the concourse at the front of the stadium was unavoidable but there
was no problem.   Large 'Welcome' signs directed fans to appropriate turnstiles.

I wondered whether the people sitting in the sun were without tickets
but as the kick-off approached they made their way to the turnstiles.

The police had a special squad to deal with ticket touts. I was told
there were two or three but I didn't see them. Jack Crawford was at this
game and he was also present at Maine Road the day before when ticket
touts were selling tickets for the semi-final.

FENCING: Ladder type fencing with inward facing angle and lip to deter
climbing all around the perimeter. The 29 gates in the perimeter fence
were left open and manned by police. No stewards on the perimeter.

SEGREGATION: The stadium was divided diagonally and I saw no mix of rival
supporters. Rival fans were channelled in opposite directions after the
game to the coach parks and towards the railway stations.
                                          -   3   -




10      POLICE CONTROL ROOM: Purpose built and well positioned behind the seating
     ,,^in the Directors' Box. One radio channel covers the stadium and immediate
        environs. There is a spare base station/channel available for use in
        an emergency.

       It has the usual facilities including a V.D.U. of the computer controlled
       turnstile counter. It shows the number in each section and the total
       but the controller has to refer to a separate list to check % capacity.
       Some systems show capacity, number, and %.

11    C.C.T.V.: Five cameras - two inside the ground and three outside including
       one on top of a pole covering the main road approaches to the ground.
       For this game, the police also had available the cameras used by the club
       for recording matches played by United. The portable camera was used
       outside the ground.

12    OTHER FACILITIES FOR POLICE:  Reception and detention room beneath Main
       Stand. Prison Vans were placed at other locations for receipt of prisoners/
       ejections if required.

13    STEWARDS: The club operate a three tier system. Paid Fire Stewards covering
       all exits with their 'control' in the Police Control Room. I noted the
       Divisional Fire Officer was present for part of the time. The club also
       employ a security firm for certain parts of the stadium supervised by
       a retired police officer who works in close cooperation with police.
      There are also the usual ground stewards in bright yellow tabards supervised
       by a chief stewards and deputies. They are briefed by police. The stewards
      were in evidence around the ground but it is policy not to employ them
       on the perimeter - this is left to police.

14    INTOXICATING LIQUOR:   No public bars. I saw no drink related offences
      or evidence of anyone remotely under the influence of drink. There were
       plenty of discarded empty cans outside the stadium but for every one lager
      can there were a hundred Cola/Orangeade cans. The 1pm kick-off on a Sunday
      meant that drink was not a problem.

15    RACIAL:     One black player in each team - no problems.

16    POLICE/CLUB LIAISON:  Excellent. Mr Ken Merrett, Club Secretary, and
      Chief Superintendent Arthur Roberts work in close cooperation to the extent
      that matters requiring attention are often discussed by telephone from
      their homes. It was clear that the Chairman/Chief Executive of Manchester
      United took a keen personal interest in the arrangements for this game.

17     POLICING: About 800 police were on duty in connection with this game
       including a large contingent of mounted officers. Chief Superintendent
       Roberts is experience in policing games at Old Trafford and the Superintendents
       in charge of sectors are also experienced. A.C.C. Phillips was also present
       in uniform. The 38,000 crowd was smaller that many of the gates at Old
       Trafford this season. Only a handful of arrests/ejections.

18    CROWD BEHAVIOUR: I would have been surprised and disappointed if the
      crowd behaviour had been otherwise than excellent. Although the memory
      of Hillsborough was ever present, the fine warm weather produced a carnival
      atmosphere. An entertaining game with Liverpool the deserved winners
      by 3 - 1. Forest didn't play to their potential and the mix-up in defence
      leading to the first goal seemed to set the pattern.


      K .J.   Evans                                          8 May 1989
