                                         4 August 1989




 FA/HILLSBOROUGH

             phoned. We were obtaining the report at 9.30
and then sending someone straight round to the FA with it.
Of course he could have a copy at lunchtime.

The FA were bound to get some media interest today and
       said that although^ it went without saying the FA
snouia hot make any admissions on liability. Neither should
they say anything that would prejudice the insurers '
subsequent conduct of any legal action. He said he was only
mentioning that to me on instructions.   I said I would
reiterate the point with the FA and that   I did not think the
FA's liability was likely to be an issue   raised in the
report. However I would make Graham Kelly and Glen Kirton
aware of the insurers' comments.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation

Subsequently attending        again who said that he had
spoken to a partner of his who listened to Radio 4.
Apparently Graham Kelly had been saying things pre-empting
the report which were not very helpful. There was no need
to do that.  I said I would get back to the FA because I had
not made contact with either Glen or Graham yet.

Subsequently speaking to Glen Kirton who had spoken to
Graham Kelly who was on his way up to Liverpool to givesome
more interviews.  He had not seen the TV or listened to
Radio 4. He would call him on his car phone.    I said the
points to note were that he was not to say anything about
anyone else's liability and he was certainly not to say
anything about the FA's liability.  The report was helpful
in that respect in any event. He should concentrate on the
recommendations and could say that the FA's recommendations
were borne out.

Glen Kirton said that our team were to be congratulated to
the extent of 6 out of 7 of the recommendations were
implemented word for word. We were still getting the report
copied. Apparently there was no reference to alcohol in it.
We agreed to speak soon and he would make sure Graham knew
that the insurers were getting jumpy.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
