                                           31 May 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH

I spoke to

1.   We needed            ' report on the York Sunderland game
26 March 1988. It was not in ITQiff’s edited crowd control
file, it was not in the FA files and it was not in the
disciplinary file on the game itself. I explained what
happened at the game and that the disciplinary commission of
which ®wanaf was a member took no action because there was    mt
any hooliganism. The answer as to why no action was taken
was because the FA's role was not extended to safety
matters. |     agreed with that and I mentioned the Private
Eye article of 26 May which she would be receiving in a fax
shortly. She said she would look out KSto          report# for
me.

2.With regard to the Soccer Superstars Scheme we needed more
info from         That was being sent to me. This was in
order that       could be briefed and so that ffSirknew what
to say publicly.

3.   With regard to the FSA petition I confirmed witM
that ftc'MSW'was the deputy secretary at the FA in ,.€3?ofcjKR&i
day. She would need to speak to          and ask him what he
did about the petition and why it was sent to the police.
She said she would. This was so 'WS&SQ could similarly be
briefed. His answer might well be*it was before my time I
don't know what happened but nothing from the papers seems
to have happened*?’ It may be better if he could refer to
having got some information from SRSHSp-

4.   Would it be possible for her to send me an up-to-date
copy of the Football Supporters Bill as HMSO were taking a
week to get copies? She confirmed she would.

5.   I also asked for an agenda for tomorrow and a list of
those members who were going to be present. She thought
that had been faxed over to us and we should phone again if
we did not have a copy.

Engaged 20 minutes including dictation


Subsequently «esv?SSRffiV on telephone. We updated his
statement. We redrafted some of the paragraphs and made
some minor amendments which appear on the new draft. I also
asked him for a copy of the York Sunderland Report of
26 March 1988. He thought WSgeW           had been a good
witness but was not very happy at the Duckenfield gave his
evidence^from a police point of view.

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation


Subsequently^     telephoned.   The following points emerged.

1.   iPHf? asked        sne particular point as to why he
had not asked for the match to be postponed. His answer was
incredible - he had never thought of it.      had not put
the boot in.

2.                   "fthe Liverpool keeper had apparently
given a statement      saying that he thought the FA was to
blame for not switching the ends and also for not playing
the game at Manchester,              was not able to give
evidence and providing we could make sure that his
statement^ submitted to      "    '       ‘ ■was not made
public we would lieflron it. There was no/ point asking to
call               "* ir in making a song and dance about it.
We agreed that was the way to play it as long as the matter
was not made public. Even *if it wa^ we agreed that it might
be better for him to say it in the statement which we
disagreed with^ rather than him saying in the witness box and
get more publicity.
3.   They      had the rest of the senior police officers to
go through and then 44 officers on the grounds! who are all
going to give evidence because all the fans gave evidence!
They would be bringing out the individual bad behaviour.
Then we had the clubs from the senior stewards downwards
which would last nearly a week and then •JJallipitis for the
ambulancemen had 20 witnesses. We then had the local
authority and fire service.   Realistically JGW did not
think we would get on before 19 June/if then.

He agreed that fCelCJ/lf ought to come up a day or so before to
go through the ancillary points to his evidence in chief
which he was likely to be asked questions about.

He thought it would be a good idea if he came up to watch
               giving evidence not merely because some of
their evidence coincided on the day itself but also because
he would get an opportunity of seeing how he dealt with some
of the barristers. I said that was a very good idea and I
would mention it to’j

Engaged 30 minutes including dictation
