       Competitions Dept



24 February 1989



Sent To:    Arsenal FC            Manchester United FC
            Aston Villa FC        Nottingham Forest FC
            Birmingham City FC    Sheffield United FC
            Chelsea FC            Sheffield Wednesday FC
            Everton FC            Tottenham Hotspur FC
            Leeds United FC       West Bromwich Albion FC
            Manchester City FC




Dear

FA CHALLENGE CUP COMPETITION
SEASON 1988 - 89
SEMI-FINAL TIES
SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989

As is customary this time of the Season, I am writing to
enquire whether your Club would be interested in staging
an FA Challenge Cup Semi-Final Tie on Saturday 15 April
1989 or a replay during the following mid-week.

I would inform you that you may charge 10% of all gross
gate receipts, less V.A.T., for the hire of the ground.
I would also like to take this opportunity of clarifying
the position with regard to Executive Boxes. For Boxes
leased out for the season, we would require a payment equal
to the number of seats at top ticket price, while in the
case of Boxes hired out on the one-off basis for the match,
your Club will be entitled to retain 50% with the rest
being paid into match receipts. These amounts, however, should
not be included in the gross gate receipts when calculating
the fee for the hire of the ground.



continued
In the event of your Club playing in a Semi-Final Tie, would
you still be prepared to take the other Semi-Final Tie on
your ground the same day, bearing in mind the administrative
cost involved?

Please indicate if your Club has the necessary insurance cover
for matches of this nature. Clubs should also note the
requirements of Challenge Cup Rule 26(b) whereby the two
competing Clubs shall be entitled to 50% of the tickets for
sale. The Association in its absolute discretion may vary these
allocations.

Details of spectator segregation should be provided together
with details of the present ground capacity, number of seats
and standing places also indicating if safety fencing is
provided around the pitch.

Clubs should also note that any special areas such as Executive
Vice-President, family or any similar seated or standing area
cannot be retained by the staging Club. All parts of the ground
must be allocated entirely for the two competing Clubs with
the exception of Directors Box, which will be controlled by thi
Office.

An early reply would be appreciated as the Challenge Cup
Committee will be selecting the venues at their meeting to be
held on Monday 20 March 1989 and it is essential for the
above information to be prepared for the Committee prior to
the meeting.

Yours sincerely




S R Clark
Competitions Secretary
