                                                                        £C tr #5
                                                                    /     ?K.l"
                                        C OUNTY
                                                                    If


              EAST RIDING COUNTY FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                      President andF.A. Council Member: H. PADGET, Esq.
                               67 Ellesmere Avenue, Hull, HU8 9BS
                                        Telephone 75167
                                       24th April, 1989

           The qhief ^ecutive,
           The JJootball Association             PPS        JMC         14
           16 Lancaster Gate,
           LONDON W2 3LW

           Dear Graham,
                      I travelled to Sheffield for the P.A.
           Cup Semi pinal with a friend, via the City Centre.
*          The traffic was fairly heavy and we eventually parked
           on a grass verge about three quarters of a mile
           from the ground about 1.15'p.m.

                      At 'that time the density of the crowd
           was not too great who moved along in an orderly way
           albeit noisily singing, it was noticeable that every
           public house en route was packed with many standing
           outside but no drunkeness was apparent.    We were
           asked several times if we had any tickets, largely
           by young teenage bo^rwfte did not appear to be
           accompanied by adults.
                      Entrance to the ground was comparatively
           easy and there was no hassle.
                       We tookour seats at about 2.40 p.m..
           When the trouble beganwe assumed that some spectators
           were endeavcfring to invade the pitch by climbing over
           the fence and we saw some policemen trying to

^   ....
           prevent entry cr pushing them back.

                        The seriousness of the situation did not
           strike us until spectators were being stretchered
           off, nor did we realise that there were any deaths
           until informed in the private lounge that there were
           4 , later 11 and then 50.
         EAST RIDING COUNTY FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                President andF.A. Council Member: H. PAJDGET, Esq.
2                      67 Ellesmere Avenue, Hull, HU8 9BS
                                  Telephone 75167

        The Public Address system was unsa&isfactory as,
    with the exception of the announcement by Kenny
    Dalgleish, when the volume was greatly increased,
    it was impossible to hear what was being said.
    I am sure      of the crowd were" as unaware as we
    were of what was happening.
         I enclose a:- cutting from our locel paper.
       I an sorry that I cannot give much inf ormation but
hope this might possibly^a^little.

                   Yours sincerely.
