Meeting with South Yorkshire Police 18th June 1986.

Present:     R. H. Chester, S. L. Lane (SWFC) C h i e f S.mf r            m r       c
                     r T           .     „  „  ,   ,Lnier oupt B. M o l e , S u pt J.         Freeman
             C h i e f I n s p e c t o r D. Beale, (South Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e ) .   ^r e e m a n ’

Matters Raised:-

       Stewards                         The Club will update Stewards Instructions to take
                                        in relevant details from Popplewell Report.
                                        Representatives from South Yorkshire Police would
                                        attend the instructional evening for Stewards which
                                        will take place on 19th August.
                                        South Yorkshire Police will brief Stewards prior to
                                        every home game. This will be done by the Inspector
                                        in charge of each area of the Ground.
                                        South Yorkshire Police requestecf-'that all turnstiles,
                                        but particularly those at Leppings Lane, to be opened
                                        earlier. The Club agreed to do everything possible
                                        to ensure this.

Access at Leppings Lane                 R. H. Chester aqreed to discuss with Dr. Eastwood and
                                        the Board the possibility of a wider door in the wall
                                        inside the Leppings Lane area, and more permenant
                                        barriers for use on limited areas.
                                        South Yorkshire Police requested more Programme Seller:
                                        in the Leppings Lane area, both inside and outside the
                                        Ground.

              West Stand                South Yorkshire Police requested that a Steward be
                                        made available to patrol the front of the West Stand t;
                                        prevent visiting fans throwing their tickets over.
                                        SWFC to sell tickets from Row 7 upwards.
                                        The possiblity of removing certain crash barriers at
                                        the Leppings Lane standing area was discussed, as this
                                        would assist the flow of fans into the Ground. This
                                        matter would have to be taken up when the inspection
                                        of the Ground relative to the issuing of the Safety
                                        Certificate takes place.
                                                                    '                 11


Correct Money Turnstiles               South Yorkshire Police requested that the Club have
                                       "Correct Money Only" turnstiles for entry onto the Kop
                                       to speed up entry time. R. H. Chester agreed to look
                                       into the possibility in relation to the number of turn­
                                       stiles available.

   Keys Around Ground                  South Yorkshire Police requested that the keys
                                       allowing access around the Ground be standardised.
                                       R. H. Chester agreed to do this and to provide
                                       8 sets for the use of South Yorkshire Police.


           Plan of Ground              South Yorkshire Police requested that the update plans
                                       of the Ground showing positions of new turnstiles
                                       should also show the positions of fire points.
                                       R. H. Chester confirmed that this would be done.
