    Mote of Meeting on 26 May 19 8 9


    FA/Hillsborough


    Those present;


    John Dyson QC 8
    Jo Rickard'           )    Freshfields



     raham Kelly          )
     len Kirton           )    FA




    1,   '%John Dyson updated everyone on what had been taking
         place in Sheffield recently.    'The Judge is going to
          write a preliminary report at the end of stage 1 taking
          into account only what was in stage 1.      "Dysbrft was
          concerned that stage 2 material would therefore not be
          included in the preliminary recommendations.        We
         discussed the letter from                 the Secretary to
         the Inquiry!, and said we would reply on the basis that
         the FA would try and get the written submissions in by
         12 June and attempt to go for an extension.        F ’s would
         draft the latter.
)
    2,   The FA told us that the Committee had been set up but
          there were representations being made by STack Dunnett
         of the Football League.    Mr Scott; and Mr Noades may
         represent the Football League on the Committee.             The FA
         had Jeff Thompson, Barry Bright (Chief Executive of-
         Gillingham) and Noel Wright (a director of Liverpool
         Football Club)   as their representatives.


         The best possible course would be to have a joint
         document which the Football League agreed to but where
          the input was substantially the FA*s.    However, if
there was a divergence of views, the FA would have to
go their own way.


John Dyson 'updated us on the Police evidence given so
far.      Duckenfield^had been appalling.   The Police were
coming out as the principle villains of the piece.
Lord Justice Taylor often gave the impression of not
believing what he heard.      To that extent, the FA's
responsibility for the events was not, at the moment,
an issue other than on choice of grounds.             may be
pressed on the particular question of why they had not
chosen Manchester.


With regard to the cancellation of entertainment, it
had been cancelled in January 1989 and had appeared by
mistake in the blue booklet.      JD thought it was a
non-issue now.      It was not advertised in the programme.


Kelly may be asked for his personal view on things like
pre-match entertainment and questions of a general kind
more specifically related to stage 2, for instance
touts and drinking.     The questions may come from the
Judge himself.     They will probably be related to
problems peculiar to semi-finals.      We would have a
further briefing session with \Kel:£$| before his
evidence.     We are 2-3 weeks off our case at the moment.


John Dysctfl needed some help on the policy line he was
to take with the Club.      Did the FA regard itself as
competent on any question relating to crowd disorder
and not particularly on matters relating to safety?
Dyson was not clear as to the FA's role.      He had read
the disciplinary reports and noticed that the FA only
got involved in disciplining clubs where there had been
hooliganism and not necessarily where safety was at
issue..    For instance , they had heard evidence that
 there were 266 stewards at the game.    Did he cross
 examine them as to what they did?


 He referred to the game between QPR and West Ham on
 12 February 1988 where there had been a stoppage of the
match because spectators were on the pitch and the
problem of overcrowding.     The Disciplinary Commission
 of the FA took no action because there was no evidence
 of misconduct.    We examined Rule 24 of the Handbook.
The answer was that if there was crushing or
overcrowding there was no misconduct even if there had
been ground mismanagement.     We agreed that Rule 24 was
confined to disorder.     If Hillsborough had not resulted
in deaths there would have been no action taken against
the club for the overcrowding at Leppings Lane.
\'Dysori? would therefore not be adopting any higher
profile vis a vis the club with regard to cross
examination if the evidence was that there may have
been negligence.     The FA relied on the Local Authority,
the Police and other bodies on the safety aspects.            The
FA were only concerned with hooliganism and crowd
misbehaviour.     They had never got involved in safety..
The Spurs Wolves semi-final in 1981 resulted in no
action by the FA, similarly the Bradford fire.         They
did, however, monitor disorder by looking at the safety
certificates but did not attach any specific sanctions
bo them.


We discussed the Chelsea and Middlesborough game where
there had been outbreaks of disorder on the terraces
and a £75,000 fine imposed by the FA,      In that
instance, because there was disorder,     the FA had
criticised the stewarding,


The question then became whether we wanted to
reconsider whether the historical approach adopted by
       the FA was suitable      in the light of the inquiry.   It
       was agreed that the      FA would not be changing its role
       on crowd safety and we would confine our submissions on
       stage 2 to general matters viz a viz safety, not
       specifics,


11.   We then went into Glen Kir ton.*'# second draft of the
      FA* s submission on stage 2 of the inquiry in some
       detail,   The comments will appear on the all corrected
      version.       He would resubmit a draft to us on Monday and
      we would discuss it       at the first meeting of the
      Executive Committee       on Thursday 1 June 1989 at
       10.30 a m .


12.   John" Dyson left the meeting and we went on to discuss
      ‘'Julian Gibson-Wa:t^§|| faxed messages of last week and
      our responses.      With regard to the Soccer Super Skills
      Scheme, the matter had been discussed at the meeting of
      13 January and because there was no BBC coverage, the
      scheme was not proceeded with.       It was never
      publicised.      He did not why it was still in the blue
      booklet.       It was probably a mistake.


Time engaged:    ih hours    (inc dictation, travailing and
waiting)
