14 bh August, l>bS


r
...tr £>«cret&ry
;.I1 t'oowball League Clubs




Crowd Control

v.t- are about to ^r^barl; or. what is probably the zuost irportar.t
t>Cfa«on fur the gi;;c of fc.otl>r.ll since it began norc thar. c
Century ago.

Cur Clubs arc expelled from Europe and will not be readmitted
until wo can fciiov. that we have re-establishec control doiiistically.
English football will, therefore, be under tbfcecbosest scrutiny
in the coining year. Everyone involved with the gaae will wish to
play his part in what nust be described as a process of
rehabilitation. To assist in this and to lay down as clearly as
la possible in an inperfect world what our responsibilities are,
we have revised and greatly expanded our Meaorandua on Crowd .Control,
last issued in 1989. r Z enclose a oopy of this revised Memorandum.
Would you please ensure that its ocotents are brought to the
attention of *11 of your officials, staff and players. Z would
draw particular attention to those itw> dealing with the behaviour
of Club personnel. At a tis* «ban we are trying, through a eoncertdd
•dueational campaign, to bring about a change in attitude on the
part of spectators, it is sttarly assantial that the g s w Itself
projects tbs right iaags. this m u s that ovsryone oonnaotad with
football must be oonsctous at all tines of tbs — sd for integrity
in private dealings or whan appearing before ths public, tie nast
have sports— nship on and off tbs field. Ms anst not oritieiss
oach other publicly.
                                                        •sat/...
The Secretary                                   14th August, 1985
All Football Lsague Clubs



Ml asst loss no opportunity to prsssnt a unitsd frlsndly front
and it will greatly assist in this if tasas antsr ths fisld
togsthsr for all aatchss and finish aach gaae with ths usual
handshake.
Z an sure that vs ean rely on your co-operation in this. After
all, it is the very survival of ths gaae we all love that vs ars
talking abou^.
May I wish you a successful and trouble-free ssason.

Yours sincerely




£ A Croker
General Secretary
