To;   The yrime Minister.          From'
J*.A. ."Today" &
"Doncaster Star" Newspapers,
Methodist Secorder,
Nottingham rorest,Liverpool,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs.
                                                                    2 i APR 8?
Dear Sir/Madam,

           Re: HILLSBOROUGH 1'Ra OEDY. 15th April 1989.        --- --------


Unlike many of those who have been pontificating on the above disaster,! write
as one who was there - in a position very close to the action.I am a Nottingham
Forest supporter,but I am writing as objectively as possible.Seated on the .front
row on the side of the ground adjacent to the trouble area,! witnessed scenes
such as l've never seen before,nor ever hope to see again.This included seeing
people dying just     a few yards away,and one would like to express   the utmost
sympathy with the     families of the dead and injured.
My immediate impressions were that I was scared,sickened and saddened.
SCARED because at first I thought that this was just another case of
hooliganism.Many supporters were on the pitch,and one thought of it becoming
another "Heysel".
SICKENED as I watched Liverpool supporters running across the pitch - surrounded
by the dead,dying     and injured - still trying to stir up trouble.I can     never
understand that.I     came to the conclusion that they must be either mad     or drunk!
reople have said there was no hooliganism.      j.here wasJ I have never seen such
hatred on people's faces.only a strong police cordon across the pitch,plus a
lack of response from the Nottingham supporters,prevented this trouble
spreading.All of those officers in the cordon could otherwise have been helping
the sick and dying.
Here I raust point out that the behaviour of the Nottingham supporters was
impeccable,and should be commended. So too was that of the great majority of
the Liverpool fans - but - the Liverpool Club must aacept that they do have
a real hooligan problem which must be curbed.
5A.uD&N^D as I saw a young teenager - probably about 14 years old - die about
k yards away.i watched as the police gave him mouth to mouth resuscitation,
he was sick and seemed to be reviving - only to flop back deadilothers were
dyia,£ just a little further away.Bein^ accompanied by my daughter and a
12 years old boy l was constantly worried both for their safety and the effects
on them of what they wer» seeing.
      1      ,   •   •
- «




VONCU j h i u N :    bast year,i attended the corresponding natch,when there was no
trouble.U have in fact been a football supporter for over                years )
Uver the past few days i have been trying to think of the differences between
the two matches.it seems to me they are:-
1/. PuiiiDING:           Last year the police operation was brilliant - l wrote to them
afterwards to commend them.xhis year,for some unknown reason,it was just the
opposite.
2/m ALuOHOL. As I walked to the ground,! did so by the same route as most of the
Liverpool supporters.1 saw hundreds of them drinking Inside and outside public
houses.There were prominent notices near the ground advertising,"Food and drink
within 5 minutes of the ground1* 1 did not arrive at the ground until 2*3upm -
those 1 have mentioned were still in the pubsi This accounts for the great
pressure at the last moment - caused by people who could have been drinking
until 2,45pm and after,and thus more likely to be violent.it was not them but
the innocent ones who got there early who were crushed by the late-comers.This
seems to me a significant change from last year,whe» pubs had to close earlier -
now they can be open all hours.This trouble is one of the spin^offs we never
envisaged when that legislation went through.une feels that many pub^cans made
a quick,large profit that day - but at what cost?             Incalculable!!!

SUGGESTIONS FOK Tha rPTUKa:-
lj.       That to help prevent incidents like the Hillsborough Tragedy,all sales of
alcohol be banned within a radius of 5 miles of football grounds and for 2 hours
before the start of any 'all-ticket' match and that it be fully understood that
it is illegal to carry alcohol on coaches and trains to such matches.
2).       ihat we reconsider the removal of fences.This could increase the amount
of hooliganism.kather,these should be replaced by the rrench-style gates,or
grounds restricted to seated spectators.
J>). I have never been convinced about the value of I.D. Cards,but if these will
really help remove the hooligan element,then by all means let's try them.


                                    Yours sincerely,




                                                 2 1 APR S?
