T U K IO H I:
SHEFFIELD (0T42) 7M 22

                                                SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                   SNIG HILL
                                                       SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


J. H. BROWNLOW, Q.P.M.
CHICF CONSTAILE                                  3 June 1981

The Secretary (E A Croker Esq)
The Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
LONDON
02 3LW



Dear Sir

FA CUP SEMI-FINAL        - 11 APRIL 1981

I would refer to the FA Cup Semi-Final match between Wolverhampton
Wanderers Football Club and Tottenham Hotspur Football Club, held at
Hillsborough Stadium, the home of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, on
Saturday 11 April 1981.

As you will no doubt be aware many similar Semi-Final matches have been
held at this ground without previous problems. The stadium is issued with
a certificate under the provisions of the Safety in Sports Grounds Act 1975.
This limits the total capacity of the ground to 50,174. The area of the
Leppiiigs Lane enclosure has a capacity of 10,100.

Prion to the match itself, difficulties were envisaged because both sets
of supporters were obliged to use the Ml Motorway. This problem was added
to when a major road accident occurred on the Ml near to its junction with
the A38. The problem was exacerbated by a coach breaking down further along
the motorway, and by extensive road works. This set of circumstances
caused a large number of spectators, predominantly Tottenham Hotspur fans,
to be held up on the motorway for some 90 minutes. As you will appreciate
traffic jams built up and resulted in a sudden influx of large numbers of
football supporters to the area of the ground at around the time for the
start of the match when a fairly steady build up of support throughout the
afternoon could have been anticipated.

I now wish to outline an aspect of the problem which could have been avoided
and which should be anticipated for future similar occasions.

On the day before the Wolverhampton ticket allocation was put on sale to
the public, Tottenham Hotspur played Coventry City Football Club at Coventry
in a league match. Many Tottenham Hotspur supporters stayed overnight in
Coventry and travelled the short distance to Wolverhampton to obtain tickets
which were at a premium in London. Others also made the journey from London
to Wolverhampton on the Sunday. This completely defeated the spectator
policy which is put into effect at these matches and which places the largest
groups of standing supporters at opposite ends of the ground. Neither of
E A Croker Esq                    -   2   -                3 June 1981


the two participating Semi-Final clubs saw fit to inform the South
Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club or the Football
Association about this situation and in that event the mixing of supporters
was not properly catered for. The result of this was that some 400
Tottenham fans had to be removed from the Spion Rop, in the interests
of general safety and public order, and were accomodated in the Leppings
Lane end of the ground, which had been designated for use by Spurs
supporters.

The capacity at the Leppings Lane end is 10,100 and this obviously contains
a safety factor. At a previous match some 400 holders of forged tickets
gained entry into this part of the ground and were absorbed without any
apparent difficulty. However, on this date turnstile readings showed
that 10,435 people were admitted to this part of the ground.

A policy of packing spectators occurs at most football'grounds where
large crowds are in attendance so that all the available space is utilised.
On this occasion the Tottenham Hotspur fans, who had arrived early in the
day and taken up advantageous viewing points, refused to move into the
centre of this enclosure, thereby creating a jamming effect at the
extremeties of it. The late arrivals caused an immediate problem upon
gaining access to the Leppings Lane area because of rushing forward
immediately upon entering after Tottenham Hotspur had scored a goal soon
after kick off. This resulted in a number of crushing injuries on this
terrace including broken arms, legs and crushed ribs. In all, some 38
fans received treatment either at hospital or from the St John Ambulance
representatives present at the game.

As a result of this the safety gates at the front of the Leppings Lane
enclosure were opened and spectators at the front were allowed to go
onto the playing area perimeter track to relieve the pressure within the
terrace. Due to the problems being created by crushing, my officers also
refused access to the Leppings Lane enclosure to spectators waiting to
get in. In my view no other course of action could have been adopted in
the interest of public safety.

During the half time interval my officers attempted to move the spectators
who were standing or seated within the tracks around onto the normal
spectator areas. During this manoeuvre some rather foolish youngsters
did run onto the pitch but the situation was quickly brought under control
by officers within the ground.

In conclusion I would add that there were no other incidents either
inside or outside the ground other than those caused by the circumstances
I have described. The circumstances I have outlined have been discussed
at length and will be borne in mind in the planning of future similar
events. Discussions are to take place with my officers and officials
of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club regarding suggestions for obviating
the problems caused within the Leppings Lane terrace on this occasion.

Yours faithfully




Chief Constable
