                           THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


                          COMMITTEE ON CROWD CONTROL


                            Notes on Meeting held
                     at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2 on
                         Wednesday, 8th October, 1980.

Present:     Sir Harold Thompson (in the Chair), Messrs. R.W. Lord,
             A.D. McMullen, J.B. Mears, F.A. Millichip, W.H. Webster
             and R. Wragg.

             Messrs. E.A. Croker (Secretary) , R. Greenwood (Manager)
             and              1

             Mr. R.H.G. Kelly (Football League)

Apologies for absence were received from Sir Matt Busby, Messrs.
  J.J. Dunnett, L.A.M. Mackay, E.G. Powell, R.B. Strachan,
  Lord Westwood and

1.   MINUTES The Minutes of the Meeting held on Friday, 19th September
       1980> were confirmed.

2.   MEMORANDUM ON HOOLIGANISM

       (a)    Introduction and Past Actions of The Football Association

             The Committee considered whether the document should
             include points that had been raised with the Government
             previously, or whether it should be limited to new
             suggestions.  It was agreed that various suggestions
             which had already been put to the Government should be
             referred to again, particularly in relation to corporal
             punishment.

             It was decided that more emphasis should be placed on the
             suggestion that greater powers should be given to Masters
             and Headmasters at Schools to discipline pupils.

             It was noted that the Working Party set up by Denis Howell
             in the last Government had made a certain amount of progress,
             but had been disbanded by the present Minister of Sport when
             he took office.

             It was agreed that under "Past Actions" reference should be
             made to the appointment by The Football Association of
                                as an Adviser on crowd troubles, the actions
             taken by The Football Association in relation to the 1981
             England v. Scotland match and the costs incurred by Clubs to
             "police" matches.
       (b)    Suggested Actions to be Taken

              (i)   by The Football Association

                    It was agreed that the sale of alcohol should be
                    prohibited within Football League Stadia, except
                    in such places as may be authorised from time to
                    time by The Football Association. The Football
                    League Clubs would then be able to apply for permission
                    to serve alcohol in certain areas e.g. private boxes
                    and seated areas of the Stadia.

                    It was agreed that efforts should be made to ban from
                    all football grounds, say for five years, any identi­
                    fied trouble makers, although it was felt such action
                    would be difficult to enforce.   It was also noted
                    that Ground Regulations of Clubs could give the Police
                    authority to remove an individual from the ground if
                    he were banned by the Club.

                    It was agreed that an indepth study of identity cards
                    should be carried out and details should be obtained
                    from Coventry City, for comparison purposes, of the
                    system they proposed to introduce.

                    The Chairman said that at the meeting   of Honorary
                    Vice-Presidents, and Honorary Members   on 31st October
                    he would take the opportunity to seek   their support
                    in any agreed schemes to combat crowd   problems.

                    It was decided that it would not be possible to ban
                    all "away" travel or to stop the sale of terrace
                    tickets to visiting supporters.

                    It was agreed in principle that a meeting should be
                    held between The Football Association, The Football
                    League, The P.F.A. and the Managers', Secretaries'
                    and Coaches' Association, to emphasise the importance
                    of The Football Association's campaign.

                    It was agreed every effort should be made to eliminate
                    abusive shouting by spectators and this fact should be
                    conveyed to all Clubs.

             (ii)   by Players and P.F.A.

                    It was decided that kissing, hugging, jumping on backs
                    and running to the touchline with outstreched arms and
                    clenched fists when goals were scored should be dis­
                    couraged and it was agreed that discussions should be
                    held with the P.F.A. and the Secretaries', Managers'
                    and Coaches' Association to find suitable methods of
                    eliminating such practices.

                    It was felt that if the above suggestions were adopted
                    then the need to take, action at International level would
                    not arise.

3.   ENGLAND TRAVEL CLUB     Consideration of this item was deferred until
       the next meeting.

     The meeting adjourned at this point and decided to reconvene at 10.00 a.m.
     on Wednesday, 5th November, 1980
