F R0 M   C E id fi T N E V POWELL




     INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
     STADIUM DISASTER    !



          NEWS HCtEASE
    24 April 1989                                                   01-273 4610


                                    KILLSBOROUCH DISASTER INQUIRY

    Lord Justice Taylor, yho will conduct the inquiry into the
    Hillsborough Stadium disaster, w i n be assisted by two
    assessors * Professor Leonard Maunder OBE BSc PhD SeD FEng
    FiKschE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University
    of Newscastle-Upon-Tyne, end Mr Brian Johnson QFM, Chief
    Constable of Lancashire. Counsel to the Inquiry will be Mr
    Andrew Collins 0C and Mr Alan Qoldsack,

     On 28 April, Lord Jus ifice Taylor will hold a preliminary hearing
     at Sheffield Town Hal 2 at 11.00 am. The purpose of this will be
     to hear applications n behalf of those who wish to be
     represented at the or £ll hearings and to give directions as to
     the pxocedure to be f<£1lowed. He also hopes to announce the
     date on which the ora hearings at Sheffield Town Hall will
     commence.  Those intertding to apply on 28 April to btt
     represented at the ori 1 hearings are invited, if possible, to
     notify the Secretary to the Inquiry in advance:

                  Mr R M Whallay
                  Room 662
                  Home 6ffice
                  50 Queen Arvne'£ Gate
                  L o n d o n , mm S a t            Tel: 01-273 2577/3602/2370

     The evidence to be considered for presentation by Counsel to the
     Inquiry is being gath^ red and oollated by the West Midlanda
     Constabulary, under t lie direction of its Chief Constable,
     Mr Geoffrey Dear 0PM. Mr Dear is responsible direct to Lord
     Justice Taylor for th conduct of th© police inquiry.

     Anyone who has inform ation bearing on the ©vents on 15 April is
     Invited to contact We st MidUemde Polio*, A Freephone numbar for
     this purpose will be announced shortly. Alternatively,    they
     may contact the Secre tary of the inquiry at the above address.

     Apart from oral evide nee, Lord Justice Taylor will consider any
     written submissions bearing on his Inquiry, These should be
     sent to the Secretary to the Inquiry.
