                                             BY HAND

                                             11 May 1989

Dear Graham

Hillsborough
I refer to our recent discussion with Counsel concerning
the form that Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry is likely to
take. As you know he has decided to deal with the matter
in two stages, the first dealing with the factual issues
of what happened on 15 April and why, and the second
dealing with wider issues. At the hearing for directions
on 28 April, Lord Justice Taylor made it clear that
although there could be some overlap between the two
stages he was hoping to deal with the second stage by
means of written submissions.
It is not possible to predict how long Lord Justice Taylor
will take in dealing with the first stage. Certainly
from the way in which he dealt with the directions on
28 April, it is anticipated that he is proposing to deal
with the matter fairly briskly and will not be hearing
witnesses who have similar evidence to give. This means
that Lord Justice Taylor may move on to the second stage
of his inquiry within the next 4-6 weeks.

I recommend that the FA submits a paper to the inquiry on
issues such as crowd control, safety at sports grounds,
identity cards, all seater stadia and other relevant
football issues. I therefore consider it to be vital
that the FA start working on the paper to be submitted to
Lord Justice Taylor as soon as possible.
    G Kelly Esq                         11 May 1989         2




    It may well be that there are a number of people at the
    FA who would wish to be involved in dealing with this
    paper to be submitted to Lord Justice Taylor. However
    because of the very short timescale involved, I do not
    consider that it is feasible for the full Council to deal
    with the issue. I would therefore strongly recommend     v
    that there is a formal delegation from the Council to a '
    Committee of say three people. The reason for suggesting
    a small committee is not to exclude views but to ensure
    that the necessary time is spent to prepare this paper.
    Involvement in this job will be on an almost daily basis
    and a committee of a larger number than say three, is
    likely to become unwieldy and ineffective in practice.
    There should be a formal delegation from the
    Council to ensure that the administrative procedures have
    been adhered to.

    I am sorry to be pressing you on this issue at this time
    when I know there are many other matters of equal or
    greater importance. However our experience is that
    unless time is put into this type of exercise, the result
    will be disappointing with a failure to convey the
    intended message. It also seems to me that in view of
    the criticism that has been made of the FA in the press
    since the Hillsborough disaster it would be a goo<|
    opportunity for the FA to be seen to be taking a clear
    and positive lead in dealing with what are very topical
    issues.
    If you would like to discuss the matter further please do
<
    not hesitate to call me.

    Yours sincerely




    G Kelly Esq
    The Football Association
    16 Lancaster Gate
    London
    W2 3LW
