G« Mackrell Esq.,                                   13 March 1987
Secretary,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC,
Hillsborough,
Sheffield S6 1SW.

Dear Graham,
                  Football League Proposals for
                    Anti-Hooliganism Measures
      Thank you for your letter of 10 March enclosing the
papers received from the Football League. As requested I
have pleasure in letting you have our comments.
      Dealing first with the areas which have to be designated
as being for the exclusive use of members of a scheme.
I suggest that you would designate the South stand and the Kop
between them, these cater    for around 30,000 spectators,
which is comfortably inexcess of the 50% requirement.
      You would then beable to admit those local supporters
who are not members to either the seating in the North stand
or to the standing accommodation at the North West corner. Thus
the membership scheme is not likely to place any real restriction
on seated spectators but it could be that for a handful of the
most important games ina season, the ntimber of places for standing
spectators who are not members will be inadequate. The North West
corner of the Kop only holds 2,900 people and I would be fairly
confident that more "casuals" than that will want to be in
standing accommodation for a few games each year.   However it
may not be too damaging if there is a shortage of non-member
standing places in that there will generally be seating
accommodation for them in the North stand if they are prepared
to pay the extra money.
      Turning now to the various items in the document headed
"Looal Plans*. I think you will need help from us on the
following items j-

1,               Ground Plan
                  We will prepare the necessary drawings and details and
                  you will provide a copy of the safety certificate.
 .       .....




                  Stadium Operation
                  It may be that you cam deal with the whole of this item
                  but we will provide a plan showing the location of
     j           turnstiles and if you so wish,a description of the
     I           counting system.
     :
     ■


5.               Segregation
                  We will provide the necessary drawings showing the way
                  in which fans are segregated at the Leppings Lane end
                  with the access routes clearly marked both inside and
                 outside the ground.

8.               Security of Players and Match Officials
                 We will mark on the plans which we are providing,the
                 locations of car and coach parks for players and match
                 officials.

      I have had a talk about the matter with         and he is
setting in motion the production of the various drawings and plans
which you will require. If there is any other ieem which I have
omitted, please let me know.

                                            — Yours sineerely,
