    AHTl-gQOLlGAHISW AMD THE FTOJRE OP PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL


Save for oblique references, this meaorandua concerns matches at
League grounds within England and Wales, that is to say, anti-hooliganism
abroad is not directly considered because matches abroad are within
the jurisdiction of the Football Association. Ve are, therefore,
aainly considering the position and attitude of the Football League.

T^e Football League representing the 92 League Clubs is and always
has been conscious of its and their responsibility as lav-abiding
citizens. In these clrcuastaaces we shall all do what we can to
■lniai.se hooliganisa and to aake football grounds as safe as possible
for those who wish to coae and watch.

Having said that:., neither •the Football Leigue nor its Member'Clubs
can accept total responsibility for anti-social behaviour at football
grounds. Such behaviour has become part of a general pattern of
declining social behaviour markedly evident over the last 20 years.
And it is not only at football grounds where acts of hooliganism
taJce place, but even at cricket., boxing and athletic occasions,
quite apart froa acts of hooligaaisa at seaside resorts and elsewhere,
e.g. Stone Henge and pop festivals. Attention seeas to be concentrated
on football because it is easily the most popular spectator sport
(22 Billion spectators last year) with an enoraous coverage by the
media. Furthermore, the whole situation oust obviously be reviewed
and considered in the light of a situation where national crime increased
last year by 8S and the jails are overcrowded. It is as unjust for
the Government to sake clubs responsible for hooliganism at their
grounds where they have taken all possible precautions as it would
be to blaae the airlines and their pilots for hijacking and terrorism.

As mentioned above, however, the Football League and its Clubs are
fully alive to their responsibility and have had meetings with the
Prime Minister and with the Minister for Sport and the latter1s deputies.

On anti-hooliganism, the Government has proposed two main courses
of action:

Anti Drink Legislation

The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc.) B U I , to be debated
in the Bouse on 3rd July, we believe, imposes a blanket ban on alcohol
in grounds, but gives Licensing Magistrates a discretion for parts
of grounds. The B U I also prohibits the taking into grounds of alcohol
and alcohol on public transport to grounds.

Siailar restrictions, plus others, ware contained in a Private Members
Bill (Football Crowds Control Bill) introduced to the House of Commons
in January 1981 by William Whitlock, M.P. and by the President who
was then a Member of Parliament. This Bill had the support of the
Football League and of the Football Association.

The Government rejected this asasure, saying "the time is not yet
opportune".

In August 1984, just before last season opened, the Minister for
Sport issued a paper on anti-hooliganism entitled "Football Spectator
Violence - Report of an Official Working Group" and came to the conclusion
on Page 27:
                                     -   2-


         "la Che absence of clear evidence that the Introduction of legislation
         along the line* of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 would
         reduce violence at English soccer matches, the Group cannot recommend
         such action."!

     The Home Secretary, Nr. Leon Brittan, repeated this assertion in
     correspondence when he said that there was no direct correlation
     between alcohol provided Inside grounds and hooliganisa.

      The Government are now making a 0-turn on this issue.

     There is clearly a case for limiting the availability of alcoholic
     drink, in some parts of sane grounds, but not in all parts of all
     grounds. Drink and its effect on.sane spectators cas be a marginal
     influence on sane spectators' behaviour. It is,.however, carrying -
     the matter too far to ban drink from Executive Boxes, and restaurants
     occupied by responsible citizens and where there is no record of
     bad behaviour. Insofar as Executive Boxes and Restaurants are concerned,
     should not the Magistrates be given the same discretion as to Licensing
     as they have for other parts of designated grounds?

b)   A further Public Order Bill

     This will be introduced in the next Session and has been contemplated
     for some .time to cover public meetings, picketing etc. The Government
     is tacking on additional clauses, as appropriate to Football grounds.
     In view of our conclusion expressed in paragraph 8 that the problem
     is one of Law and Order, we can hardly dissent from stronger measures
     being introduced to combat hooliganism at grounds-

6.   The Government also suggested that the Football League take   several
      other steps voluntarily:-

a)   All Ticket Matches

     After liaison with home and away police, this system should be introduced
     for matches where there is likely to be trouble, either because of
     past experience with the competing teams or because of intelligence'
     reports of likely conduct at a particular match.

      The Football League cannot dissent from this, as long as the policy
     ' is implemented intelligently. In particular, if an all ticket match
       is ordered by the football authorities the Police should be directed
      not to compel a club to give access to spectators without tickets
       as has often been the case in the past.

b)   Horning Kick-Offs

     The Football League agrees that in suitable cases this would assist
     greatly in minimising potential trouble.

c)   Membership Identity Cards

      The Government wish us to consider a system under which no-one could
      visit a League football ground without being in possession of his
      Club's membership card which would be withdrawn either upon the holder
      being found guilty of an offence in a Court jurisdiction or even
      as suggested if the Board of Directors of that Club so decide to
      withdraw the card at their discretion. This fora of identification,
      while seeming to be an attractive safety measure »ould, in fact,
      Oe entirely valueless, as potential non-home supporters could easily
                                        -   3-


      obtain a card and gain access and there would be no previous record
      of them at that Club. Zt it in fact usually non-home supporters who
      initiate trouble. Tie Government have, therefore, moved on to a
      universal compatible system under which anyone wishing to go to a
      football ground would have to have, in advance, an identity card
      electronically coded and hearing the holder's photograph and with
      the details of the holder recorded on a central computer. 411 Clubs
      would have access to this aad those barred froa any ground would
      be recorded at every ground. There are soae objections to this which
      have been expressed both to the Prime Minister and to the Minister
      for Sport.


1)    rt would be impossible to install the equipment for the 17th August
      1985, when the> season starts-, an. objective bn which the Prime Minister
      places such store;

li)   la the system to apply to Vembley matches (starting with the Charity
      Shield match on .Saturday 10$h August 1985) where, a large part of
      the audience are not usually visitors to League Clubs?

ill) Is it worth the trouble involved in issuing nearly 6 million cards
     and putting the details on a computer (bearing in mind that, merely
     to go to one game par season requires a card) to combat the violence
     of no more than 10,000 spectators a season out of a total of 22 million
     spectators?

iv)   Would all this justify the cost, estimated by IBM at £10 million
      for installation and 3/^P per spectator entrant, I.e. perhaps £750,000
      per annum? An.alternative quotation from Sperry yields a running
      cost of £5 per spectator per season, although no installation costs;
      that Is to say on 6 million csrds a running cost of £30 million per
      annum.

7.    As already Mentioned, if hooliganism could be eliminated, the Clubs
      would still consider implementing these measures, notwithstanding
      the fact that total Club revenue within England from football is
      only about £44 million a year less about £64 million V.A.T., i.e.
      leaving a net total of £37 i million.

      The difficulties are as follows

a)    Turnstiles would still have to be maimed, even if electrically operated,
      to enable a check to be made that the person referred to on the card
      was the proposed entrant, I.e. there would be a check against the
      photograph on the card. It is often difficult to identify someone
      from a passport photograph but particularly the case when there is
      constant flow through the turnstile. There is no conpsrison whatsoever
      with Government buildings and the like, where the flow is fsr lighter.

b)    The delay at turnstiles would lead to further problems, particularly
      if It were raining and spectators had to wait to get through and
      in. There are recorded instances- where in these circumstances the
      police have ordered the club gates to be opened and the public allowed
      in without payment, and thus, there would be no identification possible.
      It is possible to assume that in such a situation, the organised
      hooligan element would congregate at one turnstile and the moral
      pressure involved would lead the police to follow their pjnrrtwua— _____
      practices of open entry. We do not believe that appeals fto arrive
      earlier so as to spread the flow would meet with any responsfr.
Identity Card* can be borrowed within families or between friends
looking alike where one Has had his card withdrawn but a friend still
retains his■

Cards can be stolen or put to double or Multiple usage.

The social and political consequences of nearly 6 Billion people
probably 30S of the male adult population being required to have
an identity card linked to a central computer are iaaMnse.

Pbr these reasons and not tolely because of the expense, we regard
a membership identity card ayatea as lapracticable and wrong.

Furthermore, the public would be even aore enraged if, upon going
to the expense and trouble of obtaining a card upon being assured
by HM CXxv*rnnent that this would lead to safety, they still encountered
hooliganipa.

Nevertheless, and despite these difficulties, the Pootball League
have continued to investigate the implementation of a system of Identity
Cards. Because of the great number of -systems available and the
technical considerations involved the Management Caamtittee, with
the aaaiatance of the Football Truat and of the Sporta Council, are
aetting up a Committee fully to explore the matter and compare the
reapective efficiency of the vsrioua ayatama with a view to recommending
an efficient and coat efficient ayatem if one can be found. It la
quite clear that becauae of the time factor a final product cannot
be implemented by the first match of the aaaaon, namely Saturday
10th August 1985.

The Football League have given thought over asny years to these probleaa
and- in the light of the Prime Minister’a requeat have conaidered
the matter further within the laat three aontha. The League's conclusions
remain unaltered.

This is a Law and Order problem. It exists on the Continent, e.g.
in Holland, Italy and West Germany but mitigated becauae in these
countriea the police and courts take urgent and aevere action. Here
in England* there ia an organised element determined to cause chaos
and disruption and to incite others to do ths ssme. We need;-

More police at grounds, these to be provided at Government's expense.
It seems wrong that Clubs should have to pay for the preservation
of Law and Order, something which every other citizen takes as a
normal service. Clubs pay their taxes and are entitled to protection.
The Government meets the costs of the police svsrywhere else and
during ths miners' strike, as an example, provided an ample police
preaence to aafeguard alnera wishing to continue to work who were,
in the Government'a view being unlawfully reatrainad by pickets.
The ssme should apply to grounds just as It does in the areas around
the grounds and away frost the grounds.

Greatsr assistance for the police by use of close circuit television
coupled with video recorders. Consldsratlon should also be given
to greater .use of police dogs soaiething which the Ho«e Office discourages
but which on the Continent has been found to be the greatest deterrent
of all.
                                        - 5-




c)    Severe sentences fo r those found g u i l t y , and not B arely being bound
      over to keep tie peace.

4)    The inclusion in either the Anti Drink Bill or in the proposed Public
      Order Bill of the Exclusion Order Clauses, numbers 11 to 14, contained
      in Mr. Whitlock's 1981 Bill which provided, inter alia, for all offenders
      found guilty to have details notified to a central register maintained
      by the Football League who would in turn notify all Clubs who would
      Chen be is a position Co bar Chose who hare offended at other grounds.

9.    While issuing this memorandum, it is perhaps appropriate to refer
      to Oround Designation. The Football League have always believed that
      grounds should be as safe as possible for spectators. It Is the expense
      involved as compared with the low income of the as yet 37 non-deslgnated
      clubs which has hitherto prevented the fullest implementation of
      designation bj HR Government-.

      We think it right that all Clubs be made safe as soon as possible
      but we feel that Government should at least help to meet the cost.

      It is true, for example, that cinemas and theatres do not receive
      grants or subsidies for these purposes but art does receive grants
      for general purposes, neither of them yield revenue to the Government.
      The Clubs on the other hand produce a VAT revenue on football activities
      alone of £6i million. More to the point, if Clubs in any number were
      to go out of business through being unable to meet the requirements
      of the police and the local Safety Licensing Authorities the Pools
      Promoters would not have an adequate coupon to issue which would
      in turn lead to a loss of their revenue and in turn to a loss of
      revenue to HR Government whose P.ool Betting Duty at a rate of 42 i*
      will this year yield £212 million. Should the Government not take
      steps to preserve the revenue and to avoid killing the goose that
      lays the golden eggs? In passing, can the Government say why betting
      on horses on course carries a tax of only 4S and off course of 8%
      and with much of this going back to racing whereas professional football»
      which yields so much in revenue, isnot considered in its time of
      need. And can the Government say why safety at cricket grounds and
      at; Wimbledon does not seem to be is issue.

10.   Although our jurisdiction is not in respect of matches outside' England
      we are naturally concerned at events occurring outside the country
      involving our clubs where even more than in England Government action
      is needed. Even when Clubs refuse to sell tickets for matches abroad
      or the Football Association for International matches abroad, the
      aggressive hooligan will, in our experience, be able to buy a ticket
      when he reaches his destination.

      Foreign Governments in whose country matches are to be played have
      the remedy in their own hands by restricting entry. They can also
      help by ensuring that their grounds are safe as we would like our
      grounds to be with adequate segregation for those that slip through
      the net.

      It is significant Chat on the night of 29th Kay when the Brussels
      tragedy occurred our own Minister for Sport commented on television
      that only that weekend he had sent a telex to the Belgian authorities
      with his view that the ground was unsafe. Furthermore, after his
      Strasbourg meeting on 27Ch June the Minister gave it as his view
      Chat-most European Clubs had much Co learn from ours. If we recall
      his radio interview correctly, he referred to our "good order, good
      planning and good preparation".
                                     -   6-



      We compliment Liverpool on lamedlately withdrawing from next year's
      European Competition ml tbough the Enquiry of 20th June shows that,
      aa our Minister for Sport suspected, both the Belgian authorities
      and the Italian Club were also to blase, vte do not think that the
      Football Association should have withdrawn 5 innocent clubs from
      European Competitions without consultation with the Football League
      notwithstanding the possibility that after due consideration we might
      have case to the saae conclusion. There is, of course, also the aatter
      of a breach of Clause 4 of our Agreement with the Football Association.

      It is a fact that in the last few years there have been as many incidents
      concurrent with England International matches in Europe as there
      were with Club European Batches which must put our entry to the forthcoming
      European Championships at risk.

      The fact that the madia rushed i n t o establish Liverpool's guilt
      for hooligans over whom they had no control did not help. It was
      noteworthy that it was such eminent sports magazines as the Financial
      Times and The Economist that proposed the.most draconian measures.


11.   The old Football Association Rule 31 as amended on 28th May 1984
      to clarify the Club's responsibility both for home and away games
      and Clubs are now completely responsible for the conduct of all players,
      officials, spectators and supporters. However, under the new Regulation
      24, it is a defence to show that all events, incidents or occurrences
      complained of were the result of circumstances over which the Club
      had no control and that its officials or agents had used all diligence
      to ensure that its responsibility was discharged. The Government
      had wanted absolute liability. This the Football Association Council
      could not accept, as a breach of natural justice, and indeed the
      defence clause was agreed by 832 of the vote.




1st July 1985                                    The Football League Limited
