                                                         0.">6<r^   f:Vil*   »■* *^'*r   — ”T |C|V7
                                                               (H*0                .




THE fOOTWHl SUPPORTERS
                   IISSCXIflTIOn
                             " THE '.?TH5LEY DOSSIER "


Introduction

The FCCT3ALL SUiPCRTEBS ASSOCIATION is the only nationwide organisation that
ordinary supporters are welcome to join, regardless of club or national alle­
giance, and through which their views can be expressed.

There are, at present, eleven branches of the F.S.A. throughout Eritain. The
regional branches invite all supporters in their given area to meet together
regularly to debate topics of cocmon interest and develop nutual ties.

Following the F.A. Cup Final between Everton and Liverpool at Wembley o~ Kay
1Cth 1986, the F.S.A. received hundreds of letters and telephone cadis from
football supporters detailing conplair.ts about a variety of matters concern­
ing that natch. Below is a list of the main points raised and the following
pages are a selection of letters whichevidence them. The dossier concludes
with a brief analysis of the major problems and provides suggestions for
ways to overcome then in the future.

Points raised by the letters

1.     The Cup Final ticket allocation issue.
2.     The "black market" in tickets.
3.     Poor liaison between Police and Venbley Stadiun stewards.
k.     Bad policing - though soae supporters praise police efforts.
5.     Dangerously inadequate forward-planning and organisation of
        entry into and exit from Wembley Stadium.
6.     Corruption amongst some turnstile operators; failure to reaove
       tear-off portions; feiluro to collect or check tickets leading
       to dangerous overcrowding inside the ground.
“.     bxires>ely ~ocr prevision for disabled supporters.
8.     Views blocked by Television camera gantries.
9.     Praise for good behavi.ur ■ and goodwill from supporters.
10.    General dissatisfaction with V.’embley Stadium, its location,
       toilet facilities, provision of refreshments etc.


          THE F.S.A., 59, OAKUOOD RD.. HALKWOOD, LIVERPOOL L26 1XD
                                I




From:

My son, aged sixteen and his seventeen year old friendobtainedgenuine
tickets from Anfield for G block at Veabley.

As you are aware, you have to go through two sets of turnstiles at the
stadium. They passed through the first gate easily but when they tried
to enter the second a policeman took their tickets from then saying they
were not genuine. They argued of course. The policeaan said if the
back of the ticket turned pink when he rubbed it with a pen or pencil it
would prove they were not genuine.   This he did. The tickets turned
pink and my son and his friend were thrown out. They tried to return
but were thrown out again. The policeaan, by the way, would not return
the tickets. My son would not give up and found a police van with
C.I.D. officers in it. He told a C.I.D. officer his story and luckily
this nan believed him. He then took the boys back to the turnstile and
told the same policeaan to let then in.

They originally tried to get into the ground at 1.00p.m.,   bythe   tine
they did get in it was well after 2.30 p.n.

All I can say is there is obviously something very wrong.




From:


Vest Upper Standing Enclosure Ticket ® £6.00.
Turnstile G, Entrance 68. Ticket No. 479.

I an a shareholder at Liverpool Football Club and an writing about the
trouble I had at Venbley.

I was with a few friends in the chaos at the entrance to G block and
after pushing and shoving for about half an hour I finally went through
the turnstile. As I was coming out of the other side the police grabbed
ne and told me that ay ticket was a forgery. As I picked up my ticket
fron the Club Office I knew full well that it was genuine. The police
would not listen to ae and I was bundled out by three or four of thea,
getting ay face saashed into a turnstileon the way. My lip was split
open and my nose is still sore now. I managed to get back in straight
away, but I'm sure you will hear of people in similar circumstances who
did not get in at all. I know what a Job the police and officials had
with forgeries, but I’m sure that if tickets had been checked at the
bottom of the steps it would have been a lot easier for all concerned.
                                      2




From:



I was at Wembley with my mother and daughter aged 6 , for the cup final.
Ve got to Wembley at 2.30 p.m. and made our way to G gate. We stood
back and watched in horror the people stretched the width of the gate.
They were being held back but I saw two people go under the barbed wire,
they then let people go in still pushing, then a lot of people went up
to G gate but were sent back by the police. At that point I said to my
saia "did you see that policeman kick that lad in the back?" Every time
the gate was left by the police crowds were running up to storm the
gate, it was horrible. I later found out that some people were
receiving first aid on entering through that gate. There were still
people trying to get in well after kick-off which is all wrong,
especially when some fans paid double the face value for tickets. It
leaves a lot to be desired about the whole organisation of this game.
From:                                                  Liverpool

I was one of many who arrived at the bottom of the steps at G block. At
2.00 p.m. after being pushed up and down the steps which became very
dangerous, I'm an O.A.P., extra police arrived also mounted police.
They held the fans back at the bottom of G block to ease the pressure
going up because fans at the top were being crushed and trampled on.
Vhen I managed it to the top I was pulled to the turnstile by the police
which I was thankful for after the ordeal. That was at 3.10 p.m. (1
hour and 10 minutes!!).

Fans paying 19.00 and 125.00?   SEVEB AGAIN.

Ve were then met with a notice in two foot high letters, "Toilets not in
use". Vhen you went in the tide was in, DISGRACEFUL! I have been to
Vembley six times, but no more, thank you. It was a disgrace to the
people responsible for the great day of the season it should have been.
From :


I will comment on the fiasco at G gate. I started to queue at 2.15
p.m., fully expecting to be in by 2.30 p.m. I was greeted by the sight
of crowded stairways. On reaching the concourse leading to the
turnstiles there was no apparent sign of movement.

Special Constabulary men were called in and did their best to control
the crowds but there were too few radios for inter-communication.

Several young children were in distress and had to be lifted onto
shoulders for safety. Pick-pockets had a heyday. There were many fans
who could see the potentially lethal situation and appealed to police to
hold the fans back. During this time there was still no movement
through the turnstiles.

Luckily some mounted police came to the bottom of the stairs and
relieved the pressure off the crowd. The police did their best.
Vithout that police presence I am convinced there would have been some
serious injuries and it would have been put down to "Liverpool thugs"
again. O.K. there were one or two the worse for alcohol, but the
authorities could at least get their side of things sorted. I finally
got a place on the terraces at 2.55 p.m.

I was not altogether looking forward to the 'Vembley Experience* as the
ground Is well past its best. The facilities are spartan and the
building is a shambles. The surrounding area resembles a shanty town
and must be a nightmare for the police to patrol effectively. Ve
approached the ground from Vembley Central Station, this led us Into a
nightmare bottleneck through what looks like a bike-shed. I agree that
we need a new stadium, purpose built In its own grounds, with a station
that does not resemble a stalag marshalling yard. Vembley Central must
be the worst station I have ever encountered. I am a Liverpool
supporter and bear no sour grapes, but why should the 'cheery, cheeky
scousers' have to put up with this disgraceful organisation?
To quote some fans coming out "They couldn't run a Zingari League
match".
From:


My friend and I were disgusted with the arrangements for getting      into
Vembley. G block where we were was terrible.     I thought both of    uswere
never going to make it to the top of those steps. It was appalling and
could have been a disaster, plus the fact that many people were trying
to get in without tickets. Ve were crushed and gasping for breath in
the pushing and pressure.

Vembley wants demolishing and a new stadium built altogether, as it is a
disgrace. Dirty toilets and dirt everywhere.

Ve are not going to Vembley again under those conditions trying to get
through the turnstiles. It's about tine the F.A. and all concerned got
about building a new place with more modern turnstiles for us to get
into.

Anyway we are not goi9ng to the Charity Shield, we are boycotting it
altogether. I don't know why it can't be played at either of
Liverpool's or Everton's grounds.

Vembley is Just a stunt for the F.A., to make noney considering the
expense we had to get there, especially from the north.

I hope you will be able to get a lot done with other people contacting
you. I and my friend will back you all the way.
From:


My brother and I had tickets for block G and spent 20 ainutes <2.00 p.a.
to 2.20 p.a.) in a suffocating crush in the 10 yard gap between the top
of the steps and the turnstiles. This was certainly the worst
experience I have had in 20 years of watching football matches;
children and women were crying and none of the men looked too happy. If
anyone had fallen to the floor (fortunately this was nigh well
impossible because of the press of bodies) I do not think they would
have survived. VIth the Brussels disaster in everybody's ainds, panic
was only Just below the surface; the barriers and walls of Veabley oust
have had a severe test.

I must emphasise that there was absolutely no misbehaviour - the cause
of the crush was the total lack of crowd control. People at the back of
the crowd coaing up the steps could not see the crush at the front and
thus added to It. A few policeaen at the top of the steps could have
prevented everything, however, there were none. Inside on the other
hand there were dozens! All doing absolutely nothing and deaf to the
requests of nyself and others to go outside and do something useful.

I am not sure exactly who ay protest should go to, but I hope you can
pass it on for ae.

From:


My ticket was for entrace G gate 64. I arrived at the stadium at 2.15
p.m. and headed straight for turnstile G. There was already a large
crowd filling the staircase leading up. It was impossible to tell what
was happening at the top, but the general story was that no-one was
being allowed in because of an injury, and/or forged tickets. Several
mounted police were present and they attempted to block the staircase at
the bottoa. They did not seem to know what was happening, but kept
saying "You'll get in eventually". Naturally, more people kept arriving
and the crowd grew.

At 2.50 p.a. after ainlaal movement on the G staircase, I decided to try
F, where I waited only a couple of ainutes before getting in. Vhen I
reached gate 64 inside, there was no-one on duty so I went straight up.

I'd passed G on the way and saw several checks going on and slow
turnstile noveaent.

Long after the aatch I chanced to aeet an old acquaintance who had been
a steward during the game. He told ae that he didn't know what the
problea had been.

Obviously there was a gross lack of efficient organisation on the part
of Veabley authorities and the police. It is not a ground that I wish
to visit again.
From:

Vhilst I was extremely lucky to be able to go to Vembley Saturday, I was
horrified at the incident outside Turnstile G before the game.

Xe and my father had arrived at the Stadium at approximately 2.20 p.m. ,
and we joined the queue. There were two mounted policemen at the
turnstile, who were turned sideways towards each other, and because of
the large volume of the waiting crowd the horses started kicking. This
caused, as you can well imagine, many people to run out of the way, and
obviously tempers flared, so the police rode the horses out of the crowd
and stood at the back near the parked television vehicles. People were
very slow at getting into the ground, people became inpatient and some
started pushing through to the front.

The situation was starting to become out of control and the police
decided to charge into the crowd in a feeble attempt to stop the chaos.
People tried to scatter, the children and women and certain men screamed
and I got rammed between the wall and one of the horses. I have to be
truthful and say that for one split second I thought I was going to die.
My dad said the same thing after the match.

This continued for another 10 ainutes, until eventually we managed to
drag each other up to the turnstile itself. In the madness, the ticket
collector managed to tear off not only my ticket stub but also half my
ticket, so I now have precious little in the form of a decent souvenir.
Anyway, we arrived inside the ground at 2.55 p.m., Just in time to
savour a fragment of the pre-match atmosphere.

Vlth hindsight, the police and ground officials did absolutely nothing
to halt the crush before the game and I think the blame lies with the
disgraceful allocation of tickets. If at least 45,000 of either side's
supporters had received tickets in the proper manner, there wouldn't
have been half the trouble before the game.

Ve were lucky,too, In that we only received chest pains from the crush,
but if someone had been taken seriously ill whilst in the crowd, very
little could have been done to help them.

It would be nonsense for the authorities to say that it was the crowd's
fault. There Is pushing and shoving to some extent at Anfleld on a
normal Saturday and the police control the crowds adequately then, so
why In God’s name they couldn't do so at Vembley Is anyone's guess.

I am not in favour, though, of building a Vembley of the Vorth since all
the atmosphere of the event would be lost. But, something should be
done about a situation which could easily have turned into another
Heysel disaster, and I shudder to think that I could have been part of
it.

If it wasn't for the quality of the game and 3-1 scoreline, I think
Saturday’s Cup Final would have put me off football for ever.
From:

I approached G entrance at 1.30 p.m. The crush during the approach was
worrying.   CVhat tine were the gates opened?). Immediately after
handing in my stub and getting through the turnstile, my main portion
was inspected. Others before and after ae got through without
inspection.

I got to enclosure 68. There was lots of room to begin with but it Just
filled and filled. I began to get frightened. Injury and even death
were on my Bind. About 2.20 p.m. the crush was so bad I would have left
the enclosure if I had been able to. Voaen in the aisles were crying,
also a nan. Ken were straining to usher the wonen into the sides of the
aisle and into the barriered area. There was no room for them. G 68
seemed to be far more affected than the enclosure to my right.

At kick-off the crush was at its worst and I ended up forced against a
barrier, there was no space ahead of me to duck under. Vhen Liverpool
scored the crush was repeated but nore intensely. The barrier flexed
and the terracing, though made of concrete, bounced like a dance floor.
I fought my way to the left hand side of the barrier and got my foot
onto the barrier support. I raised my body, the idea being that a
crushed leg and pelvis was better than a crushed chest. I hoped
Liverpool wouldn't score again. They did and the foregoing was repeated.

I would estimate that there were four times the safe number of people in
enclosure 68.

There was a man on a catwalk above the spectators, what was his
function? They seemed to turn their backs on the situation below. If
they weren't there to report on crowd control they should have been and
recording it.

Vhy do the F.A. persist with their allocation rules? Does it need
something drastic to change their "bury the head in the sand" attitude.
Surely the demands of the supporters of the finalists should be
satisfied. If by a certain date there were tickets remaining then let
these be distributed elsewhere, at least only neutrals would then be
buying them. Hopefully then any spivs would be stuck with tickets.

Forgeries for G block were public knowledge.    The ineffectivenessof
Vembley and the police was there for all to see.

I fully agree with the call for a new stadium   and inthe aeantiae more
effective measures for future Vembley finals.
Froa:

I thought I would relate my experience at Vembley on paper In case It
helps to improve things.

My ticket was for turnstile D, entrance 9, ay son's for D.10. Ve got
Into the queue at 1.45 p.m. at the top of the stairs. Ve didn't aove
forward for ages and I thought they had closed the gates for sone
reason. Then people at the back, down the stairs a few yards, started
to get edgy and started pushing forward. In ainutes we were packed like
sardines on the plateau fron the top of the stairs to the turnstiles.

My son, 17, and auch slimmer than nyself, was pushed forward and was
ahead of ae and for the next 35 or 40 ainutes we were Just Jamaed in the
crowd watching youngsters, teenagers, climbing the walls and getting
through windows and over the barbed wire on top of the turnstiles. It
seeas that the turnstiles were open, but people with no tickets at all
were trying to pay the gatemen and walk in, people with forged tickets
were trying to get in and both were being turned away, so it was utter
confusion as people were trying to get in and trying to get out!

Two policemen were leaning against the wall on the plateau chatting,
meanwhile two fans wearing the same favours behind me were threatening
each other because of pushing. Children were crying, they were
terrified, women feared for their safety and for the children and sore
than once the Brussels wall was mentioned, which didn't help.

I have often been In huge queues at Goodison and our 'bobbles' have no
trouble, they Just seem to ride up and down on horseback and tell us to
stay In single file .... it works!!

Ve could have been formed In a queue at the bottom of the stairs and
kept in single file, and a bobby or two, maybe with a Veabley steward,
could have checked the tickets and Just let the 'good' ticket holders go
up the stairs. Ve knew about forged tickets at least a week before the
game.

The cause of all this stems from the F.A. and their method of allocating
tickets. They seen to think that people who work on a Saturday running
football clubs or playing football, and get paid to do so, should be
entitled to tickets before the people who pay the wages and put
thenselves out at their own expense! The first alstake they nake after
that Is to Just deliver 25,000 tickets to each competing club.... I have
been supporting Everton since I was 10, I aa now 50, but I have a
saying. "Show ne a player who has played In a Cup Final and I will show
you a so-and-so who has made money fron the fans who pay his wages".

I reaenber last year's queue for seal-final tickets at Goodison. I
started queuing at 3.00 p.a. although they did not start to sell until
6.00 p.a. The queue went along Goodison Road and around to the Stanley
Park end and it was raining heavily. I thought then, why doesn't Mr.
Kendall put his teaa on a bus and drive around Goodison (I wouldn't want
thea to get wet as well!) and say to thea, "Look at these people ... a
                               10.




lot of then on the dole, they will stand in the rain for three hours to
go to Villa Park to help you to get to Vembley.... Do you still want
over 100 tickets each?"




From:



My friend and I were having a drink in a club two tube stops from
Vembley. In view of there being so many forgeries floating around we
decided to get to the stadium early.


Ve arrived at 1.45 p.m. and proceeded to queue at the bottom of the
steps leading up to turnstile G. Ve were on the gangway at the extreme
left of the steps. At about 2.00 p.m. , we had not moved a yard. Then a
policeman, whoa I did not hear asking me to move, struck ae once across
the head. Vhereupon I turned around and I asked him why he had struck
me. He said he wanted me to move, which was impossible because of the
crowd. Then he hit me again so I soon found a space to move into so as
to let him pass. At 2.30 p.m. we were still only half way up the steps
when the snails-pace ground to a halt. Vhen we asked why we were told
by a policeman that somebody had died and they were trying to get the
body back down the steps. I have since found out, from friends, that
the police had shut the turnstiles because of forgeries and that the
story of the death was a complete fabrication. Ve eventually got into
the ground at 3.10 p.m. very angry and upset.

My other friend had gone to turnstile H. He queued up until 2.40 p.m.
when the police opened the gates and let everyone in, reasoning that
there were so many forgeries to sort out from the real tickets that they
had given up. Please find enclosed a genuine Cup Final ticket Vo. 1583
(Turnstile E, Vest Upper Standing Enclosure), unused. He was not asked
to produce this ticket at any time whatsoever, even when he had to go
through the gate into the 58 Vest upper enclosure.
From:

I would like to add ay experiences of the Cup Final 'fiasco'   concerning
the scenes outside Vembley before the natch.

I was with a group of friends arriving at the ground at about 2.30 p.m.,
adnittidly rather late but after being held up en route. Ve all went to
D turnstiles and found that there were about three thousand people at
the turnstile alone, most of then probably didn't have tickets. Judging
by what I witnessed when I finally reached the turnstile, they didn't
need one anyway. All of ny friends and myself went through the
turnstiles without even having to show our tickets. I still have nine
completely intact. I would not blane the turnstile operators for what
happened because how could they turn anyone away without a ticket with a
few thousand people behind hin pushing like mad? I would instead blame
the police for, to my horror, there was one policeman for the whole
block of turnstiles, and he was telling everyone that they wouldn't get
in! He said that the gates were locked because there were too many
people without tickets. I said I did have a ticket and went past him as
he was trying to stop me. Then I saw in fact that the gates were open.
Vhat was this policeman trying to do? Cause a riot? Turning people
away with tickets when people without were climbing over railings and
into windows (as seen on T.V.).

To cap it all I saw the official attendance put at 98,000, surely a lie?
I thought the white horse would have to make a comeback after seeing the
scenes outside.



From:


Ve arrived at Vembley Stadium at 2.00 p.m. Our seats were in H block.
Due to the crushing around the turnstiles we eventually reached our
seats at 2.45 p.m.

Ve were among the first to leave at the end of the game, but found that
the police had barred the way out to the left. Consequently the crowd
surged forward towards the railings opposite. There was crushing of a
terrific nature, the crowd round us tried to help but there was little
they could do. However, we were lucky as they managed to get my friend
and I through a gap in the railings and up onto a grass verge. Ve have
both felt the effects of this crushing since.
                                 12.




From:


Seat Ticket ® 125.00
Turnstile D, Entrace 2, Row 24, Seat 229.

Please find enclosed the strip portion (to be given up) of my ticket.
Ve arrived at the turnstile at 2.20 p.a. having four seats together at a
cost of £25.00 each obtained through the Everton 500 Club, of which we
are members.

It was absolute chaos, in fact we almost gave it up, however, when we
eventually got to the turnstile the steward demanded the complete ticket
of which two of the party only got back the narrow strip, which of
course should have been retained by them. Ve tried to argue but because
of the chaos we were just pushed through the turnstile. The police
didn't want to know.

This led to further confusion in our minds because we still had to get
through another gate and we didn't know whether they would accept the
narrow strips or not. However they did, much to my relief. The time
was now 2.56 p.m.

Ve arrived at our seats only to find that one was occupied. (Seat 229).
Ve demanded to see the occupier's ticket, and lo and behold, to our
amazement he produced the other half of the ticket! This matched up
with the enclosed strip. Give this lad his due, he didn't argue, but
muttered something about a tenner, so we can only assume that he passed
£10.00 over the turnstile. Vhat puzzles me is how he beat us to our
seats.

Just to fill you in on our backgrounds, I am 65 and a retired
Engineering Project Xanager. The others consist of a woman of 60 who is
manageress of a wages office, an insurance broker and a part-time
teacher. I hope this information will help and we all wish you all the
best in your efforts to help the ordinary supporters.
From:

At 2.15 p.m. I was outside H block with my son and daughter where we had
arranged to meet my other son, and go in at H and G blocks. Ve then
tried to get into G block where most of the forged tickets were for.

There was quite a crowd who were all pushing forward but were kept back
a little by police onhorseback. Eventually we got to the steps. Then
the trouble started. The police pushed us back saying people were
getting crushed up front and that there were casualties. Ve couldn't
get back because of others behind us pushing forward. I was rather
upset because one policeman spoke to us in such a bad Banner. He said
"I've told you to get down them bloody steps, now get down those bloody
steps”. He then pushed me. I panicked a bit as I thought ay son was
going to hit him but he kept his cool and told the policeman to go down
the steps himself and explain to those at the back what the problems
were. He just ignored this plea and went on shouting. He wasn't a
young policeman but one that certainly gives the police a bad same. I
was distressed but a couple of very nice young policemen let us duck
under a barrier to where there was less pushing. Eventually we got to
the turnstiles and through. It's a wonder many people were not injured.

Vhen we made our way to the upper standing enclosure, what a carry on!
I've been on the Anfleld Kop a few times but it was nothing like this.
People were nearly standing on one another'sheads. Ve couldn't see
much of the game.  Assoon as half time came my daughter and I Just had
to get out and we saw the rest of the game on television in a
refreshment area.

Ve spoke to some stewards who told us that the problems started when the
police took over from them checking for forged tickets. They were so
incompetent that they let people with forgeries in and people with
genuine tickets were thrown out. Ve heard that one young chap with a
real ticket came back four times before being let in. The stewards said
they had never seen it quite so bad, and I felt sorry for them because
they were getting abused for something not their fault.

Anyway, it was better to watch the game on 'telly' in safety rather than
endure the conditions inside. I have been to Vembley many times and
always been safe, but this time was quite another story and I was rather
frightened.

I thank you for your concern and hope the F.A. finally take notice.
                               • M*


From:

I was at H entrance at about 2.00 p.m. and before I realised it there
was an almighty crush of people. This was not helped by the lack of
progression through the turnstiles seemingly because there were a number
of people trying to gain entry without tickets, the turnstiles being
closed and people turned away.

It was, however, impossible for these people to turn away because of the
crush of people which was increasing as the game drew nearer. I and
others around ne pleaded with policemen Inside the ground, behind the
railings, to take some action to relieve the pressure of the crowd but,
I am sorry to say, we were completely ignored. I spoke to a couple of
people later on who said they did not even give their ticket in. I
assumed from this that the gates were eventually opened to anybody just
to relieve the crush.

I would add that I am a 35 year old male, and I was terrified. I'm
surprised there were no serious injuries amongst the women and children
and the elderly involved in the crush.

I wish you luck in your campaign for a new stadium.



From:


Xy first complaint is the terrible state of the approaches to H
entrance. It was just like a railway without the tracks and caused
quite a lot of discomfort to try and walk, especially for female
supporters.

The second complaint is the lack of organisation regarding people
entering the stadium. Xo police or stewards to form queues. This was
at 2.00 p.m. After a lot of pushing and shoving I got in at 2.20 p.m.,
getting In without having to hand in my ticket or even show it, and I
know of many people who also walked into the ground without handing in
tickets at G and H entrances. After settling into my chosen place, I
noticed a young lady who was very distressed. She had lost her shoes in
the crush outside H entrance and her feet were badly cut and bruised
after being trampled on.

As far as I am concerned Vembley Stadium is no longer the right venue
for very important football matches, Cup ties or Internationals. As far
back as 1950 I was campaigning for both Liverpool and Everton not to
spend money on ground improvements but to examine the possibility of
building a super stadium for them to share, where every facility for
supporters were available, no parking problems, a railway station on
hand and a good roadway from station to stadium cutting out interference
with traffic.   If this had been built we wouldn't have had to play this
Cup Final at a disgrace of a ground.
                                IS




Fron:

My ticket was for Turnstile H, entrance 56, lower Vest standing
enclosure. Following the advice printed on the ticket I reached the
turnstile at 2.05 p.n. In this area was a V.P.C. who was so crushed by
the crowd that she couldn't use her walkie-talkie to sunnon assistance,
learby was a P.C. sounted on a piebald horse. I formed the opinion that
his contribution to crowd control was nininal. Had he been sited at the
foot of the turnstile steps reducing the nunber of people clinbing up,
then his presence would have been useful rather than ornamental. At
2.45 p.n. I entered the enclosure and was anazed to see a significant
police presence seenlngly unoccupied.  I was left in no doubt that
happenings outside the ground weren't their concern.

I agree unreservedly that chaos and inconpetence was obvious approaching
the turnstiles. However, building a new stadiun catering for supporters
needs would not improve conditions outside without proper crowd control.




Fron:



He the Venbley nightmare, I feel I should tell you that my husband, my
15 year old nephew, a friend of ours with leg trouble and I were trying
to get into the stadium at H block entrance about 2.00 p.m. I have
never been so frightened in ny life with all the crowds pushing. There
was no organisation whatsoever. I felt that I was about to be
suffocated and would never ever go through that ordeal again. The
problem was not helped by the mounted police going through the crowd.
Having got in after a terrifying 20 minutes we got to H 63 entrance and
our friend and ayself gave up after the kick-off as we could see
absolutely nothing and sat outside the stadium for the whole of the
natch, not being able to bear the thought of going through the same
experience getting out as we had getting in.

If this letter helps in any way to get a new national stadium I will be
absolutely delighted.
                                IW




From:


Xy son and I had tickets for the Cup Final, entrance H. Ky son is 26
and I an 56. Ve arrived in front of the H turnstiles at 2.10 p.n.
There were no orderly queues, just a seething nass of people and there
was no option but to join the crowd. Vithin seconds we were being
squeezed, pushed and shoved fron all sides. The mounted police sensing
the dangerous position, particularly with the people at the front nearer
the actual entrances, noved their horses to forn a horizontal line. The
idea was clearly to allow the position for some 12 yards in front of the
turnstiles to ease, before letting nore people through, hopefully in
organised lines. This failed and within five minutes chaos reigned
again and the horses were withdrawn. Youngsters were crying and being
lifted onto shoulders while near the turnstiles several foot policemen
did very well to shield a man who had fainted and fallen to the ground.

I am 6* 2" and weigh 1314 stones, but I was out of breath and dishevelled
when I finally got into the ground at about 2.50 p.m. Xy son had got in
several minutes before me through a different gate and waited for me.
It is not the first time I have been squashed and pushed at a football
match but it is the first tine I have been frightened for my own and
others' safety.

There was no bad behaviour but I an sure that people arriving from 2.00
p.n. onwards and seeing no orderly arrangements to enter the ground
panicked ever so slightly and became afraid they would not get in. In
an effort to ease the position my turnstile operator just waved me
through and did not take my ticket.




From:



I was disgusted with the struggle I had to enter Vembley and with the
seat I was allocated.

I had to get from the coach to J/K Entrance 36. I started at 1.30 p.m.
At J/K it was a solid mass of bodies. This was quite an ordeal for a
man my age (65). It took a great deal of pushing and shoving to get in.

I wasn't happy with my 120.00 seat either, Row 29, seat 46. Vhilst it
was nearly opposite the centre line a stanchion blocked my view of the
goal to my left. I could see the rest of the field but the
camera/commentator gantry completely blocked the view of the Royal box
for the presentations.

I would suggest that a new stadium be built in the Birmingham area
giving most fans an easier and cheaper journey.
                                 17




From:


(Letter sent to Liverpool F.C. and copied to F.S.A. )

Having enjoyed a great day out at Vembley last Saturday, I do not wish
to sound a sour note, but writing as one who experienced the chaos at
the Heysel Stadium I have to say that in ay experience the lack of crowd
control at Gate H, Vembley Stadium, both before and after the match was
a dangerous disgrace and It is a near miracle that nobody was badly
injured or worse.

Before the match there were too few policemen on duty to form orderly
queues - just two policemen on horseback it seemed and only one In front
of the turnstiles. The crush was stifling as I entered the ground at
about 2.35 p.m. Later I believe the gates were opened to relieve the
crush - which was then transferred inside - certainly two men behind me
still had their tickets. During the game it was dangerously crowded
Inside, especially In and around the aisles, which should be left free,
but leaving that on one side, to say nothing of the terraces which
bounced under the jubilant crowd, after the game the crush to leave was
even worse. The few police on duty seemed to want to prevent the crowd
from turning right - the natural exit - and a crush formed up against
the perimeter railings which many people climbed to escape. Once we had
entered the slip road to the right the pressure eased but before that
things were getting out of hand. There were children crying and even
adults struggling to keep their feet and it was a miracle nobody went
down. I still can't understand why this was allowed to happen. The
police response was little more than to shout "stop pushing", I ask you!
Luckily no-one appeared to be hurt but it must have been a close thing
and I would ask you to forward my concern to the relevant authorities.

(Liverpool F.C. forwarded this letter to the Football Association).

From



Xy son and friend went to the Cup Final at Vembley. Their tickets were
for the ground, (Liverpool end). Unfortunately they were swamped by a
crowd of supporters swearing, pushing and kicking everyone in sight
after they had broken through the turnstiles at the back. It was so
terrible that ay son and friend thought It safer to come out and watch
the match on the television at the hotel. It was very disappointing for
them as we had travelled down from Hartlepool especially for the Batch.
To go all that way and get In to Veabley then have to come out on
account of hooligans, they decided on coming out, they said, to save
their lives, they were all bruised on their ribs and back because of the
crush.
                               18




From:

I have been watching Liverpool since the age of 12 and am now a twenty
year old female living in Liverpool. I was fortunate enough to receive
a £6.00 ground ticket for the first all Merseyside F.A. Cup Final
through having a Season Ticket for the Spion Kop. I was looking forward
to this memorable day.

I travelled down to Vembley with my brother, who is a Liverpudlian and
my boyfriend, who is an Evertonian. Ve were enjoying the day until the
moment my boyfriend left to go to entrance A in the Everton end, and we
approached entrance H, our allotted entrance. This was at 1.45 p.m.,
approximately. There were a great deal of fans around but there seemed
to be no movement at all into the ground. Ve joined the end of the
queue and immediately began to be pushed this way and that. A certain
amount of pushing I can stand but this was chaotic. There was a sudden
surge forward and everyone was in some discomfort. Vhat followed next
was due to lack of organisation and unfortunately, poor policing. A
mounted policeaan lacked the ability to control or restrain the crowd,
who only wished to get in to see their teams. People were appealing for
help but there was none. Instead of moving the crowd away from the back
a mounted policeaan Just turned the horse around and waded in. Many
people were distressed by this time and children were receiving a great
deal of pushing. People began to realise that they were not going to
get in at this turnstile and many began to leave until some order could
be restored. My brother and I left the crowd at this stage and stood
back in the distance. Ve had planned to wait 10 minutes before kick-off
or so, but the general concensus seemed to be that we would not enter
the ground until around half-time! At this time I was extremely
distressed, knowing that the teams were on the pitch and we were still
outside. There were frantic attempts by      fans to enter the ground.
Flags were tied together and thrown from     a window 60 feet up. Thiswas
an entrance for some risking their lives     to get in.   People’s liveswere
at risk at this stage, two ambulances arrived on the scene, but there
was still much pushing and shoving.

It was 2.55 p.m. when we approached a policeaan and asked to be allowed
in through another gate. Ve finally entered through block J and were
told to go to gate 60. Ve reached there and were then told to go to 59,
then 58 and finally we entered an overspill section (which was nearly
full also). From here we aanaged to see the game. It was 3.10 p.m.

Vhat I could not understand is how officials allowed or did not foresee
these scenes happening. Vhy does Vembley not have separate entrances
for people with youngsters? Surely this "national stadium" should set
an example to the 92 league clubs! Vhy were there only 2 mounted
policemen and why were police dogs brought into the crowd? And why were
fans not prevented from joining the queue until the chaos had died down?

Although I had a great day, it was marred by these events and the
knowledge that I could have easily missed the game.
                               >*




From:


I would like you to pass on this letter of complaint regarding the
entrance fiasco at the F.A. Cup on 10th May1986.     Ipaid 19.00 for a
safety fence view seat and had to enter the stadium via turnstile *G’.
I arrived at the said turnstile at 2.20 p.m., allowing myself 40 minutes
to enter the stadium and find my seat. On arriving at turnstile 'G' , I
was greeted by mounted police and police with dogs, I was told by a
mounted policeman not to go on to the stairs as it was too packed, but
to wait a ninute. Whilst ayself and hundreds of other people were
■waiting a minute" as he put it, other people were coming in at the side
of what was supposed to be a queue and jus-t pushing their way In and the
police just let this happen.

At approximately 2.35 p.m., I was allowed onto the steps leading up to
the turnstiles, at this point the pushing got worse as one policeman
stood in the middle of the crowd and said that it was no use pushing, as
the gates had been closed, which only made matters worse.

Vhen I eventually made it to the turnstiles, the feelings of people
around me were running so high, that I feared that there was going to be
another ’Heysel Stadium’ at Vembley.

I eventually made it to my seat at 2.54   p.m.     andat 3.15 p.m. people
were still streaming into the ground.

I have since spoken to various other people who were at the Cup Final
and who experienced similar and in one case worse experiences. One such
person is                                                who, along with
his brother, had taken his son to Vembley for the first time, they also
had to endure ’G* turnstile, but their situation was worse because they
were in the upper standing enclosures and their pen in particular was so
overcrowded, that at one point              patched the match without his
feet feeling the terraces as he was suspended in the air by the people
around him. Also               ^aid that when Liverpool equalised and
everybody was jumping up and down, he could feel the terracing moving
beneath hin.

In my opinion what should have been a great day for everybody at the
match was spoilt by bad police work, an old-fashioned stadium that is
completely Inadequate for staging major gases of this laportance and the
short-sightedness of the Football Association in their ticket
allocation.
                              2.0




From:


I arrived at Vembley at 12.30 p.m. and got inside the stadium without
too much difficulty. It was however, quite a different story coming
out.

After leaving the exit gate at J 4 K area we got stuck in a very large
crowd of people trying to get back to the car parks at the front. Just
past G I B exits, crowd conditions became very crushed and quite
frightening. I was particularly concerned for the safety of ny 8 year
old son and I was having difficulty holding on to him. Forward movement
eventually stopped although the crowd behind us kept moving and the
situation was, in my opinion, very dangerous. It was only the common
sense and discipline of many other adult supporters that avoided
possible tragedies by helping both myself and others with children from
being crushed or trampled and with their help we eventually got clear of
the crush.

The apparent cause of this quite dangerous crowd congestion was it
seems, caused by a line of police who prevented movement from G.H.J and
K exits back to the car parks and thus caused a large crush. The police
made no attempt at organised crowd control but merely aggravated the
problems caused by large numbers of people in one place.

The police just stood and watched this crush and they should be made
aware of what seemed like incompetence if a future tragedy is to be
avoided. One can imagine where the blame would be placed if anyone were
to be killed or injured.



From:


Vest Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket 9 £6.00
Turnstile H, Entrance 61, Ticket No. 952.
Ticket stamped on reverse VEST BROMVICH ALBION F.C.

Enclosed is a Cup Final ticket for which the price paid was £50.00.
This ticket was bought outside the stadium at 2.15 p.m. on the day of
the match. As it Is printed Vest Bromwich Albion, I feel something
should be done.
From:

I have been an Everton season ticket holder for the last 20 years along
with ay mate,                This year he received a seat" ticket and I a
£6.00 standing ticket.Because I couldn't get a seat we decided to swap
and stand together, with disastrous results!

Ve are both pretty fit although I an 61 and he 58. Ve were in the
ground at 1.15 p.m. to get a good view and settled down for the pre-
match build up. After 2.00 p.a. the place began to fill up so we had to
stand to keep our places on the bigsteps. By 2.30 p.m. we were three
deep on each step and getting pushed all over the place.

The aisles by this time were packed solid with people trying to force
their way in and by 2.45 p.m. we were being battered by grown aen
fighting to get onto the steps. The fact that there was no room to
breathe, let alone move, didn't seem to matter to them, they just pushed
and used their elbows and fists to get you out of the way. By this time
I'd gladly got out and gone homeIf possible, my pants were cooing down
and I couldn't even move my arms      to    pull them up!

Xy view of the match had gone - I only wanted to survive and get out,
but it was totally impossible to even move, until Everton scored and 1
was carried bodily forward down the steps and ended up on the floor
trying to force my way up through the bodies to regain ay feet. Luckily
a young chap grabbed me under the arms and hauled me up. Even at half-
time I couldn’t get out or go anywhere.

Eventually the match ended without going into extra time.... Thank God!!
I was able to struggle my way through to the steps out with my mate. Ve
were both soaking wet with sweat and steaming visibly from our clothing.
The fact that the steps behind us were awash with urine all     the waydown
didn't matter a damn, we were free and out in the fresh air     again,
that's all that mattered.

I've been to Vembley with Everton many times, always in a seat, I'll
never go again though to stand if it means never going again ever.

After all that, our coach didn't get out of the car park until 7.00 p.m.
then crawled for 3/4 hour to the Ml. Vhy can't we have a Stadium in
Birmingham?

And at Vembley it was one big rip-off.   £1.10 for a hamburger, Just
bread and a sausage, no other filling.

lo, I don't believe I'll ever go to Vembley again, I'm beginning to hate
the thought of going to Vembley as a Stadium.    As much as I   love myteam
and like to believe it stands for "Football",   the way it was on that day
I won't forget in a hurry.
                                a*




From:                                              (no address Included)

I arrived at 2.15 p.m. There was a large crowd at J and K blocks with
over 100 deep trying to get through 12 turnstiles, no barriers to
separate queues and a few police talcing no action. I entered the
stadium at 2.35 p.a.

It then took   me 10 minutes to get to ay seat,row 27   at the top of the
stadium with   no direct aisle to any exit.

Coming out of the stadium, on the path outside there was severe
crushing. It seemed to be caused by the two flows of people oeetlng in
a space that was far too narrow. Although there was a line of police
horses they were taking little action. I was pushed across the path
into the metal railings, the bar type ones. I ducked to go through the
railings, there was another huge surge in the     crowd and     I finished   up
rolling downa grass bank. Other supporters stopped me going into a
line of railings and picked me up.

At the Merseyside Xilk Cup Final, five of us, including two children met
the same crushing at exactly the same spot. Because of this I did not
hurry to leave the stadium hoping that most of the congestion would be
over.




From:



Forth Terrace Seat Ticket 8 £9.00
Turnstile G, Entrance 74, Row 6, Seat 105

Believed to be issued to an 'agency' in Preston and bought for £50.00 on
a Preston - Euston train.

Xy son was approached on the train down to London and asked if he had a
ticket. He said no. Later on the journey a man out of a party of six .
or seven asked him if he wanted to purchase one, he juaped at the
chance. I was very wary about forgeries but it looked real and handed
over £50.00. It was for G gate.

I have also spoken to a man who paid £30.00 for a £25.00 ticket that had
Bradford City F.C. stamped on the back.
                               x*>




From:


My reason for writing is to say that I an pleased that you are asking a
formal protest about arrangements at Venbley for the Cup Final. It was
the worst overcrowding I have been in, if animals had been treated like
this the R.S.P.C.A. would call it a scandal.

Xy wife, having paid £6.00 for her ticket, never saw a ball kicked and
spent the entire game uninjured, but seated in the first aid post and
bears witness to the many injured supporters brought in for treataent.

I soldiered on but took a week to get over the bruising! The
authorities nay ask what conparisons do we nake. Veil, we both attended
the Vest Bron Final in '66 and fron the terraces watched the gane in
comfort. I stood in the same place before the Var for the
Huddersfield/Preston final and was quite comfortable. Even allowing for
forged tickets, I am convinced that the nuabers for personal safety were
greatly exceeded. I am delighted that you are raising the natter, for
too long the average supporter has been treated shabbily. I might add
that a 14 year old relative of mine, having got through the turnstile,
found the gate to his section closed because it was full.

It was adding huniliation to injury to lose after being a goal up but
one redeeming feature about the day was the carnival spirit and the good
behaviour of the police, who seemed to appreciate as much as anybody the
prevailing goodwill.




From

                                                  Liverpool

Forth Stand Seat Ticket 8 £20.00
Turnstile F, entrance 79, Row 19, Seat 9

I paid £50.00 for this £20.00 ticket outside Vembley Stadiua at 1.30
p. a. on Cup Final day.

The tout was originally asking for £120.00 before I bargained him down.
From:


I enclose a copy of a letter my brother has already sent to the F.A.

Ve are both ardent Liverpool fans and he and his son used our allocation
of tickets to go to the gaiae. His letter expresses his feelings about
what went on.

Ve wonder however, why a filtering system is not used to prevent those
without tickets from approaching the entrances? There were plenty of
warnings of forged tickets and the 'ready money' people are always in
evidence.

This of course brings us to the disgraceful ticket allocation system
which leads to these situations. The shortage of tickets plays a big
part in people milling around Vembley and eventually to a breakdown of
security which leads to the spectacle of fans swinging like monkeys high
above the ground, as witnessed on T.V. One day there will be fatalities
in and around this Stadium and once again we will have the politicians
expressing their horror as they did after Heysel and Bradford. That is
why we think the problems should be addressed to both the football
authorities and politicians who are so quick to condemn the game, yet
offer no solutions to its problems.

Ve wish you luck in your struggle for a betterdeal for football fans -
it will be hard but a worthwhile one.


From:


East Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket ® £6.00
Turnstile C, Entrance 17, Ticket Ho. 466
Ticket stamped on reverse, LONDON FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

Although I hadn't obtained a ticket for the match, I travelled down to
London on the Friday evening. At approximately 11.30 p.m., on the
Bayswater Road, after asking passers by, I was approached by four men
who said they could sell me two tickets. The tickets had to be
purchased together and the price was £50.00. As I was desperate, a
friend and I paid the money, £25.00 for each £6.00 ground ticket.

As you will agree, this black marketing is exploitation of genuine fans
and must stop. I therefore enclose my ticket stub and hope that you can
use it to bring this practice to a swift end. If you could return it it
may be useful for next year!!!

Finally, I must mention my disgust about the allocation of spaces for
disabled people. It is totally inadequate for some people whose only
pleasure in life is football, to be turned away from an event such as
this.
From:

                                                   Liverpool

I would like to tell you of my own experience at Vembley along with my
sixteen year old son who is confined to a wheelchair. Xy sen and I are
season ticket holders at Anfield and so were eligible for the Cup Final
at Veabley. Ve were kindly issued with a pass to go right into Vembley
by car, but unfortunately our car developed a fault and so we had to
travel by coach. Our tickets were allocated for a place on the Flame
Stand and as this was our first tiae at Vembley we encountered numerous
problems on arrival there. This stadium, to say the least, was never
built with handicapped people in mind as I soon discovered. First,
there were lots of steps we had to use with the wheelchair, which
created more than its fair share of difficulties as I had no-one else
with me to help. Secondly we could not find any stewards to ask
directions for the Flame Stand. I asked numerous people including lots
of policemen where it was but none of them were able to help me.
Anyway, I walked right around Vembley with my son before I found the
Flame Stand but this turned out to be the last straw because the only
place left for my son was behind a six foot square of scaffolding which
was cordoning off a huge London Veekend television camera man. This
almost completely blocked my son's view of the match as all he could see
was the goal ends on either side of the pitch. I couldn't begin to tell
you how upset he was about it as this was his dream shattered. Anyway,
I would like to say that these complaints are not for myself, but to
ensure someone can help prevent it happening to someone else in the
future.




From:   Everton Shareholder                 (lame and address supplied)

A travel agent in Kegent Street, Douglas, Isle of Man was openly
informing callers to their premises that they could get Cup Final
tickets at x 10 face value.

One chap I heard of actually had to pay £80.00 fora ground ticket five
days before the game, although that is not confirmed.

Then, 3 - 4 days before the gane an Everton supporter complained to
their higher office (perhaps their parent company) and, apparently, the
Isle of Man office was then informed that their ticket "offer* had to
cease forthwith.

Vhereas to certain supporters this black     market is their only hopeof a
ticket, it is nevertheless disgusting inView of the many week-in, week-
out fans who were unable to get into Veabley.

I hope this will be of help.
                              a<*




From:


Letter sent to : The Chairman, F.A.
                 c.c. Minister for Sport

I wish to draw your attention to what I would describe as serious
overcrowding in G/68 Vest Upper Standing Enclosure, Venbley Stadium on
Saturday 10th May.

The conditions within the enclosure were appalling, particularly when
one considers that I was in the national stadium watching the football
event of the year. If animals were subjected to this sort of treatment
they would at least have the protection of the R.S. P.C.A. Perhaps the
authorities consider those who throng the terraces as something less
than animals and therefore do not require such protection.

Vhen one considers that these deplorable conditions were happening
within fifty yards of the F.A. officials and only one year after the
Bradford and Belgium disasters it makes me wonder whether officialdom
has learned any lessons at all.

The reasons for the overcrowding are complex and range from an
inadequate stadium to insensitivity in the distribution of tickets and
poor control by turnstiles and stewardship. If attention is not given
to these points make no mistake - there will be a disaster at Veabley.

It is for this reason I am copying this letter to the Minister for Sport
and my local MP to be recorded against the possibility of further action
should it become necessary.




From:   Anonymous

Korth Stand Seat Ticket ® £20.00
Turnstile F, Entrance 77, Row 20, Seat 28

’Sold to ne by touts in the Crest International Hotel for £50.00*.

Ticket stamped on reverse COVESTRY CITY F.C.

(telephone number of purchaser available).
                          XI




From:


He the Vembley nightmare. My friend, daughter and myself took well over
half an hour to get from the bottom of the steps to the top to A
Entrance, turnstile 23.

It was disgraceful the amount of people trying to get into that entrance
with forged tickets and some even without tickets.

Vhy was it not possible to have police in the crowd onthesteps
checking tickets, once inside the stadium there were plenty of police.
Twice we had ours checked, once as we came through the turnstile and
again by a policeman and a steward at the entrance to the staircase
inside the ground.

Once up there it was even worse, we could not get through the crowd. Ve
complained to a steward whose reply was "It's all you scousers with
forged tickets!" How can this be when we had our tickets checked twice?
He then said we would have to push our way through the crowd as we were
blocking the exit.

Just before kick-off about fifty or sixty fans came up the stairs saying
that they had been moved by the police into our section because there
wasn't room in other parts of the ground.

Vhen Everton played Liverpool in the Milk Cup, we walked in half an hour
before kick-off with no problem. Also, in view of the games against
Vatford and Manchester United where there were no problems, why was it
not possible to organise things better?

On the train coming home i spoke to two young Liverpool fans who had
tickets and didn't even get in to see the game. Also another friend
said he had trouble getting into his section of the ground, J block.
                                    a.8




    From:

    2 x JTorth Terrace Seat Tickets ® £9.00 each.

    Turnstile D, Entrance 2, Row 13, Seat 217.
    Turnstile D, Entrance 2, Row 13, Seat 218.

    I answered an advertisement in the Liverpool Echo which stated
    'Executive Coach Travel to Vembley, neal with wine on outward and return
    Journeys with Cup Final Ticket for £75.00'. Vhen I rang the telephone
    number I was told that £75.00 was for a ground ticket, stand tickets
    were £110.00 I went to Manchester to a public house called the Egerton
    Arms, Gore Street, Salford. Vhile waiting to see the person selling
    tickets I was talking to two aen who told as that this happened every
    year, that the person selling the tickets was c a l l e d a n d he had
C   no trouble getting tickets for any major football match. When I net
    this person he told me that the price had gone up to £135.00. I said
    that I had only brough £220.00 so he said O.K., he would let me have
    them at the original price. He then brought out a aanilla envelope
    stuffed full of tickets.

    On the day of the natch the coaches were to pick us up at 9.00 a.m.
    After numerous 'phone calls they finally arrived at gone 9.30 a.m. They
    were not executive coaches, there was no wine because we were told it
    was banned, the meals were pre-packed salads consisting of a slice of
    wet boiled ham and a limp lettuce leaf. As they were handed out they
    were given back untouched!

    The person sitting next to me at the match told me he was worried when
    he heard about all the forgeries so had taken his ticket, bought from
    the same source as mine, to Everton's ground and asked them to check it.
    He was told that he couldn’t have come to a better place to have it
    checked as it was one of their own quota!!
From:


2 x North Stand Seat Tickets ® £20.00 each.

Turnstile F, Entrance 76, Row 14, Seat 13.
Turnstile F, Entrance 76, Row 14, Seat 14.

Tickets stamped on reverse OLDHAX ATHLETIC F.C.

My brother lives in Hertfordshire and works in London. He obtained the
enclosed tickets from a Company Director of a firm in London which he
visits in the course of his job. He was offered these tickets for
himself and his son for £100.00 each which he realised was many more
times their worth, but was so desperate to see the game he reluctantly
agreed to pay.

he's not a rich man but in my view a silly one. Sobodyshould   pander to
these greedy sharks by paying what they demand. He said that£25. 00
tickets were going for up to £1,000. The mind boggles as to who would
pay such a price, or could afford to, but obviously there is plenty of
money around, especially in London!

I would dearly like to see this stopped once and for all. Loyal fans of
both teams were unable, as we know, to obtain tickets. Vhat incentive
do they have to keep attending matches? The ticket distribution is a
disgrace. You will notice that the tickets were issued to Oldham
Athletic and it would be interesting to know who made the most money
from them!
                                lo




From:

East Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket ® £6.00.
Turnstile C, Entrance 16.
Ticket stamped on reverse BIRMINGHAM COUNTY F. A.

Please find attached a ticket that I bought on Friday 9th May outside
the Regent Palace Hotel in Piccadilly, London, for £45.00. The tout who
sold it to me wanted £60.00 at first, as that was the going rate, he
said. He was a small fellow with glasses who had a Brummie accent (if
you see the back of the ticket it says "Birmingham County Football
Association"), so to me it is obvious that these tickets never reached
their true destination because he had an envelope full of tickets that
were in pristine condition, hardly touched, as if he had just got them
from a club.

Good luck in trying to rid these vermin from the game!



From:


Forth Stand Seat Ticket ® £20.00.
Turnstile E, Entrance 86, Row 19, Seat 13.

I bought this ticket in London on Cup Final day for £50.00.   Good luck
in your quest for a better deal for genuine supporters.

Ticket stamped on reverse MANCHESTER UNITED F.C.



From:


Vest Lower Standing Enclosure Ticket @ £6. 00.
Turnstile H, Entrance 56.
Stamped on reverse PRESTON NORTH END F.C.

I have enclosed ay ticket stub which you will see cooes from Preston.     I
had to pay £50.00 for it. I bought it from two guys from Preston -
pretending to be Evertonians!

I would like to think that the ticket could be tracked down to a player,
and he then made to pay for it.

I have also heard two stories (from reliable sources) that (a named
player) was chosen to dispose of Everton tickets. This makes ms so
angry. Best of luck to you.
                                31




From:


South Terrace Seat Ticket @ £9.00.
Turnstile B, Entrance 25, Sow 7, Seat 18.
Ticket stamped on reverse XAKCHESTER COUFTY F.A.

Forth Terrace Seat Ticket ® £25.00.
Turnstile F, Entrance 73, Sow 22, Seat 75.
Ticket not stamped.

Both of these tickets were used on Cup Final day but the tear-off
portion was not removed by turnstile operators. One ticket, although
certainly genuine, had forgery written upon it by an official at
Vembley!


From:


East Upper Standing Enclosure Ticket @ £6.00.
Turnstile D, Entrance 10.

Please find enclosed my son's ticket which he was not required to
produce at any time on admission to Veabley!
                                IX




From:


On Saturday 10th May 1986 myself, ay husband, my sister and my brother-
in-law travelled to Vembley with the Liverpool Development Association
Trip for Lottery Ticket Agents. The journey was tiring, but enjoyable,
and after being slightly delayed having to stop at the Watford Gap
Service Station (most other Stations not allowing Football coaches) we
travelled on to Fulham Football Club, where a meal had been arranged for
the four coaches in our party. After having a most enjoyable meal and a
couple of drinks we travelled from Fulham to Vembley.

Ve arrived at Vembley later than planned, but in good time to get into
the Stadium before the kick-off. Getting into the Stadium was the
problem. My husband and myself had tickets for Block G and the other
two members of our family had tickets for Block H. Ve parted at the
bottom of the steps at Entrance G and arranged to meet up later in the
Coach Park.

As my husband and I were walking up the steps at Entrance G, there were
a number of fans coming down saying that there were only a few
turnstiles and that they could not get in (this in itself was causing a
problem. As people were trying to go up the steps a large number of
fans were trying to come down - whether because they had forged tickets
I do not know). Ve carried on up to the top of the steps and onto the
flat concrete surface in front of the turnstiles.

After lunch the weather became quite warm. I was wearing a Liverpool T-
shirt with a sweatshirt over it. The crowd started to swell and before
I knew I was surrounded by six footers, unable to move and practically
unable to breathe. At one stage I had to take off my sweatshirt,
accompanied by comments in typical Scouse humour!! But this was no joke
at all. it was very frightening and a number of people were panicking.
Being just over 5' 4", surrounded by six footers and unable to move is
no fun. I was being pushed from side to side, my husband also being
pushed as he was trying to shield me. I must add though that Liverpool
and Everton supporters are quite the gentlemen when someone is in
distress.

There were men with young sons, who had to haul them onxo their
shoulders to keep them away from the pushing and shoving of the crowds.
Vhat worried me was that if one person fell, everyone would fall, and
what would have resulted would have been Heysel Stadium all over again.

Finally, bedraggled, bruised and close to fainting I reached the
turnstiles and entered the Stadium. Once inside the Stadium I
rearranged myself, and tried to get ay breath back, when suddenly fans
started to try to force the concertina-style gate to the right hand side
of the turnstiles. Our entrance, I think it was 68, was at the side of
this concertina-style gate and it was a case of running for your life
before the gates and the crowds caae flooding in. Their efforts were in
vain this time, but after watching the match on video. I noticed the
gates at Entrance G were forced at some time during that afternoon and
fans went flooding in. The fans were everywhere, trying any way they
                                *3




could to enter the Stadium - they were on top of the turnstiles trying
to break the barbed wire to get over into the ground and scaling the
walls, aided by fans already in the ground.

The Police were altogether outnumbered and in ny opinion quite incapable
of coping with such a large crowd; a handful of police at each entrance
was of no use at all. There would not have been any of the overcrowding
at the entrances if some proper organisation had been arranged prior to
the Final. Why was it that the Stewards were inside the Stadium - they
would have been of more use outside, arranging orderly lines up the
steps and into the turnstiles. Surely, on such an important sporting
occasion a lot more Stewards could be employed for just one day - say
men who are out of work, and perhaps extra police brought in.

Once we were settled into our standing positions in Entrance G, we
watched an enjoyable game of football and the fans were a credit to the
whole of Merseyside, but I really do think more thought must be put into
another fixture of this scale.

I swore on 10th May 1986 that I would never go to Wembley again, but
having thought about it, it just boils down to bad management on the
part of Wembley and the F.A. Having been to Wembley a number of times,
this was the worst experience we have had. Hopefully, the problems can
be solved before the next meeting of "Merseyside".

10 OBE EVER WAHTS TO SEE THE HEYSEL TRAGEDY ALL OVER AGAIS.
                                    3 k.

Conclusion

From the evidence presented in the foregoing letters, there are five major areas
where substantial changes need to be ir.ade:
1.   The ticket allocation systen
2.   Police - steward liaison
3.   Corruption at turnstiles
4.   Facilities for disabled supporters
5»   General amenities provided at Wembley Stadium


Each one of these points can be dealt with individually.

1.   It is clear both fror. the selection of letters included herein and in the
view of the vast mass of football supporters generally, that the F.A.'s ticket
allocation syster. for Cup Finals at Vembley Stadium is the single, most signif-
 cant factor underlying most complaints, (pp 7» 8, 9i 19* 24, 26). The number
of tickets allocated to supporters of the competing finalists is frequently in­
sufficient to include many of those who regularly attend those club's Football
League and Cup matches. Consequently, the forging of tickets ( made easier by
the fact that all Wembley tickets look alike year after year), the desperate
fans without a ticket of any kind intent on entering the Stadium, and the now
perennial "black market” for tickets are all direct results of the persistant
under-allocation doggedly pursued by the Football Association. There is one
obvious and simple way to either alleviate or totally eliminate these problems:
SUBSTANTIALLY INCREASE THE TICKET ALLOCATION TO THE CCMFETIN3 FINALISTS.

Under the current system, the F.A. allocates      5V/. of   tickets to the two finalists.
However, almost 8(# of the remaining tickets are allocated to 1st and 2nd divis­
ion clubs and the various County Football Associations. This is too large an all­
ocation. It is apparent from the evidence of tickets bought on the black market
that the majority originate from that source (pp 20, 22, 23, 2*+, 25, 26, 28, 29,
3C, 31«)« Some tickets also originate from players with the competing clubs, but
we accept that that is a matter outside of the F.A.*s direct control.

There can be little doubt that the current allocation system, despite occasional
minor modification, was designed for a pre-television age sad therefore, stands
in need of restructuring. The F.S.A. suggests that a minimum of TCtf, but better
still something in the order of EC#    oT all   available tickets bo shared by the
competing clubs in future. This would still leave up to 29,''CO (based on 7C' of
current capacity of 9S,GCC) for the F.A. to distribute between clubs, County
F.A.’s, F.A. Council representatives etc. Such a change would almost certainly
eradicate the problems caused by forgeries, the black market ar.d ticket-less
fass. This kind of positive action, sympathetic tc the desires of ordinary fans
Li'ited must recruit a better, less corrupt staff, perhaps by   offering higher
rc-muneration for their difficult and onerous responsibility.


     The facilities for the disabled spectator at Wembley are nothing short of
a disgrace. Cpp 2^.) A mere twe*re wheelchair places are available out of the
near 1CG,Q0C capacity. If Vembley is to remain considered as our T’National
Stadium" it should provide at the very minimum TOO wheelchair places, given
that about     of the population are registered disabled. For those few ( very
few ) who are lucky enough to secure a place on the designated platform, a
decent view of the game is then not guaranteed. On 10th Hay 1?S6 a London Week­
end T.V. canera gantry was placed directly in front of the wheelchair platfortr.i
(p 25.)


5*   The amenities and refreshment facilities at Wembley are poor and grossly
inadequate, (pp 3, *+, 5» 21, 25)• If rapid and substantial improvements are not
forthcoming, the F.S.A. is happy to recommend the suggestion made in a number
of letters (pp 7, 8, 1h , 15, 16), that a new national stadium be considered;
one owned by the nation and not a private enterprise, built to satisfy the needs
cf the masses of ordinary people who support and fund nany different sports.


On 10th Kay 1986 there could quite easily have been a disaster in human terns
either outside the stadium in the crush approaching many of the turnstiles, or
inside in areas of extreme- overcrowding. Fortunately, serious injury to any
person was avoided this time, although many suffered severe bruising and much
distress. There can be little doubt, as many correspondants point out, that the
basic good humour and friendly rivalry of Kerseyside supporters rather than any
effective organisation by the F.A., Wembley Stadium Limited or Police, prevented
another football catastrophe. Under similar conditions ir. the future and where
the opposing supporters may not so readily integrate, will lady luck smile quite
so pleasantly? And, if she doesn’t, WHERE WILL THE BLAME BE LAID?
                                     3£
would alsc generate a lot of goodwill and thus help prcr.cte t'..e fur.da.T.-5-ite.l
chnr.jres ir. attitude required to combat football hooliganism.


2.   -he liaison between the police ar.d Wembley stewards on 1Cth May 1936 was
obviously poor. (pp 6, 13*             18, 26, 2?, 33»)* Wembley Stadium's method
of recruitment of stewards requires considerable improvement. There were cany
examples (e.g. the Dorar. brothers featured on T.V.AM shortly after last year's
final) of supporters who found it frighteningly easy to be hired as stewards.
It seems that a number of seperate and un-coordinated organisations have been
responsible for Wembley's security, increasing the likelyhood of poor liaison
between stewards and poliee. One single body should assume responsibility.

There were numerous examples of bad policing, (pp 7» 10, 13, *5» 18, 19* 20.).
Kaay of the individual police officers outside the stadiua were not equipped
with personal radios and consequently were ucnable to inform supporters of the
problems occuring at turnstiles. The crowd crushes outside G and H blocks in
particular, where many supporters experienced much distress, were caused in
part by the failure to provide explanatory information. People will behave
patiently under stress if they understand that there is a problem and are ass­
ured of its solution. As it was, no assurances were given and many supporters,
some having paid large   sum   to purchase black market tickets, were or. the edge
of panic at the prospect o? failing to enter the stadium at all.

Further problems were created when inexperienced police officers took over the
inspection of tickets from     turnstile operators, (pp 1, 10, 13). This lead to
holders of genuine tickets     being barred from entry. The difficulties created
by forged ticket-holders being rejected at turnstiles, from where it was almost
impossible to retreat into the crush behind, could have been largely avoided by
forward planning. It was common knowledge weeks before the Cup Final that certain
blocks (especially 3 and H) had been targeted by forgers. If either informed
police or Wembley stewards     had been placed early at thebottom of the steps
leading up tc the turrstiles in crder to filter cut themore obvious forgeries
(h r i those without tickets), orderly queues could have been formed ejid main­
tained. Clearly there was wholly inadequate preparation by the Metropolitan
Folice and Wembley Stadium Limited.       If the latter recruit stewards at 11.00am
on the day of the match, as evidenced fcy the Doran’s story, there is little
time to instruct them properly* Siven the activities of various modern terrorist
organisations, the stadium's security can only be deplored.


3.   The persistance, year after year, of corruption at the turnstiles has very
dangerous consequences in terms of overcrowding, (pp 10, 11, 12, 16). Unfortun­
ately, Wembley's turnstile operators are renowned f~r their readiness to accept
what can only be described as a brine. Seas oi-evato».*s reteir. tickets ar:d re-sell
thsm later, as ;er Kr. Fenr-instor.' s f-xperienci* tsld on pag» 12. Wembley Stadium
