                                      M E M O R A N D U M



            FROM                                            TO




            DATE   28th APRIL 1989




             PA CUP SEMI FINAL    -     LIVERPOOL PC -V- NOTTINGHAM FOREST FC

                                 SATURDAY 15th APRIL 1989




    Further to you memorandum dated 18th April 1989 concerning the above,
    there is probably very little that I can add that has not been stated
    already, however I list below a few observations that I remember of
    the day :-

           a.  When I arrived at the ground at approx 2. 10pm I was
           unable to gain access to the official car park due to
           the number of supporters waiting to enter the ground at
           the kop end.  These were Notts Forest supporters who were
           waiting in an orderley fashion.

           b.  After finding somewhere to park we returned to the
           ground and approached the South Stand entrance.  The entrance
           was near to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and there
           was certainly a lot of people moving towards that end of the
           ground, and there was an uneasy feeling which I certainly
           noticed.

#          c.  After gaining admittance to the
           I did hear a PA announcement asking
                                                     ground at approx 2. 45pm
                                                     people outside of the
           ground to be patient and they would       all be allowed in.   I
           assume by "all" they did mean those       with tickets. This would
           be at about 2. 50pm.

           d.  As we took our seats it was very clear that the centre
           paddock at the Leppings Lane end of the ground was very tightly
           packed. Whereas normally on terracing you can see heads and
           shoulders, it seemed that all I could see was literally the
           hair of the people standing there.

           e.  When the match was abandoned, I and those around me were
           unaware of the tragedy that was unfolding before our eyes. In
           retrospect I felt that the entire scene events was handled
           very badly indeed.  I do not normally criticise the Police
           but they definetly appeared to be out of touch with what was
           happening that day.
        f.  It was approx an hour before any sort of announcement was
        made over the PA system. At the time the rescue was going
        on on the pitch, there were pockets of ill feeling spreading
        around the ground, even in the "best" seats, as people were
        unaware of the seriousness of the situation.  A simple
        message, not necessarily telling the whole story would, I
        am sure have lessened the tension.  I eventually saw a senior
        police officer walking around making announcements through
        a loud hailer! !


        I hope the above comments are of some use to you, but they
do not portray the horror of the scene, which at times I can still
see clearly in my mind, and which reduced my son to total silence for
well over two hours, which for him, an out and out chatterbox, showed
the extent of the tragedy that he had witnessed.
