POPPLE*JELL REPORT

Relevant to football authorities.

General Remarks by OP:-

4.2    "Clubs need to ensure that their grounds are physically safe, with reasonable
       facilities and staff properly trained to control those who are invited into
       the grounds and to deal with any emergency".

4.13 "A police presence is there (inside the ground) to assist in the enforcement
     of law and order. Those responsible for organising a private fxncticn, howaver,
     have the primary and continuing obligation and responsibility to ensure reason­
     able safety for those who are invited onto their premises. (Continuing in
     4.14) This responsibility, which is a legal responsibility, continues throughout
     the tine that those whom they have invited onto their gromd remain there. It
     does not, for instance, cease when an emergency arises."

4.18     — evacuation procedures, at major grounds at any rate, should be the subject of
       pre-planning, involving the club and its stewards, the local fire services---
       and the police".

4.107 "(He urges that)    urgent consideration be given by football clubs in England
     and Wales to introducing a menbership system. (Continuing in 4.115(25)) To
     ensure that these criteria (associated with such a system) are ccirplied with,
     we .commend that the Football League issue guidelines to all clubs to be
     included in the arrangements".

4.129 "I have (already) expressed my view about the responsibility of clubs, as
     private organisations inviting spectators into their grounds for profit, to
     bear the responsibility for ensuring the reasonable safety of those spectators."

4.137: ".. .1. recorrrBnoe^that consideration be given to the design of a standard
     efficient perimeter fence with proper exits. That was understood in scute quarters
     to irean that I had recommended that perimeter fences should be installed as a
     matter of routine at all grounds. That was not my intention. Vfiat I was saying
     was that if perimeter fencing was to be installed at a particular ground, it
     would be sensible that the design of it should be standardised. (Continuing
     in 4.138)..I would like to have persuaded the Football Association to set up
     a small working party to help the clifcs develop a standard design. They declined
     the invitation pointing out that if their design was unsuccessful and the fence
     surmovnted, this would undermine their disciplinary pcwer. I still think they
     are the proper organisation to look at the problem."

Recctrmendatians (Interim and Final Report) - see attached.
