          NORTHAMPTONSHIRE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                     CENTENARY 1886-1986



 Kr F H G Ke l l y
C h ie f E xecutive
The F o o t b a l l A s s o c i a t i o n .
                                                                                  2ljfch April, 1989*


 Dear Mr K e lly ,

      In re|>ly to your             of 21st inst., I herewith
 submit my report regarding the FA Cup Semi-Final staged st
 Hillsborough on 15 th April, 198?.

       Driving into Sheffield from the MI (Junction 50) on the
 A6l6 before joining the A6l - approaching the groun£ all the
 'pubs' were open and appeared full to overflowing.
       I must point out that I arrived early at the groung by
 1.1+5 pm - parking at the North Stand car park and walking
 round to the reception area and to the Guests Lounge - at
 this time there appeared to be no obvious crowd control.
       At about 2.i£m I proceeded to my sest in the Director's
 Box (F 2 5 ) and everything seemed in good order on a sunny
 afternoon, although the terrace at the Lappings Lane end of.
 the ground appeared quite full and filling up rapidly.
       When the players came on to the pitch there was a lo£
 of excitement all around the ground culminating at the kick-
 off when there appeared to be a surge and people were spilling
 over the safety fencing only to be initially pushed back by
 the police.
       Within minutes sore and more people spilled onto the
 ground behind the goal and it appeared there were serious
 difficulties when play was stopped by a Police Officer
 running on to the pitch and contacting the Referee.
       I remained in my seat and witnessed casualties being
 attended to and stretchered to the other end of the ground
 with police reinforeements proceeding to the leppings Ipne
 goal area from other parts of the ground.
       No announcements were made for a considerable time and
 even then they could    not be understood until the final one
 which announced that     the game had been abandonedandrequesting
 spectators to remain in their places to allow casualties to
 be cleared.
       My personal comments are that it seems that much better
 crowd control should have beer* exercised outside ths ground
 and that people without tickets should have not been allowed
 to accumulate around or approach the turnstiles. Police
 inside the Stadium did not appear to be very well organissd
 - msny just standing spread across the ground. Certainly more
 and earlier information could have beer given over the public
 address system- this, in fact, appears to nesd at
 improvement.               f          \
            D eputy Chairpwm of CyuncU
                                           r(L
                              P R E S ID E N T fL U N D E R W O O D ^
                                                           H onorar^F feasurer   H onorary Sccretar%,y<w3ffi FootbaH
