                     THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                     LIM ITED

                                 Patron: HER MAJESTY THE QUEEN
                                President: H .R .H . THE DUKE OF KENT
                                       Chairman: F.A . MILLICHIP

General Secretary:                                                                        Phone: 01-262 4542/402 7151
 E.A.CROKER                                                                                      Tetri: 261110




                           16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

Our Ref:                                       YourRef:                      7thJune,     1985.




Secretary to           the Inquiry,
Committee of           Inquiry into Crowd Safety
 and Control           at Sports Grounds,
Home Office,
Queen Anne's           Gate,
London, SW1H           9A T .



Dear   |         \




     Further to your letter dated 3rd June, I note your request
for comments for submission to Mr. Justice Popplewell and his
Inquiry Committee.

     Fortunately,                was able to accept my invitation
to the Scotland v. England game and it gave an excellent opportunity
to provide him with background information of the organisation
within football, but I will now give my initial reaction to your
questions.

     The paragraph number references are in accordance with the
appendix to your letter.

Hooliganism

1.         (i)       The problem mainly occurs through away supporters
                     in confrontation with the home supporters or the
                     police or both.  There are instances where a club
                     has a poor record, whilst not attracting large
                     visiting support, such as Portsmouth, where because
                     of the location of the ground in many cases very
                     few visiting supporters attend and yet trouble can
                     still be experienced.  Mainly it is away supporters
                     that are the problem, particularly outside the
                     ground

       (ii)          The best way is to convert the hooligans into well
                     behaved individuals and, therefore, the answer to
                     the question is commit them to prison knowing that
                     whilst they are there, they will not be admitted to
                     grounds and when they are out they will probably
                     ensure that they do not go back.  Also see
                     paraqraph fiv) below.

                            Kegun i n l ( >l/uc ./ft iM ncm ter h m e. Ijm tltm W'2 JLW                LOntd...
                            Incorporated m L ondon          Registration N um ber 777V7
                                           7th June, 1985.



     (iii)   There are many occasions when a 11.00a.m. start
             or possibly before midday start is advisable and
             many clubs have occasionally introduced this, but
             it could be adopted much more widely than at
             present.

      (iv)    The simple answer to your three questions is yes,
              yes and yes. There should be all ticket matches on
              many occasions where there could be crowd problems
              and this could exclude the issue of tickets to the
              away team for clubs with a poor away record.     No
              tickets should be issued to the club and this must
              be accompanied by no tickets being sold on the day
              of the match.   The police may then face a
              considerable problem should several hundred of the
              visiting supporters arrive.   To make this work,
              the difficult situation of controlling these people
              outside the ground and under no circumstances letting
              them in would be essential.   No clubs to date have
              restricted admission to holders of some form of
             membership card, except season ticket holders and
              some enclosures, but I believe that we will see
              this in future and this could certainly reduce the
             potential problems, although it will also almost
             certainly reduce the income to clubs at least in
              the short term.   Whether this could be extended to
              supporters club cards being accepted from the
             supporters of both clubs so that they could be
             segregated adequately and vetted, remains to be seen,
             but the administrative problems of supporters club
             cards or membership cards are set out in our report
             to the Prime Minister on membership cards, a copy
             of which is attached herewith.    There have been
             inaccurate quotes that the F.A. was against
             membership cards.    This is not true.   For practical
             reasons we are against a nationwide membership
             scheme, but we believe that individual schemes at
             clubs could well be beneficial in certain
             circumstances.

Offences

2.           This is not a question we are equipped to answer,
             although we can express an opinion that in many
             cases the decisions of the Courts are totally
             inadequate and whether this is brought about by
             an adequate charge being brought or sympathetic
             considerations by Magistrates is a matter of
             opinion. There is one additional requirement
             that would make an enormous difference in relation
             to football hooliganism and that is if it was an
                                     3.

                                                  7th June, 1985.



                    offence that could be punishable by
                    imprisonment for a spectator to come onto
                    the pitch or the surrounding area.   If such an
                    offence was clearly defined in the Law and
                    positive charges which could be very clearly
                    proven with the benefit of close circuit
                    television cameras and the witnesses that would
                    be .available to the arrest of anyone on the pitch,
                    this would undoubtedly get rid of the most prolific
                    cause of reported hooliganism.   Close circuit T.V.
                    is now installed at some clubs and hopefully will
                    be extended to many more and this will not only
                    assist crowd control but could provide evidence
                    for Court cases.

     Alcohol

     3.             It can clearly be seen from the Minutes of the Liaison
                    Committee, which I would suggest should be available
                    to the Members of the Committe of Inquiry, that we
                    have requested the introduction of a Bill on the
                    same lines as the Scottish legislation for several
                    years and we have had total resistance from the
                    Home Office and the Minutes will also reveal other
                    issues on which we have required Government help
                    that has not been forthcoming.  The Minutes are
                    available within the Ministry of Sport, but if
                    you have any problem procuring these, please let
                    me know and I will send you copies.

     Designation:     Other Sports

.3   4.             This is not a subject on which we should comment.

     Legislation

     5-            If the Inquiry reveals weaknesses in the Green
                    Code in relation to the fire at Bradford and the
                   wall collapse at Birmingham, then changes may be
                    required, but generally the Act itself seems to
                    be adequate and effective and the local control
                    is an essential element.

     6.            The most important possibility is referred in
                    paragraph 2. Other variations could probably
                    be better provided by the Police who have the
                    problem of framing the charges.




                                                                    Contd.
                                                7th June, 1985.



Green Guide

7.            This has been covered by my answer in paograph 5.
               We were very much involved in the initial
               preparation of the Act and the Green code and it
               does seem to have worked remarkably well, although
               it does, as you are no doubt well aware, involve
               considerable expense and designation of 3rd and
               4th Division Clubs will impose a severe
               financial burden on clubs and The Football Trust.

8.            No comment.   See item 4.


     Due to the Summer Tour we will not be arranging meetings at
The Football Association before the end of the month, so I am
taking this opportunity of sending you this personal reply, but
it does conform with the views that I share with my colleagues.

     I note that if the Chairman would like to enlarge on this
limited written evidence at a meeting, you will let me know.

                             Yours sincerely,

                              '   //

                               E.A. Croker
                            General Secretary
