Note of a meeting with the Metropolitan Police - New Scotland Yard
Thursday, 8th August, 1985

Present:        D.A.C. A Innes
                Commander Young
                Superintendent Aitchison
                Superintendent A Arvold



                Glen Kirton - Football Association
                Members of the London Football Clubs




Deputy Assistant Commissioner Innes explained that the meeting had
been called to discuss means by which the Clubs and the Metropolitan
Police could work together during the coming season in the interests
of crowd control. He felt it was more important than ever that the
Clubs and the Police were shown to be acting together.

Commander Young explained that the Metropolitan Police would be
insisting on segregation barriers as a term of their agreeing to the
issue of a safety certificate by the local authority under the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act. They were not insisting, for the moment, on
perimeter fencing, although the Metropolitan Police would advocate
it as a general rule. He did appreciate the need, following the
Bradford disaster, to marry considerations of safety with those of
crowd control.

It was appreciated that Clubs and the football authorities would
wish to vary the dates of matches and kick-off times for matches
where problems were anticipated and that they would also wish to
make certain matches all ticket. Commander Young stated the opinion
that all ticket matches were not a panacia but could be of use,
particularly where near capacity crowds were expected. He hoped that
the Police would be allowed to participate in the planning process
for all matches.. The Metropolitan Police intended to hold internal
meetings every 6 weeks to discuss forthcoming fixtures.

He hoped that the Police could be involved in the training and
briefing of Club Stewards and that it would be possible for such
Stewards to attend the regular Police meetings referred to.

Superintendent Aitchison stated that the new laws did not, as yet,
give Police the unfettered right to search spectators, but he hoped
that Clubs would make it a condition of entry to their grounds that
spectators would submit to a search if required by the Club or the
Police. He stressed the need to make this condition public through
the use of posters close to turnstiles.
                                                         cont/.
 Superintendent Aitchison referred to the improved intelligence
 arrangements being operated by the Metropolitan Police and
 explained that it was the intention of New Scotland Yard to
 co-ordinate more effectively than ever with provincial forces
 in the dissemination of this information.

         of the Home Office explained the capabilities of the
new video surveillance vehicle, commonly known as the 'Hooli-van'.
Commander Young hoped that Clubs would be able to provide the
necessary facilities for the van to operate within grounds if
required. |         [also presented the newly developed Evidence
Gathering camera and it was again hoped that the Clubs would
provide the necessary facilities for its efficient operation.

With regard to alcohol, Superintendent Aitchison advised Clubs
that the Police would not oppose exemption orders under the
new legislation unless:

1. There was a lack of co-operation by the Club in making physical
    improvements to their grounds, especially where this was
    likely to lead to alcohol based abuse.

2. There was e lack of co-operation by the Club in assisting the
    Police in their control of crowds.

3.   There was a history within the Club of alcohol related misconduct.
4.   There was a history of other misconduct.

5.   The Club failed to appoint or use effectively a Police Liaison
     Officer.


At the end of the meeting, Commander Young read a statement vhich he
hoped that the Clubs would approve stating that there was a good
measure of agreement of the steps to be adopted. I felt that, in
the interests of stressing good relations between Clubs and the
Police, this should read "complete agreement". This was agreed by
the Police and the Clubs and the statement was issued:




Glen Kirton

14th August, 1985
CC
