THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION




CROWD SAFETY INFORMATION




                SEPTEMBER 1989
                         TAYLOR REPORT - CHAPTER 24
                           INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS


315. The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to
ensure that existing football grounds can for the present be safely
used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and
other information I have received. They complement the
recommendations which Mr Justice PoppleweU set out after his inquiry
at Bradford.
316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the
1989/90 season starts. The rest should be started forthwith and
completed as soon as possible.

Maximum Capacities for Terraces
* 1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which
   are self contained, the Safety Certificate should specify the
   maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or
   area.
    A pen or area is to be deemed "self-contained" notwithstanding that
    it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen or area and
    whether such gate or gates be open or shut.
* 2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in
   accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide
   figure") subject to the following qualifications:-
    (a) in arriving at "the Green Guide figure", proper and realistic
           allowance must be made for all factors which should reduce the
           permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum
           figures specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green
           Guide;
    (b) after assessing "the Green Guide figure", a deduction of 15%
           should be made to improve the safety margin.
* 3. Arrangements should be made:-
    (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained
            pen or area to the maximum capacity figure assessed in
            accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically,
            mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
            otherwise, and
    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its
           maximum capacity is about to be reached.

Filling and Monitoring Terraces
* 4. There should be a written agreement between the club and
   police setting out their respective responsibilities for crowd
   safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-
   contained pen or other terraced area and the monitoring of
   spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
   variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match
   should be agreed in writing in advance.
 * 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each
    self-contained pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the club
    is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are
    monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that
    area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period
    the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should
    be in addition to any other steward or police presence. He should
    have ready access to the police officer authorised under
    Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to the control room.

Fences and Gates

      6. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to
    the terraced areas and especially those with duties under
    Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with
    regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition
    of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. T r aining should
    include demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed
    to enable stewards and officers to recognise different crowd
    densities.
* 7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-
   contained areas should be painted in a different colour from the
   rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit".
* 8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch
   should be kept fully open during the period when spectators are
   on the terrace.
* 9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence
   (or group of gates if they are close together) a police officer
   authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a
   gate to relieve overcrowding. The officer so authorised in respect
   of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so
   by all stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be
   able to make radio contact with the control room either himself or
   via an officer close at hand.
* 10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided
   by the club at each ground where there are perimeter fences to
   permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers
   of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached as to
   whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade,
   or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so.
   Whether to use it should be a decision of a nominated senior police
   officer at the ground.

Crush Barriers

* 11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately
   for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be affected by a
   significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.
* 12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be
   reviewed immediately to ensure that it complies with the criteria
   contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the
   assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced
   area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should reflect the
   fact.
Safety Certificates
      13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate
    by the responsible local authority, which should consult the club
    in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire
    service, the ambulance service and the building authority. Such a
    review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its object
    should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the
    Certificate are complied with and to add or substitute any
    condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following
    the findings and recommendations in this report.
      14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports
    stadium designated under the 1975 Act for which no Safety
    Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to
    remedy the situation.
      15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local
    authority at least once annually and each Certificate should
    require to be renewed annually.
      16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for
    issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing
    Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists
    or is provided an accountable administrative structure whereby the
    functions of the local authority are regularly and effectively
    supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions
    are properly taken in accordance with the local authority’s rules.
      17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it
    should set up an Advisory Group consisting of appropriate members
    of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and
    ambulance services, of the building authority, of the club and of a
    recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory Group’s terms of
    reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety
    and should require regular visits to the ground and attendance at
    matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local
    authority, and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be
    recorded and it should be required to produce regular written
    reports for consideration by tie local authority.

Duties of each Football Club
* 18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of
   flow measured. Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to
   ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators
   at the rate anticipated.
* 19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and
   the turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure that all the
   spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass
   through the turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done,
   the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced accordingly.
* 20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of
   the area served by them is about to be reached and arrangements
   should be made to ensure quick and effective communications with
   turnstile operators for this purpose.
      21. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable
    crowd densities outside the ground, within concourse areas and in
    pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and
    throughout a match.
* 22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the
   ground should be comprehensively reviewed. It should, in relation
   to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous* eye-catching,
   simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid
   movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing area.
* 23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear
   and should correlate absolutely with the information provided in
   respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained
   ticket stubs should contain information necessary to guide
   spectators once Inside the ground.
* 24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position
   by a particular time should be reviewed by clubs in conjunction
   with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned
   arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.
      25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as
    to the provision of pre-match entertainment aimed at attracting
    spectators to the ground in good time.

Police Planning
* 26. The Giief Constable of each police force in whose area there
   is one designated stadium or more should nominate a chief officer
   to liaise with the management of each football club and local
   authority concerned in respect of the safety and control of
   crowds.
* 27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium
   and the pre-match briefing of all officers on duty there should
   alert such officers to the importance of preventing any
   overcrowding and, if any is detected, of taking appropriate steps
   to remedy it.
* 28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium
   should enable the police to cope with any foreseeable pattern in
   the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It
   should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment
   of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.
* 29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion
   of the officer in command at the ground. Crowd safety should be
   the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.
     30. There should be available in the police control room the
   results of all closed circuit television monitoring outside and
   inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical
   counting of numbers at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any
   area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
   in the interpretation and use of these data.
Communications

      31. There should be sufficient operators in the police control
    room to enable all radio transmissions to be received, evaluated
    and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators
    in the control room priority over, and the capacity to override,
    others using the same channel. Additional channels should be used,
    where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.
    Consideration should be given to sound-proofing the control room
    against excessive crowd noise.
     32. To complement radio communications, there should be a
    completely separate system of land lines with telephone links
    between the control room and key points at the ground.
      33. W ithin the control room, there should be a public address
    system to com m u n icate with individual areas outside and inside
    the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground.
    Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to
    catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in
    the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on
    every programme sold for every match.
      34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising
    boards to address the crowd. Consideration should also be given
    to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to
    indicate to the. control room the existence of certain emergencies
    or requirements.

Co-ordination of Emergency Services
* 35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain
   through senior nominated officers regular liaison concerning crowd
   safety at each stadium.
* 36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should
   ensure that the fire service and ambulance service are given full
   details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the
   number of spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and
   exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning
   the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be
   readily available in the control rooms of each of the emergency
   services.
* 37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium
   of emergency vehicles from all three services should be reviewed.
   They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and
   accessibility within the ground itself.
* 38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should
   be briefed as to the contingency plans for the arrival of emergency
   services and should be informed when such services are called as to
   where and why they are required.

First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
* 39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one
   trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the
   responsibility for securing such attendance.
         40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms.
       The number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within
       them should be specified by the local authority after taking
       professional medical advice and should be made a requirement of any
       Safety Certificate.
   * 41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at
      each match and available to deal with any medical exigency at the
      ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid.
      He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
      and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match.
      His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control
      room and he should be immediately contactable.
   * 42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate
      ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an
      expected crowd of 5,000 or more.
        43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where
      larger crowds are expected should be specified by the local
      authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should
      be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

                          GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
                                   (1986 EDITION)



        9. Crush Barriers and Handrails


     112. The maximum spacing of crush barriers will be dependant on
     the gradient of the terrace or viewing slope. Paragraphs 113-119
     below give recommendations for the spacing and strength of crush
     barriers.
     113. Ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the full
     width of a terrace, with gaps only at the radial gangways.
     114. Where barriers are not continuous between radial gangways,
     the alignment of gaps in successive rows of barriers on a terrace
     should form an angle of less than 60° to the barriers. There should
     be no more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps. (See Figure
     3 below).

               \               1— -----                               r
                 '\            tLrBarriers -                     /7
                      V                    tI                   '
                                                                A-
                          %                                 /
                           \                                /
                              V
                      60° A                             A   6 0 ° m ax
                      —       r> m                          ---------------------

                                                /   *                     T•- B arrie rs   -»

                      _                    /                                               I
Figure 3    Arrangement of gaps between crush barriers
  115. Where there are gaps in the line of crush barriers these
  should be at least 1.1 metres and not more than 1.4 metres in
  width.
  116. Column A in Table 1 below provides the maximum distances
  between barriers conforming to the greater strength requirements
  of crush barriers as described above; column B provides the maximum
  distances between barriers conforming to the lesser strength
  requirements. Interpolation may be made between these figures.
  117. A distinction is made between barrier intervals required in
  "peak" viewing areas. The term "peak" viewing areas describes the
  most popular parts of the terraces where there is a tendency for
  spectators to crowd together and become so emotionally involved in
  the occasion that their reactions can cause additional pressures to
  be set up in those sections of the ground. The peak viewing areas
  are particularly associated with football grounds and are typically
  behind the goal areas, although other parts of the terraces known
  locally may come within this category.
   TABLET

                                                    M aximum horizontal distance
                                                    between barriers
    Terrace Gradient                                Peak Viewing      Other Areas
                       Step ris e r:   Step width   A       B         A       B

   05°           le        1     in       14.4      5.0m    3.3m      8.4m    5.6m

    10°                   1      in        5.7      4.3m    2.9m      6.7m    4.5m

    15°                   1      in        37       3.8m    2.6m      5.6m    3.7m

   20°                    1      in        2.7      3.4m    2.3m      4.8m    3.2m

    25°                   1      in        2.1      3.1m    2.1m      4.2m    2.8m

   30°                    1      in        1.7      2.9m    1.9m      3.8m    2.5m

Terraces and viewing slopes
    221. Where crush barriers meet the strength and spacing guidelines
    of Chapter 9 the capacity of a terrace or viewing slope should be
    assessed from the area available for standing by allowing a packing
    density of between 54 and 27 persons per 10 square metres depending
    upon the condition of the terrace or slope. Only those parts of
    the terrace or viewing slope from which the whole of the playing
    area can be seen, excluding gangways, should be included in this
    calculation.
    222. The extreme allowances for packing density are as follows:
     (a) 54 persons per 10 square metres when the terrace or viewing
           slope is in good condition (as set out in Chapter 8); and
     (b) 27 persons per 10 square metres when it materially deviates
           from the recommended guidelines, so as to constitute a
           possible hazard to individuals closely packed.
