                                       25 August 1989




Attdg a meeting at the FA Headquarters at Lancaster Gate
with Adrian Titcomba and      ,   1       ran t:hrough the
note he had made from the previous meeting. Adrian Titcombe
said he was still slightly unhappy that the FA did not play
a greater role in safety and he wanted the FA powers to be
widened. He was slightly concerned, from the PR point of
view, that the FA would be seen to be washing their hands of
the problem but he did understand that it was dangerous to
dabble and that it would take a huge operation to monitor
safety adequately.
|   then ran through the 1985 memo to football clubs on ^
crowd safety. He thought the document was very weak and
when the safety aspects had been removed it was also very
thin. In the end we decided that the memo ought to be
scrapped and a new memo, consisting of the recommendations
from both the Taylor and Popplewell Reports, should be sent
out as soon as possible with a covering letter.
AT believed that the clubs should be reminded of the
problems of ticket touts so we decided that we would put
this in the covering letter.
We also discussed Rule 24. We said that the Rule needed to
be amended. We suggested that the words "save for reasons
relating to crowd safety" should be inserted in R. 24(1)(b) ~  >
after the words "no spectators or unauthorised persons are
permitted to encroach onto the pitch area". In R.24(2) the f
words "or for reasons relating to crowd safety" should be
inserted after the words "incidents or occurrences     ...   j
complained of where the result of circumstances over which
it had no control".                                         ^
                                                               i   t.

As AT was fairly busy over the next few weeks it was               ^
decided that I  Iwould draft the covering letter and compile
the list of recommendations in the Taylor and Popplewell
Reports and sent it to the FA for their comments. He also
felt that John Dyson should be sent a copy for his comments.

Time engaged: 3 hours (inc travel and dictation)
