25 April 1989

                                    STATEMENT ON

         F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY ON THE 15 APRIL 1989

1.15 p.m. We arrived at the A61 Junction with the Ml to Sheffield and noted that
traffic was moving very slowly and decided to enter Sheffield on the A616 through
Outibridge. I noticed that Coaches and vans were being stopped by the Police but
private cars were allowed through.

1.35 p.m. My wife dropped us off on the A616 about h mile from the ground and
there were large numbers of Liverpool supporters in obvious good spirits soire
drinking canned beer but nobody was obviously drunk. We had tickets for the
West Stand entrance 'C' although a friend of my nephews had a ticket for the Spion Kop.
We decided    to walk with him to the Spion Kop from the Leppings Lane end and
during this time we noticed several groups of Liverpool fans who seenred to be
"Casing the Ground". By the time we had got to the roundabout where the A61 and
A616 merge the fans were all Nottingham Forest supporters and it seenred there were
greater numbers of people here than at the Leppings Lane end. We left my nephews
friend here and walked back down the Penistone Road - every side street between
this and the A616 was blocked off with barriers at each end with two Policemen in
attendance all the way up to the garage at the roundabout where the two roads meet.

We walked down towards the Ground from here and I was approached on at least a
hundred occasions by Liverpool fans asking for spare tickets. Many of these were
drinking canned beer. Many people were just hovering about just away from the gates
at the Leppings Lane entrance. As we approached we were asked by the Police - there
were 5 or 6 on duty here - to get into the ground or if not to keep walking. We
were allowed into the ground on production of the tickets but immediately before the
turnstile we were asked to show our tickets and "frisked" by the Police. There
were two Police Officers to each turnstile. Once through the turnstile we headed for
the West Stand and were again asked to show tickets before being allowed to go up
the steps into the stand.

We went into the West Stand at 2.10 p.m. and noticed that very few seats were
occupied, certainly less than 300 although perhaps 50 or so supporters were stood
right at the front of the stand overlooking the terraces. The Police occasionally
tried to get them to sit down without success.

We were seated in row 9 seats 85,. 86 and 87 next to the aisle. Already by this time
the Spion Kop was quite full although the two stands running parallel with the pitch were
relatively empty.

By kick-off tine the seats were all filled and the terrace area to our left
adjoining the big cantilever covered stand     was full. Shortly after the match
had started two supporters barged past us showing us full tickets with counterfoils
attached saying they had seats and a minute later Nottingham Forest took a c o m e r
kick and I noticed fans trying to climb over the fence directly behind the Liverpool
goal. The Police, like nre, thought this was a pitch invasion and pushed 3 people
back into the crowd. People still kept climbing out and the Police realised sonre-
thing was wrong.
                                      -   2-


Two drunken Liverpool fans appeared from the front of the stand and stood on
row 8 directly in front of us. They could hardly stand and in fact fell over
on the gentleman in front of nre. (I assume they must have been pulled up from
the terrace below).

By now the Police and fans were all trying to pull people out of the terrace over
the fence but this was totally unco-ordinated and just seemsd to be a giant free
for all, people were packed so tightly that they took ages being pulled out -
just like corks from a bottle. A small door in the fence was opened and a Police
Officer wedged himself sideways into this at about waist height his colleagues
and fans were trying to pull people from underneath who had obviously collapsed.

Police and fans were trying to tear down the fence without success and it was
only when the Fire Brigade arrived at about 3.15 p.m. that the fence was bent
back at the opposite end to the door. Prior to this Police Officers had climbed
into the crowd and were trying to push people over the fence onto the pitch area.
It was just absolute chaos with Police, fans and St John Ambulance people trying
to revive people who were obviously dead.

During the whole time this went on no announcement was made to let people know,
in other areas of the ground, what was happening and I am sure that everybody
else in the Spion Kop and North and South Stands still thought that the pitch
was being invaded.

The announcer just kept asking for "fans to leave the pitch" which further
enhanced this and just added to the problem. It was not until 3.25 p.m. that they
even asked for Doctors.

We stayed in the stand until 3.40 p.m. and left via the Leppings Lane entrance.

I am convinced that up to the time we entered the ground Policing arrangements were
adequate although seme disquiet should have been raised by the small groups of
"hovering fans". I am totally convinced that a large number of Liverpool fans
had arrived at the ground without tickets and that eventually these fans just
caused the scenes I later saw on television and were hell bent in getting into
the ground at any price.
