            Meeting with Football Association, Football League
                        and London Football Clubs


Thursday 5 February 1987 at 3 pm in 5th Floor Conference Room at

NSY.

                           Minutes of the Meeting


Representatives of Metropolitan Police

       J. P. ROBINSON                        Commander         TO.20-2d
       0. 5. McCRCNE                         Superintendent     TO.20
       M.    HOSKINS                         Chief Inspector    TO.20
                                             Sergeant          TO.20


Representatives of British Transport Police

       W. I. MCGREGOR                        Assistant Chief Constable
       D. W. TEMPORAL                        Inspector

Representatives or other bodies

       E. A. CROKER                          Football Association
                                   •         Football Association
                                             Football Association
       J.     DENT                 -         Football League
       A.     WILLIAMSON           -         Football League
       D.     MILES                -         Arsenal FC
       X.     FRIAR                -         Arsenal FC
       X.     LORING               -         Brentford FC
       M.     LANGE                -         Brentford FC
       L.     SHAW                 -         Charlton Athletic FC
       A.     LEATHER              -         Crystal Palace FC
       S.     MARSON               -         Chelsea FC
       D.     BARNARD              -         Fulham FC
       F.     CLARK                -         Orient FC
       F.     WOOLF                -         Orient FC
       J.     MAUD                -          Tottenham Hotspur FC
       R.     FIXTER              -          West Ham Utd FC
       A.     COOK                 -         Wimbledon FC
       A.     PEARSON              -         Wembley Stadium


Apologies for absence were received from respresentatives of

Millwall FC and Queens Park Rangers.
MINUTES OF PREVIOUS MEETING

The meeting opened at 3.15 pm.    The minutes of the previous

meeting held on 14.5.86 were agreed.


OPENING ADDRESS


Commander ROBINSON reviewed the season to date and outlined

certain statistical information comparing last season with the

current one:-


    Police manpower used up 1%

    Gates up 7%

    Ejectments from football grounds up 88%

    Arrests:    Inside Ground up 12%

                Outside Ground down 12%


He added that he accepted that statistics could be misleading

particularly as ejectment figures could be grossly distorted by a

single incident.


OPERATION FULL TIME


Superintendent McCRONE spoke about the recent 'Operation Full

Time'.   He said it had been highly successful and had gained

valuable publicity against hooliganism connected with football.

The operation, which had commenced in August 1986, culminated in

a series of raids at 6 am on Tuesday 20 January 1987, which threw

a wide net as far north as Birmingham and to the south coast,

resulting in the arrest of 30 Millwall and West Ham 'supporters'.

Superintendent McCRONE expressed his appreciation of the support

given by the clubs concerned through the operation.
Discussion followed and the meeting wholeheartedly approved the

operation and voiced the hope that the courts would support the

efforts of those involved in order to deter others.


Regarding other acts of unruly behaviour, A.C.C. McGREGOR

mentioned recent arrests as a result of incidents at New Cross BR

Station, the North Sea Ferry incident and criminal acts on the

Underground system.   The extradition proceedings for the offences

at Hysell Stadium were also mentioned.



CCTV


Commander ROBINSON told the meeting that all 1st and 2nd division

clubs plus Fulham and Wembley now have CCTV installed and sought

views on its usage.   Mr McGREGOR said that the British Transport

Police have hand held video recorders in their possession which

are regularly used at Stations, on the highway near grounds and

on occasions at grounds themselves.   They have been found to be a

useful deterrent when used by uniformed police and were also

useful for gathering evidence.   Mr CROKER suggested that portable

video recorders may be made available to the Metropolitan Police

if application were made to the Football Trust.     Commander

ROBINSON said that this excellent offer would be followed up.

The 'Hoolivan* was also mentioned as being useful in certain

circumstances but mainly as a deterrent.     The continued use of

CCTV was endorsed as being an excellent method of identifying

offenders and restraining rowdy behaviour.
 COST OP POLICING FOOTBALL


 Commander ROBINSON outlined the enormous cost to police of

 policing football supporters and explained that such costs

  increased tremendously if matches were arranged at short notice

 and officers had to work overtime.      He said this cost could be

 greatly reduced if clubs gave as much notice as possible of

  replay dates although he was aware that the amount of notice to

 police had to be balanced against the time available to replay

 cup fixtures but asked for the clubs help in this regard.      He

  told the meeting that between 800 and 1,000 police officers are

 regularly employed each Saturday on policing football matches.

 He explained that if a match already scheduled for a Saturday was

 changed to a Sunday   (to be televised} with less than 29 days

 notice, the additional cost to this Force is about £30,000.         He

 also added that the recent postponements and cup matches

 involving numerous short notice fixtures had cost the Force at

 least an extra £500,000 and that it was essential to find ways of

 reducing this expenditure.



 Mr DENT   (Football League)   explained that three possible games are

 selected for televising about 10 weeks before the event and the

 final choice of one is made about 6 weeks before.     Superintendent

.McCRONE said that following recent discussions with the Football

 League, televised matches for League fixtures had ceased to be a

 problem and sufficient notice was now being given.     However, this

 was not so for non league fixtures where short notice of changes

* had been given.
Hr CROKER   (Football Association) said that 3 weeks notice of

televised games could only be given because of the F.A. draw.


For Brentford FC, Mr LORING said that for them, 20% of their gate

went to pay for the policing operation and therefore it was a two

way situation.


Superintendent McCRONE acknowledged that Cup matches take

precedence over League matches but felt it was unacceptable to

cancel a Saturday League fixture (for which perhaps 450 officers

had had their days off changed)   to play a Cup match on a Sunday,

for television.   Because of the short notice officers had to be

paid overtime and given another day off.    He urged at least 8

days notice for Cup matches and 29 days notice for League matches

generally although he accepted this would not always be possible.


Mr CROKER was sympathetic to the policing problems but drew

attention to the costs paid by the Clubs and the public demand

that was being satisfied by the game both at the ground and

particularly if televised.   Commander ROBINSON said he

appreciated there were difficulties but asked the Clubs to assist

wherever possible by giving maximum notice of games to be played.



VARIATIONS IN DATES/TIMES MATCHES FOR PUBLIC ORDER REASONS


Commander ROBINSON said that on occasions it has been necessary

to ask clubs to play matches in the morning due to other Public

Order events later in the day.    He said that when this occurred

due regard had to be given to other fixtures on the same day.
Superintendent McCRONE said it had been agreed at the previous

meeting that Bank Holiday kick offs should be in the morning and

sought agreement on this in the future.   There was no dissent.


                    said that in regard to evening matches it may

be a good idea to time the kick off for 8.00 pm rather than

7.30 or 7.45 in order to minimise inconvenience to commuters

using an already crowded transport system at the same time as

supporters.   Discussion followed and the general concensus was

that later kick offs could give rise to other problems and it had

been found that many people still arrived at the last moment.



ALL TICKET GAMES


Commander ROBINSON said generally police are opposed to 'all

ticket' matches as due to the considerable practical policing

problems in enforcing this rule.   After discussion it was

generally agreed that 'all ticket' games often caused more

problems than they solved but they were occasionally necessary.


PUBLIC ORDER ACT 1986


Superintendent McCRONE outlined the main changes which affected

executive boxes, alcohol restrictions in respect of mini buses,

and the prohibition on fireworks, flares, etc., which came into

force on 1st January.   He also outlined the provisions which will

apply to Exclusion Orders and explained it was anticipated that

this part of the Act would come into force on 1st August.


The British Transport Police said they would seek such orders

from a court against anyone convicted of offences on the

Transport System where they were on way to a match.
MEMBERSHIP SCHEMES


There were many different     views from football clubs. Most clubs

considered their season ticket holders were members.     Brentford

found their membership scheme satisfactory but Fulham had

abandoned their scheme.     General Agreement was that a 100%

scheme was not viable and     the situation in London isparticularly

different to elsewhere in the UK.


Commander ROBINSON referred to a recent Times article by the

Secretary of the ACPO sub committee on hooliganism and said that

the police wished to encourage part membership schemes and

particularly family membership schemes.


BRITISH TRANSPORT POLICE


A.C.C. McGREGOR addressed the meeting about problems the

travelling supporters can give to police and asked for

information from clubs about away fixtures and travel

arrangements.
