                                         8 June 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH
I spoke to           who had received my fax. It seemed
that JGW was concentrating on areas where the FA may have
been inactive. I said that obviously things were more
immediate up in Sheffield than they appeared down here but
we were chasing up all his points.
With regard to the Department of Environment file there were
various meetings of the Working Party and she was sending me
copies and also there was a booklet which summarised what
the FA did about it.
The Sheffield Wednesday plans referred to we already had in
the papers and     said she would be sending me documents to
answer my other points. Today was her last day and for
future reference next week we should get in touch with
or I           I.
Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
                                   19 June 1989




FA/HILLSBOROUGH
Attending                He wanted to sit in on Kelly's
briefing tomorrow night and I said I would let him know what
the arrangements were.

He wanted a copy of Ken Evans' statement in case we served
this. He had no comments on submissions for Phase 2.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
Subsequently attending John Dyson. He wanted Thursday and
Friday's transcripts. I said I was told the articled clerk
from Herbert Smith had brought them down and we had been
sent copies. I would bring them along this afternoon. I
updated him on my conversations with        pnd Kirton.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation


Subsequently speaking to                He had two points on
Evans' statement. If we had not submitted yet he would
rather us change the we/1 to make it clear that he was
talking about his time as a police officer not as a crowd
control adviser throughout.

He wondered why it was thought not sensible to send someone
this year. I said for the reason that 1988 had gone so
well.

I was in fairly final form but I had taken his comment on
board. I had not checked whether it was served yet. I
thought it might have been. As I understood it Evans was
not being called in any event.

Edwin Glasgow had mentioned Evans in one of the transcripts
as going to give evidence but so far we had no notification
from the Treasury Solicitor that he would. In those
circumstances          bomments were irrelevant. He said it
may have been him misreading the evidence but perhaps we
could take that on board if he was to be called and if it
was not too late.
I confirmed that our meeting to go over Kelly's evidence
with him was to take place tomorrow at 6.30 and I would see
him at the St George Hotel for that time.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
