                                                                     0cM .



                                                   17th April 1989



Wa a n a aiddle aged couple with two teenage daughtera. We were
both in the stand above where all the Liverpool Supportere were
killed.

We left our house at 11.00 a.a. and got into the ground at 2.10 p.a.
At 2.20 p.a. we went into our seate and then welked forward to look
over the balcony at the fans below. It waa obvioue to us that there
were too many fans in the area behind the goal and indeed marry looked
distressed and many of then were chanting "no aore rooa no wore room"
"don't let anyone else in hare".   Surely the Police auet have had
their surveillance camerae focuaed on that area and suraly if we
could see it waa overcrowded at 2.20 p.n. they auat have been able
to see it.   Why didn't they tell the Stewarda not to let anyone
alse into that area and to direct people to the two aide aree8
where there waa room?   Why did they allow people to keep coning
into that area in a steady stream from 2.20 p.m. to 2.50 p.m. WHY ?

Ply husband want to the toilet at 2.40 p.m. and aaid there wars
thousands outside and he could see a group of about 100 to 200
being allowed to run down the street as fast aa they could towards
the crowd8 that ware already there.

Then of course the avent which if you wanted to be kind you would call
"groaa incompetence and bad management" but if you wer8 being really
truthful and honest you mould call wicked, wae allowed to happen.
The Police opened a 16 foot gate and let the crowd ruah in aa if this
wae not bad enough* nobody had thair ticket checked to aee if they
had a correct ticket or in fact any ticket et all, this waa at a
match that waa 8uppoaed to be all ticket* I myself waa friaked when
we went in and my bag was 8earched and my husband wae alao searched.
Than to make matters even worse the Police and Stawarda allowed the
crowd to rush towards the first entrence they saw which wea of courae
the tunnel leading directly into the already overcrowded arae.

Why wae the gate opened to let everyone in irreepective of whether
they had a correct ticket or not ? Why were they allowed to rush
towerde the aost crowded area of the ground ? Why were they not
directed towerde areae with aore eapty epecee ?

Now we have heard the Police opened the gate to alleviate pressure outside
which we juet cannot comprehend was a valid raeeon knowing the
etete of the ground inside.   Why waa there so much preeeure outside ?
Why couldn't the Police control it ? Isn't that what they are there for?
Why weren't there more Police outside ? Why were 100 to 200 fane allowed
to run down the road towarde the rest of the crowd trying to get in
to the ground ?   Why did Police on horeeback not meke the croud queue in
an orderly faahion as the Police at Anfiald do week in and week out in
far worsa conditiona i.e. the allaways to the bop end the main road
outside the ground ? Why were the Police outaide the ground if not to
control the fene ?    Why didn't the police inside comuni cata the po8ition
to the Police outside ?
COPIES or THIS LETTER AND ARTICLE
HAVE BEEN SENT TOt

3ohn Saith at Liverpool Football Club
Pster Robinson at Liverpool Football Club
Kenny Dalglish at Liverpool Football Club
Lord Justice Taylor at Sheffield
The Leader of Shaffield City Council
The Laadar of Nottinghm Council
Chief of Weet Udlenda Polioe
The Laadar of Liverpool City Council
Reneging Director of Sheffield Vedneeday Football Club
Chief of Sheffield Police Forea
Chief of Liverpool Police Forea
niriieter for Sport at House of Coooona
Margaret Thatcher at 10 Downing Street
Douglas Hurd at 50 Quean Anns'e Gats
Neil Kinnoek at House of Commons
Roy Hattsrsley at House of Conrans
Shadow Plinistsr for Sport at Kouss sf Coaaens
Dohn Evens St. Helens PIP at Houae of Commons
The nanager Radio City Liverpool
The Aanager Radio Merseyside Liverpool
The Editor of Daily Post Liverpool
The Editor of Liverpool Echo Liverpool
The Editor Daily Express Manchester
The Editor Daily Mirror London
The Head of BBC London
The Head of ZTV nancheeter
The Manager Granada TV Liverpool
Sir Harry Livermore Solicitor Liverpool
Rax ttakln Solicitor Liverpool
Crshsm Kelly Football Aaaoelation London
Bert nilliehlp Football Aaaocietion London
and all our fsmily and friends
Lastly of course there is why wsre Liverpool allocated less tickets
than Nottingham Forest.   Ws have twice as many regular supporters es
NQttingham Forest and were given 4,000 or whatever less tickets than
then.   In fact people who got into the ground when the gets wes
opened by the Police had tickets which they had bought from Nottingham
Forest fans.   The Police say it was easier to control us and ths
traffic# if we were given the Liokers Lane End.   This has been proved
to be totally untrue as there was no crowd control outside and most of
the people arrived lete because of traffic problems, not to mention
Police holding up coaches and checking for alcohol* and being mads
to walk Ales from thair coaches to the ground.   This has happened
many times to ua, most recently at Coventry and prior to that at
Aeton Villa when Liverpool played Arsenal in the Littlewooda Cup.
So there ie no wey giving ue fewer tickets can be justified.

We will never forget the ecenee we caw and people being dragged out
of the paddock below ue and thrown on to the pitch and left to die.
People trying to get out through totally inadequate gates and being
pushed back by the Police at first.   People being carried away on
hoarding by the Fans not ambulance men, policemen or stewards.
Why weren't the stretchere there where were they ? Where were the
ambulances ? Why weren't wire cutters uaed in the fence more quickly ?
Why didn't the Police react quicker to this terrible situation ?
Why were there no announcements over ths loudspeaker made to inform
everyone who didn't know of the problem ?

WHY was this terrible thing allowed to happen ?

tile will never be able to forget it anyone who was there end especially
those who havs lost loved onee and friende until we get eome answers
to the above questions.

Ue are enclosing an article which we think answers those questions
but ws hope and prey that some one can show us some other reeson
to keeo us sane.
