The Chief Executive,
The Football Association,
16 Lancaster Gate,
London W2 JLM,
                                     :E!vr                24th April, 1989.




Dear Sir,

F.A.Cup Semi Final. Hillsborough. 15th April. 1989.

At approx. 2.50 p.m. my colleague, Mr.D.B.Cradock (Chairman, Wiltshire County F.A.)
and I took our seats in the Directors Box and almost immediately both made the
comment that the centre section of the Leppings Lane end of the ground was packed
whereas both ends of the terrace had plenty of room.
The game started promptly and within a couple of minutes I saw spectators on the
pitch behind the goal line and the Liverpool Goalkeeper looking anxiously behind
the goal.
A few police were now climbing on to the fencing, apparently attempting to contain
the fans and it was thought, therefore, that they were trying merely to prevent an
invasion of the pitch. Shortly afterwards a police officer raced on to the pitch
and spoke to the Referee who immediately stopped the game. Although more and more
fans appeared on the pitch there was no frantic or urgent action on the part of some
of the police who now gathered at that end of the ground so I did not realise the
seriousness of the situation. Neither, apparently, did the Nottingham Forest fans
who started the usual silly chants. However, a little later when an ambulance
appeared and some of the Liverpool supporters raced towards the First Aid area with
the injured on stretchers, mostly make-shift ones, it became obvious that there was
a serious problem and the opposition fans then showed sympathy and applauded the
helpers.
It wasn't until approx. 4 p.m. that I and my colleagues were informed by someone
who had been down to the pitch that there were fatalities and a few minutes later
came the announcement that the match was to be abandoned.
In view of the inactivity of some of the police, I feel that perhaps they also
were not informed of the serious situation and that perhaps the worst problem was
at the rear of the terracing which was out of our view.
Not having viewed the situation outside the ground it is difficult for me to make
constructive comments but I would stress that I saw no evidence of hooliganism
within the ground.

Yours faithfully,




2.M.Parry, F.A. Council Member for Wiltshire
