                                                    23rd April 1989

 Dear Sir,
              I am writing this letter as a life-long football supporter
 who lias stood on the Stretford End at Manchester United every other
 Saturday for the last 16 years.   I have attended 4 FA Cup Finalsand 5
 Semi-finals including 2 matches at Hillsborough.   I trust that youwill
 take note of the following observations before making any hasty
 decisions about the future of our national game.

 The problem outside, the ground at Hillsborough.

 1 believe that the 2 main factors here were:-
                                                                 l

     a)   The late arrival of a large number of supporters.
     b)   Fans without tickets attempting to gain entrance to the ground.

Late arrival is caused by people staying in the pub until what they
Judge to be the last possible moment.  In this instance traffic
congestion may have exacerbated the situation.  It could be argued that
the ban on the sale of alcohol inside football grounds leads to people
arriving late.

Fans arriving without tickets are a major problem.  I personally
remember having to struggle to reach the turnstiles past milling fans
who have no tickets.  The latter are largely intent on climbing over
walls or fences, breaking through weak gates or crawling under the
turnstiles.  The only solution appears to be establishing an outer
barrier or cordon where tickets must be shown to gain access to the
turnstiles.

At this point I must say that ID cards would only have added to the
problems at Hillsborough.  If ID cards are introduced I suggest that for
all-ticket games the ID cards should be shown when purchasing the
tickets with no further need for then to be shown when entering the
ground.  An added advantage of this suggestion would be that ticket
touts would be unable to easily acquire more than one ticket.

The problem inside the ground at Hillsborough

Whatever the conclusions of the official inquiries I as in no doubt that
the decision to open the large external gate was the ultiaate cause of
the tragedy.  The surge of people into the centre section of terrace
behind the goal was probably sufficient to finally overload an already
over-crowded section.  At Hillsborough the problem was not helped by the
fact that the entrance to the terracing behind the goal was centrally
situated.  If the entrances were near the corner flags the crowd would
have to make its way laterally to get directly behind the goal.  Vith
effective stewarding this is a perfectly safe arrangement in that as
each section becomes full it can be closed and thus late arrivals have
to stand nearer the corner flags.   I am obviously unable to comment on
the level of stewarding at Hillsborough but the very uneven distribution
of  spectators at the Leppings Lane End suggests that it was inadequate.

Conclusions

1.   Fans without tickets must be denied access to the vicinity of the
     ground at all-ticket games.

2.   With the segregation and fencing that exists at most major grounds
     effective stewarding will prevent any over-crowding.

3.   I believe that fences around the pitch should remain to prevent the
     odd idiot running onto the pitch.

4.   I cannot see how ID cards would have prevented this tragedy or
     would stop people travelling to matches without tickets.

5.    To finish on a personal note I would not go to an   all-seater ground
     as I believe it would lack any atmosphere.


                     yours sincerely,




Copies to

     Mr. D. Hurd (MP)
     Mr. R. Hattersley (MP)
     Mr. M. Jack (MP)
     Mr. G. Kelly FA
     Chief Constable, S.Yorkshire
     The Independent
     The Observer
