       /900                            2nd May,   1989




                       Hillsborough Disaster

     Attached herewith are my notes in connection with the first
stage of the Inquiry on Friday last at Sheffield.

     Following the hearing of representations, the F. A. Lawyers,
Solicitors and I visited Hillsborough Football ground.

     Our Lawyers feel that phase one i.e., what happened and why it
happened at Hillsborough will probably be dealt with very speedily.
They feel that we ought to be preparing our case for phase two now
so that we have the draft outline by 15th May.

      What our Lawyers feel would be helpful is the formal Football
Association's view with regard to any steps it thinks it appropriate
followi ng this disaster, i.e. relative to perimeter fencing, I.D.
Cards, all-seater Stadia, medical provision, alcohol on sale within
Stadia.   They feel that the Inquiry will expect to receive a view
from The Football Association, rather than The Football Association
indicating that it will await the outcome of the Inquiry before
making any decisions.    The Football Association's view could refer
to the fact these are our prelimenary views but obviously any
decisions of the Inquiry will be taken into account.

      In view of the above, it would seem appropriate to hopefully
progress this through the Executive Committee and the Executive
Committee could then report to Council at the Council meeting on
25th May.

      The Lawyers and Freshfields also thought it would be
appropriate to invite                     to the Cup Final, with any
others he would wish to bring with him
                   OPENING OF HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
              28th April, 1989 - at Sheffield Town Hall

The following are notes prepared by


                                'his assessors             , and
outir5eT“th,e nature of the Inquiry and the procedures that he would
follow.   He suggested that the Inquiry would not be a Law Suit with
winners or losers, that no-one was on trial or being sued and that
the purpose of the Inquiry was to discover what happened and why,
what lessons could be learnt and what recommendations could be made.

     said that if criticisms were levelled at Organisations or
individuals which were relevant he would consider them and make any
necessary findings.    However,i.■'1 said it was not the purpose of the
I nqui ry to apportion blame.        hoped that everyone concerned
would play their part responsibly.      He wished to ascertain the facts
at all possible speed and did not wish the I nqui ry to be hampered by
emotive accusations and counter accusations.

    advised that the West Midlands Police had launched a massive
exercise to gather evidence.    He believes it was right that all
relevate evidence to be made available but it was equally important
to conduct the Inquiry speedily and thoroughly so that
recommendations could be made and actions taken promptly to avoid a
similar event in the future.   No witness would be allowed to be
called without first providing     a written statement. There would be
an opportunity for cross examination but this would be subj ect to
such limits as LJT considered it necessary to impose.

The I nqui ry will begin to receive evidence on Monday,   15th May,
commencing at 10. 30 a. m.

The first phase will centre on what happened on 15th April and why.
It will be held in public unless it becomes necessary to depart from
that cours e.

The second phase will relate to the considerations and
recommendations for the future.   MUjysaid he would be pleased to
receive as soon as possible any written statement concerning
recommendations for crowd control and safety at sports grounds.

Addressing the Press,     said he recognised the ligimate interest
on behalf of the public to report what takes place at the Inquiry.
He advised that he would assist in that function.         .dvised that
in these exceptional circumstances copies of statements made by a
witness would be available to the Press as the witness is called to
give evidence.      said that no filming or photographing would be
permitted in the building during the Inquiry and no sound recording.
   ’stressed that the press must not interview any witnesses before
they had completed their evidence to the I nqui ry. I f the Press did
not adhere to this it may have an adverse effect on the task‘# 3 ^ had
to carry out.

                                         Contd/.
                                - 2 -

LOFT” then dealt with those people who he would permit to be
represented during the Inquiry.     He said strictly there were no
parties involved but certain persons or bodies should be
represented.         said any decisions made today (2 8th April) was
not final and indeed a party may wish to be represented at a later
stage, depending on what emerged during the Inquiry.

With regard to costs, IW^-said there was no statutory provisions
that the Secretary of State is able to meet costs incurred by any
person for the purpose of the Inquiry.         would assess costs and
make re commendati ons.      said that at the end of the Inqui ry he
would consider what recommendations to make and when he did it would
be on a common fund basis.     However, he thought it would be helpful
if he advised those present that he intended to make a
recommendation in respect of the costs of the injured and bereaved
being represented, which should be borne out of public fund,
was also very anxious that evidence from football supporters in
general and Liverpool supporters in particular should be heard, he
would therefore be perspective to any application that their costs
be met by public funds.    As far as supporters in general were
concerned, he considered that their interests would be in the second
phase and it may be that what they wished to present could be in
written form.

    then considered the following applications for representation.

             , instructed by a consortium of solicitors who have come
together to provide combined representation for the bereaved and
inj ured. They will be known as the "Hillsborough group of
Solicitors".    Sta ,Iffig?indicated that 74 firms represented every
200 bereaved or inj ured and that they may be contacted through the
Liverpool Law Society.

Another application was then made by a Lawyer representing people
not yet in the consortium.

    formally granted representation to inj ured and bereaved for one
representative.

Another individual, representing 7 deceased and 50 injured then made
applications.  He indicated that these figures were contained in
       total of 200.   He indicated that he was not entirely happy
with the manner in which a meeting of the consortium had been held
recently but did not wish to expand.   He believes that there may be
difficulties if there was only one applicate representing all the
bereaved and inj ured.

    reaffirmed his decision that he would permit one team of
representatives for the bereaved and inj ured but said if this proved
to create difficulties in due course he would be prepared to
reconsider the position.


                                        Contd/.
                                              then made application.
He said that it was essential that Football Supporters were
represented separately and that he represented the Association which
had been formed after the Heysel Stadium Disaster.

     said that he was very concerned to find out what happened at
Hillsborough and that the Liverpool supporters played an essential

the media and The Football Association as the leading voice on
behalf of supporters generally.

     Recommended that the Football Supporters' Association costs be
covered by public funds but added that if he considered that any
person had wasted the time of the I nqui ry he mi ght make an adverse
recommendation.    LJT ^’stressed that he comments were not
particularly aimed at the F. S. A.



A Lawyer then made application on behalf of the insurers of
Sheffield Wednesday F. C. and, if it was felt necessary in the long
term, The Football League.

Another Lawyer then stood up to make representation on behalf of the
Stewards of Sheffield Wednesday F. C.   He represented the casual
employees, Stewards, Turnstiles Men and Gate Men, who were concerned
that they had received no approach from the Sheffield Wednesday Club
to provide statements/evidence since the tragedy.   They believed
that their interests were distinct from the Club. €|#»,did not
consider that this merited separate representation.   The Lawyer
representing Sheffield Wednesday indicated that he thought there may
have been some misunderstanding as to the role that the Club were
seeking to play.   He indicated that the object of Sheffield
Wednesday was to make available such evidence as they could to
assist the Inqui ry and that they had carefully and deliberately
refrained from taking Statements and preparing evidence.     He
indicated that if there was any criticism of the Stewards or
Turnstile Men or others in the employment of Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club, it would be their intention to act on their behalf.

On this basis      said he would grant representation to the Club and
not at present to the Stewards, etc.   It was agreed that the Lawyers
acting for Sheffield Wednesday and the Stewards would discusa^he
matter outside the Inquiry and will bring any queries before Iwlt if
there was any conflict.        dvised that he would not be making any
recommendation as far as public funds were concerned in respect of
this application.




                                              Contd/.
A Lawyer made representation on behalf of three doctors, including
the doctor to the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, who was not
employed by the Club but was an independent contractor.      advised
that he was against representation of any individual unless there
was reason to think that that person would be criticised or in some
way unprotected.  He therefore did not grant representation.




A Solicitor acting on behalf of the Trent Regional Health Authority
then made application.   He indicated he was making application on
behalf of the Authority as the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service is
with in that Authority.

At this time somebody else made application on behalf of the
Sheffield and Hallam Authority representing the two hospitals.

     aid there was nothing to stop anybody having a watching brief
at the Inqui ry if it is thought necessary but that he was not going
to permit repres entati on on the speculation that there might be
criticism.   If criticism did arise he would review applications. He
therefore refused these applications.




Representation was then made on behalf of the Sheffield City
Council, which was responsible for licensing the Hillsborough
Ground.

    granted representation but made no recommendation as far as
costs were concerned at the present time.



               !then made application on behalf of The Football
Association.  He advised that The Football Association's interest in
this matter is general and specific.   Taking the specific first he
said that it was The Football Association's Cup and The Football
Association is responsible for selecting the ground.   Secondly, upon
the selection of the ground, in the light of attitude of the police
with regard to the segregation of the fans, the Liverpool supporters
were at the Lepping Lane end and, therefore, had allocated to them
fewer tickets than the Nottingham Forest Supporters.   That decision
has been the subj ect of criticism in the media.    There had also
been a specific criticism in the form of a letter from a solicitor
acting on behalf of a number of the bereaved, asking The Football
Association to take liability for negligence.

    advised that the Inquiry was not deciding on claim.

                                             Contd/.
                                 - 5 -

          advised that he was aware of that.   However, The Football
Association's interest in this matter was a specific one, quite
apart from the fact that as The Football Association it has a
responsibility for promoting football in the country at all levels.
          advised that he believed it right to indicate that The
Football Association interest was not merely of a general nature.
Criticism had been levelled at The Football Association.  There were
important Officials, including the Chief Executive, who had attended
the match in a Official capacity and would certainly want to give
evidence before LJT if considered helpful.

           advised that The Football Association's interest was a
general one, concerned for football in this country, the running of
its competition, the performance of its function and the specific
matter of which The Football Association had noticed so far was in
relation to the allocation of tickets and the fact that Liverpool,
having a larger following than Nottingham Forest, received a smaller
allocation and it appears that this may be a matter for
consideration.

    replied that he considered The Football Association should be
represented but wondered to what extent it was necessary for the
Lawyers to be present all the time.   ■     1^ - .■ advised that he was
aware of this and that they would make decisions depending on
developments.   <■; . advised tha-   . -.i,» would receive notice in
advance of witnesses that would be called and what they would be
saying and this would no doubt help with deciding their presence or
otherwise on the various days.

    Itherefore granted repres entati on, but with no costs.



There was then representation on behalf of the South Yorkshire
Police, who indicated that they had considerable interests in all
aspects of the matters concerning the Inquiry.      agreed that it
was quite clear that the police should be represented and he would
permit this.   He made no commitment with regard to recommendations
to fundings.




There was then an application on behalf of the Fire and Civil
Defence Authority, who officers had attended Hillsborough on 15th
April and have been subj ect to some criticism.   This Authority is
also involved in the licensing of the ground.     Whilst      nitial
reaction was that the application was premature, on further
discussion he granted application on the basis that it was
understood that other bodies who were largely concerned with one
mi nor aspect of the Inqui ry would be selected in the part which they
played.
                                   - 6 -

    A Solicitor then made application on behalf of the Liverpool City
    Council and on behalf of other Councils in the Liverpool Area.  His
    reason for application was to ensure that the Liverpool Community as
    a whole were protected.

        assured him that he would safeguard the interests of the
    Liverpool Community and said that he could see no reason to permit
    representation.




    There was then an application on behalf of the St. John's Ambulance
    Brigade.       said he did not see any reason to permit
    representation but who appreciate any written evidence that St.
    John' s Ambulance Brigade wish to present.




    zna May,   1989




#
