                         THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                       LIMITED
                                                       Founded 1863

                                       Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                     President: H .R .H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                            Chairman: F. A. M i l l i c h i p

      Chief Executive:                                                                   Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G. K     e ll y f c is                                                                    Telex: 261110
                                                                                           Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                               16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
 Our Ref:                                           Your Ref:              22nd September 1989


To: All Football League Clubs


Dear Sirs

Following the extensive investigation into crowd control and safety at the Public Inquiry
into the Hillsborough Disaster, The Football Association consider that the Memorandum on
Crowd Management dated 18th November 1985 has been superseded by the Interim Report produced
by Lord Justice Taylor. In addition, the Crowd Safety Memorandum and Certificate printed on
pages 342-345 of the current Association Handbook should be disregarded (our letter of 1st
September 1989 refers).

The Football Association have therefore compiled a new document entitled "Crowd Safety
Information" in which we have extracted the recommendations from the Taylor Report which, we
believe, will be a helpful guide to all Football League clubs. Also contained are extracts
from the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (1986 Edition) (the Green Guide). The
recommendations take the form of guidelines but represent, in the words of Lord Justice
Taylor himself, "the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football grounds can for the
present be safely used." In addition these are meant to complement the recommendations that
Mr Justice Popplewell set out after his Inquiry at Bradford.

We are aware that many clubs will already have implemented the recommendations.
Nevertheless, there have been suggestions in the press that even some of those asterisked (to
be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts) have not been implemented. These
allegations must be a matter of concern to all those involved in football and it is hoped the
enclosed document will give you a convenient reference point from which to ensure that safety
issues get the priority they deserve. It is issued with the support of The Football League
and recent communications from FIFA endorse many of the recommendations. It may be that
further recommendations are made when the final report is published at the end of the year.

One of the issues Lord Justice Taylor has still to deal with is the problem of ticket touts.
The Football Association have been advocating the undesirability of touts for many years and
see the main problems as:

(i)         bona fide supporters without a ticket can only obtain one at an inflated rate;

(ii)        a build up of non-ticket holders outside the grounds; and

(iii)        rival supporters may end up in the same area thus reducing the effect of segregation.


Whilst appreciating all the difficulties associated with the removal of ticket touts, we urge
clubs to do their utmost to minimise the number outside grounds.



Continued..                        Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W 23LW
                                   Incorporated in London Registration N um ber 77797
The Football Association will, in all probability, be making a further submission to Lord
Justice Taylor and would, therefore, be interested to receive, within the next fourteen days,
any comments on the recommendations with special reference to any difficulties encountered by
your particular club.

I also take this opportunity of informing you that Adrian Titcombe of this Office is now
undertaking the role of Crowd Management Co-ordinator and will be pleased to discuss these
and related matters.

Yours faithfully
____________________________ i




Chief'Execu tive
