                 REPORT ON THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


On Saturday 15 April 1989 I travelled from St Albans, Herts, with my
Dad to Sheffield. We arrived at Junction 3A of the Ml at approximately
12 noon but did not actually arrive at the ground until 2 pm because of
the heavy traffic.  We took up our seats at approximately 2:30 pm.

When the game kicked off, the stadium was not full to capacity. There
was an area of seating in the opposite stand (far left hand side) that
was not full.

A few minutes into the game we could see people spilling on to the edge
of the pitch and shortly after this a policeman ran on to the pitch and
made the referee stop the game. More people spilled on to the pitch -
a number sat down on the pitch and I thought it was a sit-down protest.
They were obviously trying to get their breath back. Even more supporters
spilled on to the pitch and we could see the police trying to assist people.
A couple of Liverpool supporters ran to the other end of the pitch and
tried to antagonise the Notts Forest supporters but they were removed by
the police. Gradually we realised that the situation was more serious
than we originally thought, as a St John's Ambulance appeared on the
pitch and we could see a couple of people being given artificial
resuscitation. I saw one person stretchered off with his head covered.
The situation seemed to be getting more serious by the minute as the fire-
service arrived and supporters were running the length of the pitch to
pull down advertising boards to use as stretchers.

We stayed in our seats until approximately 4:15 pm following an announcement
that the match would not be re-started. We left the ground at approximately
6 pm when the traffic had subsided a little.

Observations

(1) The crowd were not kept informed of what was happening - the announcement
    by Kenny Dalglish was far too late.

(2) No request for medical assistance was made.  There could have been doctors
    and other medically trained people in the crowd but their assistance was
    not requested.  Also, I did not see the Club physios or Club doctors on
    the pitch.

(3) The kick-off should have been delayed - there were obvious traffic hold­
    ups outside the ground.




15 May 1989
