                                             15 May 1989




    FA/HILLSBOROUGH

    Chief Superintendent Baker telephoned, He had been up to
    the County Hall to try and see me today but I was not there,
    He had not bumped into anyone else on our team,

    He asked whether he could have Kelly'1 and 2 ,            and
    Clark,  I said they were being biked" up to Sheffield today
    for service on the Treasury Solicitors. 'Snraanel indicated
    that would be sufficient.  Did he really want a copy? He
^   confirmed he would like a copy and he-would send an officer
    over from Furnival House to the Inquiry tomorrow morning to
    pick up those 4. He asked about K ir to n , 'Robson and
    i said that he could have copies of’'jK'irton■and;Robson but
    for the moment we were waiting confirmation on Wiseman.

    Engaged 10 minutes including dictation

    Subsequently telphoning John Dyson. 1 arranged to meet him
    at the FA tomorrow morning for tfie preliminary meeting on
    evidence of Phase 2, I said it was important to sow the
    seed of urgency,

    He had spoken to Collins and mentioned that the FA were
    concerned that Phase 2 may not be viewed seriously enough
    and that all the evidence was concentrated on Phase 1, That
    could have disastrous consequences and it would be very
    unsatisfactory to make recommendations on the specific
    evidence that came out from Phase 1. Collins said the judge
    had it on board. He wanted to make sure that the FA would
    have time to comment on written submissions and should apply
    for liberty to adduce oral evidence in cross-examination if
    necessary,

            went in to see the judge who thought that writing a
      tter to the Inquiry was not a good idea.
    1 o                                          v v e would get
    copies of all the written submissions and then we could
    decide whether we want to answer in writing and if necessary
    apply to deal with matters in cross-examination by oral
    evidence,  It was recorded informally and -Dyson had mads a
    note in his notebook. We agreed that that was’     "entirely
    sensible.

    I explained that        was having a bit of trouble with the
    fax machine in the Grosvenor and I said it may be worth him
    going into the local firm and setting up an agency
tarrangement so that we could get copying and faxes done,
       agreed and also agreed that he would not need the
 witness statements before they gave evidence unless he was
 going up there. He would certainly need a transcript,

Ha did not want to fall behind on the atmosphere up there or
the transcripts and would be going up there from time to
time. I gave him the number of the Grosvenor,

With j||garg. to Evans' statement it was difficult to know
what Pfdodwaira '“062 ‘for the police's position was but it looked
as though it was going to be that the police operation this
year is the same as last year, We agreed that seemed
contrary to all the evidence, However we would quiz 'fflsmmgs
further on that.

Engaged 30 minutes including dictation
