         COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER SUBMISSION TO TAYLOR INQUI RY
                                                               a

                         MOTES OP A MEETING
             held at 16 Lancaster Sate, London, W2 3LW, _
        on Thursday. 1st June 1989, commencing .at 1.0* 30 :
                                                           'a. m.



 PRESENT:   Committee




            Counsel



            Fraahf islets




       Draft 7 of the Submission had been circulated prior to the
meeting, .but before considering it is detail       ©fW#f» gave a-
bi;is£ 2$suats of the timing with regard to Phas©6 .X and 2 of the
inquiry^. it was noted that                  _      had raquestad
that^submissions be forwarded to him by 12th June.       Whilst it
was .honed that Lord Justice. Saylor-would agree 'to an-extension,
it ^aa agreed that in the meantime the Committee would have to
tforic to that deadline.                               -

      During the following discussion               indicated that if
the leading authorities in football wished to persuade the Taylor
iaquiry to follow a particular course, they would be more likely
to succeed if it was seen to be the views of both Tha Football
Association and The Football league.       After further discussion
the Committee decided it would be in the interests ox football if
its Submission was seen to be a joint Submission of The Football
Association and The 'Football League.      In the event there were
areas' where .there, we.rs differences of smphasis, it would be
barter to indicate thiss i n the Joint Submission, *’

        The Committee than -.considered, the *.draft in> detail and tha
         -rtnq points arose; -
    '*»•' ■*
■general

      •John Dyson 'reaffirmed that the document should include a
bri e£ introduction, explaining the role of Tha Football
Association and The football League,
                                           2.

     .Sectiori '1 - Introduction                               '    a   ?

     I,         if the situation has improved this should, be stated.

     geetlpB 2 - Seating a ad Paollltleg

      1,   I t was ’agreed that an Increase in seats should be promoted
      but that all seated stadia should not be pursued at this.stags,
      as it was considered that ail-seater stadia would not be
     .successful at tha present tijns.     However, it was important to
      state the reasons why sil-isater stadia could not be achieved-
      overnight, i. a. Coventry ■experience, some people ..unwilling' to
      accspt ehaneja, particularly if a better view ia obtained when
    i standing,-1'                                       ;        5

     2,  "If all-asatsr or a move towards sll-seater stadia was
     included in Safety Regulations it would enable tiis'•worJc to be
     grant-aided.                      -                           .

     3,   The information being gathered .by the League in respect of
     increasing seating capacity ia stadia will be made, available t o '
     the Committee.

     4,     Reference was made to the up to date report of ‘  The -Football
     Trust on their activities (copies of which were handed to Messrs,
     •aytdlT, Calif, Kir ton and 'Mrs, Rickard® later in the-me'eting). -
     It was considered it might be useful to reproduce sow® Of 'the
    Istati3ti.es appearing therein in. tiva supporting documents to the
    1Submrssion.     The Football'Grounds Improveaient Trust statistics
    *should also be referred to in this son-aeotion, -
          =a»

     5-,    Posadbly there fshould be a central body to advice what ths
     actual .safety standards -should -be and to which Football Clubs
     should operate, including' ’whether standing areas should only be
     belli nd the goals, or elsewhere la tha stadia, baa ring in mind tha
     problems that generalisation would create,

     6,     According to a recent study, the cost t o oonvart the present
     Football League Grounds to all-seatsr stadia would be
     approximately 30 million pounds and ,it would sost a further oa$
    -JmngUrsd million pounds to qovsr' the arees presently, open.
     The/afore, divide,the one-hundred and thirty million pounds bv
     .sixteen million pounds which -football received through the Pools
     and-this twould.indie ate the time seals to achisve! such a .
     -3onver*sioa. _         » ,         .             >

     , -
       ."lEt 'hay joe preferable to refer to percentages of. grounds

I   rather than p-aroent&ges of a&p&oitias.
                T
          c. may also Os preferable to work towards ---ail-seater .stadia
    ia the First Division ixii tiaily, possibly over a three year period
    ^nd than gradually introduce si1 -seatar in the lower Divisions,
'7,   Consideration should fas given to .introducing a maximum d^pth
 ia standing .areas,

 8=   .Considerable attention should be given to aecass and agrees.

,y.    I£ It 'is felt that Mandatory requirements should be
 introduced, consider whether Clubs should have the option to •
                                                              '
Iapply to the Local Author!ty or Central Licensing Authority .for
 axemp tion, 5 , g, relating to the seated/3 tanking ratio/.

10. .It was agreed that the 1 Green Code' should -I?© reviewed in
detail as a matter of urgency.         There may well toe sections that
should becomes mandatory, e.g. fsnces, arush barriers-, $to. and it
aay^be b e t t e r •to have a mandatory section and an advisory
section.      x f the Committee deoided to state that tha Sreen Coda
inquiredasiend.ment it would be necessary to provide; draft
amendments with its Submission.        '                          ..
                                                                       j,



-of f. It £as ^ cidsd.^hJ t %£* J a o k - C r a^j ^^ -e wu jr ity M a i s o n
in detail and, in consultation with other sppropri-ats personnel ,
put forward re coirtmendation© to the Committee.

faction 3 - .Membership

1,      R. Noades "rexsrred -to his proposal regarding the' Membership
iScihesss and agreed to'provide copies -for 'those present prior to
tile Aext" meeting.      .                           -

 2, .=> Ks two members of the Committee had had to 1 save the
 aieeting, -it was agreed to defer detailed discussion-on this
 sixbj ect ..uritil the next .meeting.   However, it was agreed that
 pressure should be brought to bear to sasurs that if a match was
 ’ -all-ticket' the Police ehould not admit those who arrived
 without tickets.       it was also agreed that attention should be
 given to turnstiles.         Those currently in use had been in
 existence for many ways and until such time as a more efficient
 ..asana or entry could be established, it would be necessary to
 ensure that schemes were in operation to avoid congestion in the
,Immediate vicinity of the turnstiles.

jsation   4 -■ Ticket Touts
                        ; —
                                        .           -    -

1.    Ithvild. it be possibly for legislati-.on to toeintroduced making
•
'      t touting'     illegal?
                  '                                                .

:2.  The allocation of cup Final Tickets 'was considered.  ' Many
expressed the view that it would be in the long term interests
Of football if the competing finalists received * dreater share
or the ticbets than was the current practice, but it was decided*,
co deter making a recommendation in this aonnsctioh •at tha -
present feists.
 dsction 5 - Prs-Match Kntsrtainmsnt

 L.   The Cdmai ttee was given details, of a response iroati®
                         . wherein he had stated that In M s vi aw
 prs-match entertainment did' not wake a signifi 3ant difference to
 tha time that supporters errtsxsd stadia.

                poiatsd out that in ths Memorandum sent to
Football League Gluts in season 13S5/5, it had besn.- stated that
all stforts should bo made to provide spectators with are^-ntatch
satertain and, thareforo. it would have to fo® carefully worded if
tha Committee decided to make a rscoKunendation in its Submission!

3, • ' I £ any refsrsncs was to be mads to the difficulties
rs gar ding pre-match entertain, the point should, aiff’o be -made that
tlis' choice was limited due to the effect it wqu-1 d h kve on ths
playing surface.                     '                          *

4„    Under this section reference was algo mads to She
availability or otherwise of aloohol on match day®. - It was
agrs-ed that- supporters facilities in general should be improved,
including tho availability of alcohol.     I'c was the view.- of the
C-ommitt-se that it would    difficult for aa indiyiduad to become
drunk if obtaining alcohol within a stadium, but if a© individual
knew it waa not available the tendency seemed to tos’to drink
as much as possible prior to -ant©ring the stadium.

Station 6 •- 'Policy oa- Kick-Off

1, r5*'^hare wars no statistics available to show th® srfeot of
^arlv kick-offs over a r s a s o n a M s period of.tias within The
foottoall, league.       ,

 1.    3y tradition, matchas kicked-off at 3 p» m. on Saturdays,
  1 th a few axceptions, 3. g. live coverage, clash with another
-7.
; derby'’, Bank Holiday, ate.

3,      If iiek-oxfs were moved to 11 a, a. on Saturday, it «ay
..3Siul t iii away fans ..travelling tha right tsfor-3 and staying On
-iitax tha itm'cch, tha policing commencing much. earlisr'in the day
out "hot reducing the, rsqux reaient I star in the da y^ the vast
majority ..of away tsame incurring ove-rnigilt axpendlturs, conflict
of i-ntarasts with tlm Pools contract, necessity to kick-off
sarliaTr that 11 a, m. do coincide w t th opening of "butos, ciagh with
             morni ng shopping.

 ■i,   it was oalisved that -it       probat-1 s that one of the       ,
 iintaresrad parties' would 3 ubmit a rsGommendation.regarding
 *arly kick-offs and, thsrexors, it would bs necessary for the
 'iommittse to sither aa)?B a r 9 cosnmeudation or -provide detailed
■reasons why ths status quo should 03 oreaoryed,         \
 5,    it" was agreed that this subject should be considered
‘further at tha next auseting and, in ths meantime, iff possible,--,
 the views of. the Police should, be obtained.
                                                       rS
..gastipn 7 - Fences

1...  1  ...‘ ■gave a verbal report on h i s visit ’to Bispeg and
advised h® woulS produce a report for the next meeting o€ the-
Committee,

•jastioa 8 - Supportsr Relations                                »

1*      It vas agreed that there should be spins form Of li.aision
w i t h football supporters, not necessarily through, already
astablislxed supportars organisations,     It was agreed" that It was
iscssBary to establish a system whereby tHe supportfsrs needs and.
requirements could be ascertained.            ,    * ‘1

jestioa 9 - Medical Provision                     _     »   '

1,    Jefereac$ was made to a meeting of Club Doctors, and other
Club officials at Manchester United F. C. that afte-rnoon,       it was
hoped that a .report of ths aia#ting would be -available for the
aaxt meeting o f the Cosnadttee., which would, indicate t-hs,'Stated.
-Minimum medical facilities to b& permanently on aits, ^which would
be supported by ths easrgancy services when the need arosa,

2. ' .a.sf§renci6 was made to. the* .concern soms Club '
                                                       ‘Doctors had
?spressad I f they trs-atad art indiviau&I and at a-latar date,
parhsLps due to a lack of facilities, they were accused of
•aeg-Mgenoe.

St^'wardg. %             . '

1,    T?hare was a brief discussion on tha possibility of away
teams' at swards being used to assist In crowd control.    it was
agreed that to achieve this they would need to be at ths home
ground for th© briefing and be familiar with the ground and that
such an arrangement ssay be beneficial for high risk matches,

     _ it ¥as agreed that the Committee would not put--- forward any
specific -submissions _regarding stewarding, unless -apeoifio
proposal a arose out of further di 5 ous si oris at? the* Conuaittsse
vasetings.”!...     •
        It was agreed that ths asjtt jns-stiaq would £>e held at 10. 30
•fu m . on Tuesday 6th June, with a possible continuation on
Wednesday, 7th Juris 1969,

Meet-ing closed at 3. 40 p. m,                         3/8/89




    - Frsahfi aids'
      7. iOyson ' *
