                                                              12   May 1983




?A/HILLSBOROUGH

Meeting at the offices of the FA,

Those present:
                                                      ) u o u n sel
                 J©«Rjigkaagd-                        )
                 I             _____
                               I                      } Freshfields


                 . Q i r a i i a m '. K e - i a # ,   )
                 Glen Kirtori                         ) FA
                          l?                          )
1,    we discussed Mr Kirton^s first draft.  It was not
intended to be a drafting session. We needed mors
information in terms of hard background material.   It was
not sufficient just to give the FA's views without reason.
■TohimByson quoted some examples in the text which needed
expansion,

2,   Reference to the Popplawell Report where applicable
would cut out the need for a lot of regurgitation.

3,    Lord ‘.Justice 'Taylor would want an update as to what had
happened since Popplewall,      Once the propositions had been
sorted out we needed conclusions for what the FA were
contending for, The digest of football statistics was
vnentionsd as a possible source material,

4,   We discussed ID cards and the Leeds experience ought to
bs dealt with,  Pbpplewell--dealt with that in
paragraph 4.114 of his Report,

•5,  sis. discussed the criteria that the PA would be
advocating with reference to banning fans who caused trouble
in the vicinity of the football matched,

5,   v7e discussed the amount of money spent on ground safety
:ver the last 10 years.   (£50 million). We would need to
give a lot more detail in relation to finance if the FA
wanted Lord Justice Taylor" to make the necessary
recommendations, A degree of self-help would be necessary,
7,   ffobn-'DyssM was under the impress ion chat the FA should
steer clear of safety aspects and rather concentrate on the
facilities to be improved at stadia. We agreed that in
practice the FA were not competent to deal in detail with
safety, However they did collect safety certificates.

         The issues which needed to be addressed were:-

  .)        all seater stadia
  .1)       facilities
  .ii)      revenues
(iv)        ID membership
(v)         Popplewell and background
(vi)        medical
        - ■ ■liaison with -the--FA'■
rviii)      Liaison with the FSA
(ix)        all ticket matches
(~si)        pre-match entertainment
pii)        late arrivals
(rxii)      touts
(:>dii)     perimeter fencing*

;3„  The Football League Directory w-jagff suggested as a
source of reference for ground plans.     In addition we should
look at                 "Football-Grounds--:Q£.-Sreatv::

L0» It was agreed that we would find out whether the
submissions made to -Pop^lewell- were public or not in which
case we should obtain relevant documents.

11. Wa a n s w e r e d r e q u e s t in relation to pre-match
entertainment at Hillsborough with reference t o \
            conversation and ______________ having put
something down on paper.        We should be getting a statement
from him soon. However it was doubtful that the matter was
advertised and the cancellation would have no .Effect in
practice on late arrivals.

12, We agreed to make relevant press coverage available to
our team in Sheffield.

13. fMB discussed the rumour that the kick-off had not been
delayed at Hillsborough because of the F A 7 s TV contract.  It
•-■/as explained that the match was not broadcasted live and in
relation to overseas sales and broadcasting it was not a
relevant consideration.     We had a document to this effect
which was handed over. There was nothing in any contract
with the FA which would inhibit late kick-offs. It was
agreed that we should obtain copies ofH               _ Iblack
r.arket file in relation to the rumours circulating that
black market tickets were commonly available and that the FA
did little to stop them being so.
14, We discussed the Sheffield Wednesday request and it was
agreed that/Kellf- should respond on the basis that the
request was badly timed but that the FA may reconsider the
natter once the Inquiry was concluded.

15. It was agreed that Glen Kirto^ would produce another
draft by Friday and we would have a meeting next Wednesday
at which stage it was hoped that the Executive Committee
would have been appointed at the Council meeting this
Thursday 25 May.

Engaged    hours including travelling, waiting and dictation
