                                         19 April 1989


 P<4( l4"iUS            <S-g




NOTE OF MEETING AT FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION ON 19 APRIL
AT LANCASTER GATE                            _____

Present:       Jo Rickard      ) Freshfields
                               )

                               )
                               ) Football Association
               Glen Kirton     )

JPJR said she had provisionally fixed up Julian Gibson-Watt
as a junior and had in mind John Dyson QC or |              |
QC as leaders. After some discussion on our recommendation
John Dyson was thought to be more appropriate as he would
keep the advocacy on a suitably low-key and persuasive
level.
JGW would be doing most of the leg-work with us with Dyson
overseeing tactical issues. There would be lots of coroners
courts representation to consider and JGW was familiar with
the FA's handbook as he was involved in the Luton job.
          asked whether we wanted Adrian Titcomb to come to
the meeting. We suggested we did not need him for the time
being. GK handed over various papers which he had
accumulated and we said we had started a file on press
cuttings. Steve Clark had made an initial report which he
also handed to us.
Herbert Smith had been in touch with uSj acting for the
Commercial Union. They had a watching brief and we agreed
that we would keep them informed as to what might happen.
At this moment in time we did not have papers. Jardines had
broked the insurance policy and    said that he would try
and obtain the Royal Insurance policy which had materially
the same clauses in relation to public liability. There was
some correspondence with Jardines that would be copied to us
and Jardines had taken the view that the FA had not
identified which matches public indemnity liability cover
was needed on. There had been some meetings a n d s a i d he
would get us the notes of those as well. We were
particularly concerned that Jardines may be taking a stance
for a possible avoidance on behalf of the insurers.
When Jardines had had a change of offices the whole policy
was looked at again as well as other insurances the FA had
through Jardines. It was decided that coverage ought to be
increased. There had not been any claims under the policy.

There was cover in the Windsor Insurance Company for most
football clubs and the^BgadJjord fire disaster was dealt with
through the club itself. Xeague had increased cover since
Bradford and that may have been a reason for the increase in
the FA's public liability cover. Bradford was a league
fixture on a league ground and did not involve the FA in any
liability.

It may be that we would need to give Herbert Smith details
on arrangements for the match in due course.

Steve Clark and Adrian Titcomb may have to be interviewed
but for the moment they were preparing fibr details which
included all telephone conversations etc together with
giving a historical picture.

GK mentioned that this was the new Chief Executive's first
FA semi-final and GK had been to quite a few. That was
central to the question of what the Chief Executive saw the
FA's role as being on the day. We said that was obviously
something we would need to get into in some detail.

He mentioned that he had no real discussions with Graham
Kelly prior to the Cup semi-final with regard to the
organisational arrangements.

He referred us to a rule of the handbook relating to
competitions which purported to put the direct
responsibility for organising the Cup semi-finals in the
hands of the Council. In actual practice the function was
delegated to the clubs in conjunction with the police. At
Hillsborough only Graham Kelly and GK attended from the FA.
However from discussions as to what happens in practice it
seemed that although the clubs would take decisions with
regard to ground safety and policing &£xawould normally get a
sanction for the decision from the FAfSko may have overall
responsibility in some areas. It would be very rare for the
FA to actually become involved in the day to day decision
making progress for the organisation of such Cup semi-finals
and it was clear that there was a fine balance between what
was delegated and what was decided upon by the FA.

Twenty council members were at Sheffield including
            and the Chairman of the Challenge Cup Committee.
If there was a problem on the day the FA would become more
closely involved. There was a precedent in the 1987
semi-final which was played on two separate days on a
weekend. Because of the crowd arriving late the kick-off
was delayed and the FA gave their approval to this on the
day. It was delayed at the recommendation of the police.
No such recommendation was given this year.

The staging of such matches was the comptetition
department's responsibilty in conjunction with the clubs and
the various bodies involved. Papers were produced on these
and associated areas which we agreed to take away with us
and study in detail.

It was not right to say that Liverpool had complained about
the Hillsborough fixture in writing. The Chairman of
Liverpool Mr Peter Robinson had telephoned on the day and
said that the seat allocation was unfair to Liverpool
supporters and spoke to Steve Clark. On the day itself it
was obvious that Graham Kelly and Glen Kirton would go along
with any police decision taken but there had been no
meetings with the police and their only contact with the
arrangements was through Sheffield Wednesday. Sheffield
Wednesday would have made all the necessary provisional
arrangements with the police and their own ground staff.
Almost 800 police were at the Cup semi-final but it was not
clear as to how many were actually outside the ground and
inside as yet. Various press reports had given numbers at
the Leppings Road end.

          contrasted the position of Cup semi-finals played
at League club grounds and matches played at Wembley. She
had a greater involvement in the Wembley matches where the
FA certainly had a higher profile in relation to the
arrangements. Historically that may be because Wembley
Stadium itself called the FA to meetings whereas the clubs
themselves would not call the FA to meetings to discuss the
organisation^                         For instance Sheffield
Wednesday had not called the FA to any meetings. The FA
would have been there merely as an observer to oversee
events. They relied on the clubs and police involvement.

The FA employed three security officers as consultants and
there were files on previous disasters and events which had
a bearing on the inquiry to be set-up under Lord Justice
Taylor.

We would be given all the papers relating to these relevant
events.

GK took us through parts of his statement. We questioned
whether it would be possible to get so many thousands of
people through the gate in such a short period of time. GK
thought we would be surprised at how many people could
actually get into the ground at the last moment,
commented that that woiild not be in any safety or comfort.
There would be a plan drawn up between the police and the
club which would actually schedule the day's arrangements.
GK thought that interference with the plan may have
contributed to the police decision not to delay the
kick-off. We commented that that had not any effect on the
1987 Cup> final decision.

GK commented that there had been no thought of danger in his
mind when he had mentioned to the Shefffield Wednesday club
secretary prior to the game that it may be worth delaying
the kick-off. He was concerned that the whole ground was
not full and it may be difficult to get everyone in for the
kick-off.
We discussed the computer read-outs and GK confirmed that
there would not be a read-out from the particular section of
the particular stand where people were crushed to death.
There was obviously room on the sides so the computer
reading would be misleading. It was not clear to what
extent the police relied on it when they opened the gates.
Every club had to lodge a local plan with the police as to
how many they wanted inside and outside the grounds. We
wanted to get our own house in order before asking Sheffield
Wednesday for their documents.
No police officer consulted Graham Kelly or GK about any
request for a delayed kick-off on the day. Off the record
many police officers were saying that they had pleaded with
their senior officers to delay the kick-off so that people
could get in^an orderly fashion.
            ft*

We moved on to medical assistance and commented that there
had been press speculation as to the lack of facilities
inside and outside the ground. St John's Ambulance people
apparently were only paid £35 a day and there would ha\e been
the normal quota of facilities there which included a
limited amount of stretcher facilities. A particular doctor
had complained in the press that there was a lack of
vibrolators (heart massagers) and no oxygen in the tanks.
With hindsight, he had said that in view of the size of the
disaster it may not have made much difference to have a few
more pieces of medical equipment.

It was clear that the club was not set up for a disaster of
the magnitude that occurred. Clubs would get St John's
Ambulance to attend. The Popplewell Inquiry did not deal
with medical provisions in any great detail. The Safety at
Grounds Act may do. It was left to the clubs to decide how
much and what levels were needed.

We would also get a copy of the       enquiry following
Ibrox. The Heysel Stadium files would also be made
available. Everything would be trawled back including the
Bolton disaster of 1946.
We went through a draft letter   from the Chairman to Margaret
Thatcher and suggested various   amendments which GK accepted
to cover the FA's position and   also amended a letter from GK
to Wembley Stadium with regard   to communication systems.

We said that the FA should be prepared for a lot of
continuing bad press with regard to such issues as lack of
leadership etc. GK commended Graham Kelly's involvement on
the day and we agreed that by making himself visible and
available was probably better than hiding awayand saying
nothing.   We discussed perimeter fencing whichwas now
subject to UEFA regulations and we discussed the continental
situation.
I said we would get in touch with Lord Justice Taylor's
clerk to see what his plans are in connection with the
setting-up of the inquiry and we thought that it was likely
that he would try and hear most of the evidence by the end
of July.   That did not leave us a lot of time.
We would read into the papers and the FA would     continueto
prepare along the lines they had been. They had employed a
separate agency to record all radio broadcasts and
television in relation to the inquiry. We concluded that
there were areas which the inquiry was likely to address
which would have serious implications for the FA both for
the time being and the future. The FA should treat the
inquiry as a major piece of High Court litigation where
preparation in detail was essential. It would also be
useful to get some proposals for the future in connection
with such matches and their organisation. We discussed the
slight shift in emphasis from the fault being the policed to
the behaviour of the fans themselves. We confirmed that GK
should not speak to the secretary at Sheffield Wednesday
concerning his conversation on the day in question for the
time being.
Engaged 31 hours including dictation and travelling
