                    © 01-402-0486                   FOOTBALL ASSOC                      E1002
89 06/05 12:59

■t




           SfitHUftST PARK STADIUM ;LONDON SE25 6PU ;T6L 01-653 *462 PAX; 01-771 5311



     R,H.G,Kelly Esq
     THE FQQThftLL ASSOCIATION
     16 Lancaster <3ate
     London W2 3iM                                              2nd June 1989




     Dear Graham

     Herewith as premised, so that you can-pass it can to the otlier •
     members of our five-man Sub-Osrcrnitteet is my proposal for what was
     to b6 a new regulation o£ the Football League for which it was
     intended that the ECM was betoy called on the 26th April,

     it Ac i»t wittcm ij> the form rvf a msml'KS'r^hip proposal but ili the
     form of a new regulation proposal so perhaps when you circulate
     it you voulrJ explain this to my fallow members*

     See you on Tuesday




     R.G*Noad6S
     Chairman




                           C --i: P.'-r-Si'a<;r;i
      89 Wb/Wb
                                                                   ryu 1PALL
     V




            DKAfT          STW'J.£i2sTiLi l*i£ftOUE r«'*i:L‘^vi*row wvrfjuium !? 1YJ* A MAMHATOR^
         MEMBERSHIP SCHEME TO BE DJPLJ-WEaED BY ALL FOOTBALL LFACUE CLUBS




1.       Subject to th<2 provisions set. out in paragraph (2) hereof, this
         Regulation shall commence with effect from the cc-rn^'icertvsnt o£
         the 1939/9° Season.

2.       Any Club which wi 11 suffer exceptional hardship in conscience of
         the implementation of this Regulation may by notice 1n writing given
         to the Management Camiittee of the Football League on or borers the
         1st June 1989 seek a variation of the terms hereof, such notice shall
         set out the full facts relied upon by the club seeking a variation
         zrdf in the case of a Club giving such notice, the iManagemsnt
         Ooamittee may either:

         (a)     defer implementation of the temts of this Regulation, or
          (b)    reduce the percentage referred to in paragraph (3)

         hut in either ovent so as to procure that the full terms of this
         Regulation shall apply with effect from the 1991/92 Season.

■3.      All Clubs shall operate a manbersiiip scterwa so that ndnSjnum spectator
         accc«wodation for members at all grounds shall be as follows:

         (a)     commencing Season 1989/90, 50% of ground capacity to include
                 at least two complete sides of the Stadium,
         (h)     Caransncing Season 1990/91, 75% of ground capacity to include
                 at least three complete sides of the Stadium
         (c)     Ccxtroencing Season 1991/92, 100% of ground capacity to include
                 all aides of the Stadium
                £>ctj.euy w i   tf£ rs'-* + .w.^                                                    -i   *




         Exemption from membership card requirements will consist of the
         following i

         GUESTS of M&'.ibers (see (8) below)
         Directors box
         Executive Boxes
         Executive and Sponsorship areas
         Family Enclosure
         Disabled and Senior citizens;

4.       The Management Ctonmittee shall have power tv aa>end the said ttules at
         anytiKie, any such amendments to taJce effect frcsn the cexrwencezrant of
         the season next following.
                  "O'W i - 4 ^ - W * i O D    * W   1 U A Ij L i




                              -   2   -




The Management Ccrnnittce shall have power to increase or vary,
the percentage referred to in para«raj?it (3)«

 (a)   in the case of all C liib s , by giving notice in writing on
       or before thu i£t May in any year

(b)    in tile case of any Club at whose ground the stanf3ard of
       spectator behaviour- falls short of that -which the Management
       Ccmittee in its absolute discretion deans acceptable, by
       giving notice in writing at any time.

Any Club which is in Aceaqh of this Regulation or of the said Rales
or which fails to catply with any notice given under paragraph (5)
hereof shall be liable at the discretion of the Management Ccmittee
to be dismissed fran or suspended for any period fran membership
of the Football Leagae or to a fine or deduction of points or both.
There will be a right of appeal to an Appeal Board appointed by the
Management. OcstmLttee to hear such cases.

Clubs will be required to operate a price differential in favour of
xneKibers against non-nterttbers. .

There will be a “guest tickettt-system available to the public at all
tiara, in the seated areas only.
