                                                            London EC4M 7JA
                                                            Telephone 01 -t>06 6677
Fax Transmittal Form                                        Telex 263396



To:       f u u ft+j        ■& 10S<»                        Date:   /*           tVffy   .
                                    bo*TT
Company:                   ^                              Time:

Countiy:                                                  Fax No:

From:                                                     No. of pages (including this page):   ^^

Direct fax lines:

  ^ du do not receive all the pages, please telephone or telex immediately




                                      O U T ftO lN f*


               I KtkcJL         £a.                    *W      *    ft*           2.


             4.J




A list of partners' names is available at the aoove -ludrsss
                          <lii-i 1'V/V.i t                              A d5 U ^ .iA 1 iUiN
                                                  LiMH'HD
                                                  ."•OUTK^fjiKtf
                                      Patron: $KR Majesty Tin1   .Q\ Mium
                                   /V?swV.*j?,-H.R.H. T h e D u k k o k K w y
                                            ('hairmm:F. A, MlU.laUi»
       Chief Executive:                                                                    Phone:01-4(»27!.51/2624542
    R, H. G. K hi.ly ms                                                                           Tricar:261110
                                                                                              Facsimile:ft?-40204H6


                            \b LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
     6 W Wr/r                                        )’our Ref:

                                                                                                             * •'“'v-■

                                          FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION
                                                                                           \&   C



                                                                         ?
     ?OR THE &TTENTI03SJ OF;                          Oo            f{jo<6A<££)




     COMPANY:




     DEPARTMENT:



     F&X NUMBER:



^    COMMENTS:




     ?r o w :                                    ,


                                                      '\**N
                                                      •sjJ'*a«^■ 6 V - S H
     DATE;


                                                      i/x
     PAGE ONE OP;




                                   U“r,slf'r“i.i[J.'lnr :
                                                        rJ<i        J r -r            ■'
                                   v->>          i.'\ Ltm-.it/ft   ‘U'-’i.'irninnri
                   ?A StJBMI S S I ON TO TAYLOR IN Q U IR Y


D R AFT/7/26 May 1989




    INTRODUCTION


      1.      1 Football is Britain' s national winter sport.  Every
year, the professional game in England attracts millions of
people from all walks of li f e, transcending barriers of class,
race, religion,, politics and sex.     The total attendance at
matches involving Football League clubs in season 19S7-d8 was in
excess ox 20, 000,000.    Attendances in 1989-90 show an increase of
.3t>m© 2. 5%.  it is little wonder, therefore, that the people who
gc> to football matches should mirror what is best and worst in
our society.

      1,     2 It has become fashionable to point the finger at
football and to blame the game, or those who are responsible for
its administration, for the behaviour o£ the tiny minority of
those attending matches who create trouble out of all proportion
co their numbers.    Government figures show that, in. season
19-87-38, 6147 people were arrested in connection with matches
involving Football League, clubs, [insert comparatives].    Many of
th®ise wsre arrested away from stadia.   That constitutes soae 3
arxsats per 10,000 people attending.    The Football Association
accepts that one arrsst is ona too many and unequivocally
condemns the conduct of this section of so-called football
:5upportsrs.   Football is saddled with a problem not of its
.staking,  Blaming football for the situation is akin to
criticizing: the householder for being burglad, to apportioning
:pj±It to the victim instead of the mugger.   Nevertheless, The
football Association xecogniz ss that it has a duty to protect tha
game and that the world at large will expect it to take the lead
in dealing with hooliganism,    Football has accepted this
responsibility.    It has tackl@d the problem - successfully, vt
contend - it is continuing to do so.

       , 3 Tho problam is, however, complex. -There are no sasy
answers.   There are considerations of safety as well as of
behaviour.   5?© need to find educational solutions in the
long-term, just as much as affective short-term answers in the
•area of orowd control,

       i.      4 iTgotball, in partnership with the police, has developed
an intelligence network that allows matches to be planned in as
'chorough a manner as is possible, taking into account the
..mprsdistability of human behaviour.    svery Football league club
is required to lodge with Tha League a "local plan", fexpand and
■3i4plain, Sheffield Wednesday plan as example] detailing tha
T.anner in which it deals with matches on its ground.    Before
avery game, tha police - from the areas both of the home club
and the visitors, - ens visiting club itself and the transport
auchoritias decide the arrangements that will apply. The police
rula on the number of officers that will be deployad both insida
 and. outside tha ground. Tha clubs pay an agreed £ss for sach
policatnan operating within Lha stadium. The club has no right 0 1
73t o over the number selected by the police.   [By what regulation
or law?] In 1937-88, the total police charges paid by Football
Laague clubs for tha policing of League games was £3,355,000 - an
average charge per match of £1,650.    This burden is lightened
somewhat by the payment by The FooLball Trust of 3 5% of tha
charges, excluding VAT.    The balance borne by clubs represented
4. 2% of gate and season-ticket receipts,

      1.5 Ths single most effective, contribution to the fight
against hooliganism in the last decade has besn close-eircuit
television.   It was a recommendation of the Home Office Committee
of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds of
•January 1986 (the Fopplswell Report), that followed the fire at
Bradford City football club, that such systems be introduced at
Football League grounds in England and Wal&s (paragraphs 4. 92
to 4.101). The process had already begun prior to Fopplewell.
It baa now been completed and all Football League grounds
©ither have permanent systems or access to a mobile one,

      1,      6 All Football League grounds and Wembley Stadium are
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds hot, 1975. Tha
legislation was introduced following the ibrox disaster in 1971.
The Football Association co-operated to the full with the Inquiry
of kard Wheatley following that disaster. It concurred with the
introduction of standard safety procedures. It welcomed the
extension of the designation of clubs to the Third and Fourth
Divisions after the Bradford fire and will assist in any way
possible should it b© considered, in the light of. Lord Justice
•Taylor's findings, desirable to establish a central licencing
authority for sports grounds. (Explain why]

      1,7  The installation of closa-circult television and the
ground alterations made necessary by ths Safety of Sports Grounds
Act have, of course, absorbed significant amounts ot money. From
1978, much of this expenditure has been met by The Football Trust
and by The Football Grounds Improvement Trust, funded by
contributions from Littlawoods, Vernons and letters from their
* -Spotting-ths-Ball" competition. To date, a total of £58,000,000
Has been provided. £2,775,000 has been spent on the installation
of close-circuit systems in England and Scotland. 343, 500, 000 has
been allocated for safety and improvement worJt, also in England
and Scotland. Tha total amount apent on ground safety at Football
league clubs, including the clubs' own contributions, amounts to
£36,000,000 in the last ten years.

      1.      3 Government has, in addition to the Safety of Sports
■Grounds Act, produced legislation covering fire safety, the
control of alcohol consumption and public order.

      L 3 Tha net result has been a dramatic reduction in the
number o£ incidents in grounds reported to The Football
Association, as the following table snows, (Reported by whom?j
                     Football Association

                      [Insert previ Qua yaars]

                      1981-82               42
                      1982-83               42
                      1983-34               41
                      1934-85               41
                      1985-86               20
                      1986-87               19
                      1987-88               19
                      1988-89                9

                (Total matches approx 2, 300 per

    [This is not concrete enough. Firm evidence required from clubs
    and from ACPO that hooliganism is In decline. Minister of Sport
    prefers to rely on arrest figures. Compare, Stats that increase
    due to close-circuit and undercover operations. Any evidence on
    hooliganism from Leicester University. ]

         1.      10 Yet the public perception is still of a gams .beset by
    the twin problems of hooliganism and outdated facilities. As the
    attendance figures quoted in the opening paragraph. Indicate,
    the game enjoys a vast fund of goodwill.  Increasing numbers ars
    also playing the game. The figures below indicate the steady
    rise in participation fostered by The Football Association sines
    the Second World War.

           table 2   Number of clubs in England registered
                     with The Football Association

                      19 48                 1 7, 390
                      1961                  22,5 8 0   (Sunday Football
                                                                    lagalj
                              fworld cup]
                      1972                  36,904
                      1975                  37, 641
                      1980                  39,730
>                     1935                  41,173     (decline in Schools
                                                                  football 1

         1.      11  Following Hillsborough; The Football Association
    perceives its task as being to reconstruct general public
    confidence in the game on the foundations airsady provided bv
    healthy levels of participation and attendance.   In the following
    pages we discuss the lead that we shall be taking in fitting
    football for the requirements of today and tomorrow.



        SEATING AND FACILITIES


         2.    1 First, we need to get more seats into our major grounds,
    Ths First Division is 3 9% 3 sated. Experience at Aberdeen has
    shown that, if supporters are treated well, thsy behave well.
    •Seated customers are mors safely controlled and the tendency co
    ■jaunt and gesture is gradually lessened.  Grounds become better
    placas to visit.   Spectators can stand and watch in safety, but
    che racio of seats to standing accommodation must be altered so
    that there is a preponderance of seats.
       j, ^              =saj.u uui . ‘jiiisgo'w .fcta&gers convert ad. their
.stadium t'soai a 33,000 capacity., of which 20, 000 were seats, to
44,000, oi which 35,000 were seated.           At more or less the same
cirna, i:hs Criminal Justios Act was introduced in Scotland.              ‘
                                                                          Phas*
factors, together with the success that coincided with tha
arrival of new manager Graeme Souness in 1985, have led to a
dramatic increase in average attendances, as tha table below
indicates, The club ftas some           00 season-ticket holders, ail
of them seated.

              'abla 3      Comparative average attendances at
                           Glasgow Rangers matches

                           1980-81      19, 000
                           19 81-32     17,000
                           1932-83      18, 000
                           1983-84      22,000
                           1934-85      21,000
                           1985-36      25,000
                           1986-87      37,000
                           1967-38      38,000
                           1938-89      39, 000

 [Rangers arrast figures. Comment from Scottish FA that most
arrests come from standing section. Lettsr from Rangers on their
impression of seating, 3

        2.         3 Aberdeen PC went ona step further than Rangers,
coverting their Pittodrie Stadium to all-seater as long ago as
1918. The capacity is a. respectable 23,000 and, while tha club
does not enjoy the massive support of its Glasgow rivals, it
still achieves a healthy average of around the 14,000 mark.
More significantly, perhaps, the statistics for arrests in
connection with Aberdeen's home matches ars remarkably low, as
bho table below illustrates.

             cable   4    Comparative arrest statistics at
                          Aberdeen matches

                           L983-B4      36
                           1984-85      25
                           L935-86      36
                           L3S6-S7      30
                           L987 — 88    34
                           1988-99      15

(Letter from Aberdeen. Letter from police.          Coventry sxperience.
tfhat. about fans standing on seats?)

       '2. 4 Second, w© need to improve our facilities at
grounds.      [eg urinals].  There is little incentive for thefan,
particularly the travelling supporter, to forsgo the pub unless
the ground can offer reasonably-priced, wholesome refreshment.
■The Football Association intends to concentrate a grsat part ox
its resources on a drive for .better facilities.     (refer to
2 . 11 - 2 , 13 ]

        5 Action is needed to allow our existing major stadia to
become safer, mors wholesome arenas.     They snjoy permanent bases
■?£ support and ancillary activities and do not, in general, need
to consider moving or sharing.    Many will, however, wish to
become ai 1 -aeater. ( reconcile with 2. 9 - 1. 10]
     -j .         *■ ~i   ii-v w   j / ’S c i i - a   o x iJ .u a   EjXJ.u 4, S J i i U    H U tlV fliU   3   O r

1nisrnationai football tournament.    (The 1356 World Cup).  It is
Li yaars sines ve ware asked to find a venue for the final of a
Suropsan club competition.   (The European Cup Final of 197a
piaysd at Wembley between Liverpool and Bruges).    FIFA, the world
governing body os Association Football has made it cl ear that
they will, in future, only award World Cups to countries that can
provide all-s#afc«sr stadia. 'Their exact criteria are; -

              ” A maximum of 12 stadia with the following
                capacities (all seats):

               First Round matches                              30, 000 - 40, 000

               Opening match,
               •Semi-Finals and
               Final                                           minimum                    50,000. "

       2.      7 At present, only Wembley Stadium is capable of meeting
'-.he criteria for the second category of matches. It ig expected
that the ground will be all-seat, with a capacity of 30,000
within the next year or so.    No other ground can meet the
requirements, ©yen of the First Round matches.    There are,
however, at least 3 grounds capable of conversion that
could provide the required capacities.    The following table
shows these grounds, converted on the basis Of one seat
being gained for every two standing places lost:


            table 4       Potential capacity of stadia
                          converted to .100% seating

                          Manchester United                                               41,000
                          Sheffield Wednesday                                             39,000
                          Manchester City                                                 39,000
                          Sverton                                                         3 3,000
                          Arsenal                                                         37,000
                          Liverpool                                                       34, 000
                          Aston Villa                                                     32,000
                          Chelsea                                                         32,000


      2.     3 This nucleus of all-seater stadia would also provide
the pool from which The Football Association would draw the
79JIU3S for FA Cup Semi-Finals.

      7. 9 Many clubs, however, find themselves in geographical
locations where it is practically impossible cor meaningful
improvements to be made. Others share catchment areas in
which two costly to maintain stadia on prime development
sit3B make no commercial sense whatsoever. Many of these
clubs would undoubtedly benefit from a move to an area
providing better communications, better parking and, perhaps,
snared use of facilities. Many clubs spring immediately to mind
as candidates:   Tha Bristol clubs, one of whoa has no currant
home, fulham and Srentford, Blackburn and Preston, Solton and
Sxiry, Rochdal© and Oldham. Leeds and Bradford, Chester .and
Wrexham, Stoke Citv and Port Vale, Huddersfield Town and
Halifax, Watford and Luton Town, Enfield and Barnet.
There is resistance.   Supporters do not like leaving chair
traditional home ground, as the experience of Charlton
     return ro chair xormfcr around - has shown. Howavar, to set
    against this we have ch3 sjxpssrience of countries such as Italy
    vffeere big oJLutos such as AC Milan and Internationale Milano
    3 bars a stadium with no perceivable problems.       In our own
    country, Scunthorpe United have provided the only recent example
    of a Football League club moving to a purpose built stadium.
     (Scunthorpe brochure.     Experience from Utrecht and other overseas
    clutos j.   Their experience is of interest. Their new ground was
    "given" to them by the local authority In exohang© for the old.
    The olub estimates the cost of tha new stadium to have been
    £2, 300, 000.   Ths capacity of tha new ground is 11, 226, compared,
    to 27,000 at the old one, although this is perfectly adequate for
    tfte club' s attendance.     The new stadium is 60% seated,    ‘
                                                                   Tha old
    had only 10% seats.      The new ground is easier to police and to
    access.     The entire spectator accomodation      is covered.

            2.      10 Tha Football Association believes there is ft need for
    a clear lead in this area.        As a first step, it will look again
    at a study made in 19 83, [append]       based on a ground-sharinf
    proposal.     The brief was to provide a model multi-purpose
    two-club stadium on a green-field sits.        The cost of the exercise
    wo u l d not necessarily be prohibitive, with willing partners from
    construction, property development, local authorities and
    finance.     Public money might be made available to the consortium,
    both U. K.    and E. E, c. , to support this private invitiative.

          2.        11 The Football Association will itself look creatively
    at new ways of raising revenue.     sponsorship is one obvious area.
    The game as a whole already benefits from sponsorship to ths tune
    of some £17,300,000 per year,     The Football Association's aim
    will be to supplement that with an acceptable sponsorship of its
    most valuable commodity, Che FA Cup competition.     Tha Football
    Association has already sat in motion a search for a sponsor,
    with a proposal that offers ths prospective company a unique
    opportunity to be identified not only with a competition of world
    standing, but also with an initiative Ih&t can result in the
    ?7orl& Cup' as coming to England in the not-too-distant future, The
    sponsor will be invited to pay an annual .sum as is usual in such
    agreements.     He will also be asked to provide a lump-sum figure

)   o£ substantial proportions in the form of an interest-free loan,
    This sum would form the basis of a fund to assist clubs with the
    installation of seating and/or to help with the construction of
    new stadia.     The Football Association will propose to other
    bodies, such as The Football Trust, that further capital sums be
    set aside to augment this fund.

           2.      12 Given The Football Association's willingness to find
    '•he necessary finances, there is a strong case for the government
    co reciprocate with a reduction in the pool betting tax from
    42. 5% to 40%.   This would release £15,000,000 per annum which tha
    -?ool Promoters might be persuaded to allocate for ground
    iapi-Qvements, thereby platting the game in receipt of over
    .230,000,000 per year from pools sources. Thera is no need to
    create a Football Levy Board, as proposed bv the Rothschild
    Commission in 1977 when it recommended a reduction of duty to
    37%, because the Football Trust/Football Grounds Improvement
    Trust already acta as a suitable vehicle with proven track
    rec ord.
 clubs on transfer jisee, -Tha transfer sysysm doss, in tact,
<$a$ur% tha circulation of monav throughout ths -game, Luton Town
is oftsn citsd 5 3 an ejxample to ths rsst of professional football
and w% discuss tha club's 100% membership scheats below, 1 e should
ba notad, howavsr, that whatever Luton may have achieved in tha
area of crowd control, the anticipated r3turn to its stadium of
Large numbers of lapsed supporters, bringing in fresh revenue,
bas not assured, At the ©nd of its financial year in jtfay,
the club was insolvent to tha tune of £911,132,     In a good gsason
on ths playing field, turnover went up from £2,300,000 to
E3, 900,000, but an operating loss for the year of £327,000 was
returned.   The club's cumulative deficit stands at £2,200,000 and
only a profit of £835., 000 on transfers over the last two years
has prevented the picture becoming even blacker,

       2,        14 It cannot be ignored that the main product of a
football olub is a successful team. The experience of Glasgow
Rangers shows that improved facilities alone will not guarantee
big crowds.    Clubs must look to their playing strength as well as
to tlie comfort and safety of their grounds.   The current tax
system, however, pushes clubs in the wrong direction.    Thera are
no capital allowances for ground improvements, There is only
minor rslief for work necessarily carried out as a condition of
the issue of a licence under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,
'Isansfsr fees, on the other hand, are treated as revenue.   The
Government would automatically stimulate greater expenditure on
improved facilities i£ it were to give capital allowances for
such projects.

       2.        15 With the beet will in the world some clubs will .not
b® abl® to contsmplate adding significant numbers of seats. The
JTootball Association believes it is essential, therefore, for the
iiome Office and the Scottish Office to look once more at the
standing capacities that are allowed by ths Guide to Safety at
.Sports Grounds,   We believe it is also desirable for the Guide to
lav down the maximum number of steps permitted in one
uninterrupted drop on a terrace.    The Football Association places
Itself at the disposal of the Home Office to assist in the
assessment of these maxima,    (Rewrite to say that if all-seater
not possible for all because of finances, we go along with
regulations for safer standing].



     MEMBERSHIP


 3, 1 The government is convinced that a national, compulsory,
.nembers hip scheme is the prime need, together with a range of
other iiisasures, in the quest for a solution to the hooligan
problem.    In 1965, the Prims Minister asked The Football
Association and The .Football League to cell her what football tfss
going to do about implementing a 100% membership scheme,     We said
chan that we believed such a scheme would be impractical,
ineffective In terms of the sum-total of anti-social behaviour it
■■ms required to stop and disastrous for the football industry Ih®
scheme was prasumably intended to protect.    Since that time, the
government has decided to legislate a membership scheme into
existence,    football remains opposed.  It has stated, however,
that it has no intention of opposing the law of the land and
vrould wish to be given control over the scheme, should it come
into existence as the will of Parliament.
               3,       2 The Football Association and Ths Football League have
     appointed ths Management Consultancy, Arthur foung to advise on
    aii aspects of tha establishment of a national a m b e r s hip scheme.
     [Append Report] The Minister for Sport has stated that the
    government will not sanction the introduction of a scheme until
    such time as it is clear that tha necessary technology sxists to
    ensure its successful implementation.          It has to be said that the
    football authorities are still in the process a£ evaluating ths
    available technology.          No-one has the necessary experience in
    wha t is an untriad area to be able to -say categorically that a
    s y s t e m can be produced that will work effectively in real crowd
    situations.         One of the principal concerns expressed by fcho
    football authorities and many other individuals and organisations
    is that the process of computer-reading membership cards might
    p r o d u c e delays at turnstiles with the concomitant problems c£
    safety.         This concern must be deepened following Hillsborough.
    A p p e n d e d to this submission (Appendix A) are a computer model
    p r o d u c e d by Arthur Young, based on queuing times at the
    littlewoods Cup replay between Arsenal and Liverpool on 9th
\   November/ 1988, whan 3, 000 to 5, 000 people were locked out, and
*   report by Manchester United on the National Membership proposals
    that contains interesting references to admission flows into the
    clu b7 & Old Trafiord ground.

          3.     3 In the process of examining ths technology necessary
    for the introduction of a successful membership scheme, The
    Football Association will also look at the entire question of
    turnstiles.  Ths standard model used on most Football League
    grounds is antiquated.  The Football Association will give a lsad
    in researching a better system of filtering entry to football
    grounds.

              3.        4 Tha Football Assoc.i ation and The Football League have
    st ated that they would wish the Football Spectators Sill,
    should it bs snactad, to give real powers for -the exclusion
    from membership of violent offenders, whether or not their
    crime was committed in relation to a football snatch. The
    government has not seen fit to accede to football7 s wishes.
\    The offences for which a person may be excluded from the scheme
*    are limited to those considered 11football related" . The crux
    of the argument against the proposals in terms of their likely
    sffeotiveness is that millions - independent research by 'Target
    Group Index in 1985 showed that 5, 7 million people attended at
    least one football snatch during the course of a season - of
    blameless football supporters will be put to great inconvenience
    cor the sake of what appears, on police figures of those
    arrested, to be no more than 5,000 or so, Indeed, if we are to
    calk about the effectiveness of the legislation in detaching tha
    h o o l i g a n from football, we should perhaps look at the numbers
    of exclusion orders issued .by the courts as a result of these
    arrssts.         The figure is i, 760 between August L987 and May 1989,
    or approximately 900 per season.           [Insert recommendations for
    amendment to bill giving courts wider powers co exclude all
    violent offenders |,

         3.      3  [Luton experience, quoting -arrest figures,       but also
    drop in attendance and financial problems j
     ..                     w —   w ^ - w w   u .j—   w   w   -   -*.   /   •,,•   ;i4 i i   j. s q   {u1 - w w   v   —   a ~ < i-   •.'■• '-»«3   C\   nci   v


     ..'.atahas, --as •■3 result of an inoiclsnt at Birmingham City,  Bines
     April ,1,087, cfae club has voluntarily chosen to daal with th« sals
    oi tiekats for these games through a members hip schsms, entitled
    -1 ths Naw-CJ-Club"» Admission to away games can only ba obtained
    through ths possession of a valid membership card together with a
    match ticket,          Ths club provides twelve of its own stewards for
    ail away games to check cards and tickets before spectators
    approach ths turnstiles,          Members who are arrested, or ejected are
    banned or suspended from attending further matchas,

          3.      7 This is one means of largely slirainating undesirable
    siements from games.   Most matches do not require such drastic
    •neaaures.  The away supporter is undoubtedly ths focus for what
    -violence does occur in connection with games, but effective
    control is achieved in the majority of cases by a combination o£
    police direction and "self-segregation" by the supporters.   In
    other words, ^ost spectators prefer to avoid trouble and will
    automatically go to ths section of the ground reserved for them
    >?here they know they will be protected.

           3.        8 Tha Football Association would not wish to give the
    impression from the foregoing that it.is against the concept of
    •aembership per se,      Quits the contrary. It recognise that it is
     in the interests both of the clubs and the supporters for a
    closer relationship to be developed between the parties,      ‘Che
    examples of clubs such as Barcelona and Real Madrid, each with
    isosne 100., 000 members, illustrate what can be achieved through a
    ■3 lose identification of club with community,    Many clubs are
     already moving rapidly in this direction. The Football 1‘rust
    has instituted a Community Relations Award Competition for
    clubs, with cash prizes for the more enterprising schemes, in
    its first year, Millwall and Preston North End shared the main
    prise, while the submissions lodged with the Trust are too bulky
    to attach to this document, they are all available for, and
    worthy of, study,

          3.9  If sootball rejects the enforced ''solution'1 offered by
    Part. I of the Football Spectators Bill - it weJ.C0»«8 a Fart 2
    chat offers for the first time the prospect of being able to
\   prevent known trouble-makers from travelling to away games
    overseas - it understands that it needs to put forward other
    immediate, as well as long-term, proposals. The confrontation
    betve en supporters needs to ba eliminated.

           3.    i0 The Football Association rscognizas that there is a
    need to convince the public that all possible steps are being
    taken to avoid clashes between supporters.    It proposes,
    therefore, to maJce all away support '’Members Oflly. ” It will also
    Introduce a sliding scale of security risk for ail games.      It
    will be the responsibility of the two clubs to consult with the
    police and to obtain a rating for each match at least one month
    in advance.,  th the exception of cup matches.     fhe scale will be
    .13 follows:

          !,   Low.         Away section - members only.

          2,   Medium.      Ail ticket.               Away section - members                                                    only,

          1.   :iigh.       Ail        ticket.        -So visiting supporters.

          4.   'Priority,   All ticket.               Members and season-ticket holders
                             jnly.
         3,        il M l - t i c k e t arrangements have often foundered when put
      ths t e s t by supporters arriving for fames without tickets. The
?ootball Association understands the p x o b l m a faced by police
officars needing to make decisions bearing on public order over a
w i d e area.     Many will fsal that they would prsfsr to have
potential hooligans within grounds rather that wandering ths
^treats.        However, if all-ticket restrictions are to work,
it is essential that supporters soon coma to rsaliaa that they
will not be able to gain access to grounds without ths proper
ticket and/or membership.              The whol a-hearted backing of ” the
police and the clubs will be needed, particularly in ths early
stages.      Early filtering and exchange of information about people
travelling will also be required.



4.    TICKET TOUTS


       4.     1 The only certain answer to an industry that angsrs
supporters more than anything ease is to make tha sala of tickets
at more than face value illegal. There is no Indication that
legislation to this affect will b© forthcoming, The Football
Association w i l l , therefore, continue its policy of sanctioning
those who have deliberately or negligently" allowed tickets issued
to them to have found their way onto the black market. These
sanctions normally take the form of       a reduction in the number of
tickets allocated to ths person or organization concsrned, or of
a total prohibition. Tha Football Association will, henceforth,
make public ths names of those who have been found to be in
br each of the terms of issue of tickets and will seek to make
punishments more effective,      [Explain difficulty of proving
guilt. Propose sale of tickets- on day outside ground" illegal j

      4,      2 Tha Football Association has introduced revised
-conditions of issue and a letter of  declaration for those
receiving tickets for the Cup Final {Appendix).

       4.      3 The Football Association will sxamina tha system of
al Jo cation of Cup Final tickets, with a view to making mors
tickets available to the competing clubs.    At present, the clubs
receive just over 50% of tha available tickets.    h change in this
policy was made as a one-off in respect of the 1989 Cup Final,
whan Sverton and Liverpool were allocated around 55% of the
available capacity.

      -h 4 The Football Association will seek to make available a
 reasonable number of tickets for what has come to be known as the
!1executive" market.   In this way, people who are prepared to pay
high, prices for luxurious facilities will be given an opportunity
to buy tickets legitimately and those who are tempted to sell
tickets at inflated values will have one potential outlet
removed.
         .*5133-M A T C H E N T E R T A I N M E N T


          5.      1 Ths Football Association will look closely at ths
    question of encouraging supporters into grounds ©arligj: through
    the provision of improved pre-match entertainment.    It has to be
    stated, however, that experience in tiiis area indicated that fans
    ara rarely impressed by ths type of entertainment that has
    traditionally been served up.    [              evidencej The
    possible exception to this rule is the curtain-raiser football
    matoh,   The Football Association will discuss with the supporters
    organisations the concept of a "Supporters League", involving
    matches between the supporters of the clubs taking part in the
    »$in match to bo staged as pre-match entertainment.    [Discuss
    winter problems.   Call for capital allowances for large screens].



    6.   POLICY ON KICK-OFF TIMES


          6,      i The Football Association recommends the establishment
    a£ a common policy on delaying kick-offs.    (Make clear It is a
    •natter for the police to decide on delays),   In view of ths
    comments mads about potential delays as a result of the
    introduction of computerised membership checks at turnstiles
    (paragraph 3. 3 ), we believe this is an essential measure.   The
    safety and security of spectators are the only relevant criteria.

          5.     2 Morning kick-offs have found favour with regard to
    certain problem matches.   It has become the practice in Scotland,
    for example, for Rangers v Celtic games to begin at 1. 00 pm. This
    effectively reduces ths time supporters have to consume alcohol
    before the match.   Early kick-offs do, however, give
    organisational problems.   Some police forces also prefer all
    matches to be starting at the same time to avoid supporters
    slashing sn routs to games,   There is also the contract between
    the Football League and the Pools companies to consider.   The
)   League are bound to have the majority of their games played on a
    Saturday afternoon.   The Football Association will give the lead
    In finding ways of reconciling these conflicting criteria.
    (expand and explain.   PA as honest broker between League and
    ?ocIs ).



           7SNCBS

          7,      I A physical means of preventing spectator encroachment
    ia a till required.  Tha Cup Final on May 20th has shown that
    supporters cannot toe trusted 100% to respect calls not to come
    onto the playing area.   The task, therefore, is to find a aystam
    shat affords ready access to the pitch in an emergency, while
    protecting it from invasion in all other circumstances.     The
    football Association is investigating the possibilities and
    vriil assist clubs in setting up common standards.   (Quote
    jon fusion after Hillsborough.   eg Palace fences lowered.   .^gain
    :iaed for central authority]
      , . —              ^ -v w-w s/* *   irt   i-j a j . j . - y y o u j . i i y   ti y & u ^ ? x r i   o p S I ' S C 1 11 Cl   4C
 jround of tha Minas Olympiqus club in franc® has already fca*n
 3onduot©d.  Other potential alternatives to th© standard
 ssxiaotsr fsnce will also be evaluated,   Ona        alternative
tha moat.   Most grounds do not have the spaoe for the- type of
ditoh found in some continental stadia, but the proposal, that was
put forward in ths seventies for a "double barrier" system -
effectively a dry moat at the saaa level as ths pitch, created by
satablishing a walkway between a continual barrier and a second
barrier or wall adjacent to the pitch - is worthy of careful
reappraisal,   Mr Justice Popplewell said in 1986 that, in M s
view. The Football Association was the proper body to give a lead
in ths setting up of standard designs in this area.     (Popplswell
X®port ~ paragraph 4.138).   At that time, The The Football
Association declined, pointing out that if its design was
unsuccessful it would undermine its disciplinary powers,     Such
considerations are no longer material.    I,FA not setting itself up
SB experts.   Finding out what is available for onward
transmission to clubs and central authority, ]



8.   -SUPPORTER RELATIONS


      S.     1 The Football Association has employed for tha last two
years an officer whose responsibility it has been to assist and
encourage clubs in the successful introduction and operation of
family enclosures within grounds.   The Football League has also
pursued this ideal and recently held a seminar on Family
Initiatives that was well attended by the professional clubs.
(Report attached - Appendix C . ) The Football Association
operates a family enclosure at all of its international Matches
at Wembley and at the FA Charity Shield.   Children are allowed
into these family areas, accompanied by adults, at reduced prices
and special entertainment and incentives are provided.

      3.        2 The Football Association will build on this foundation
by en su ri ng better communication with supporters in general.   It
is alr ead y consulting organizations with relevant experience in
the area of customer relations, with a 7lew to establishing an
effective system of supporter liaison,      It will give urgent
sonsideration to the appointment of a supporter liaison officer.
(Eetter expression required.     -Stimulate closer club/supporter
Liaison],



5.   MEDICAL PROVISION


          ?, 1 Hillsborough haa illustrated that there is a gap in the
Ouidsa to Safety at sports Grounds in ths area or rsquirsd levels
oi raedical provision.         At present., the levels of manning and
equipment are arrivad at by mutual agreement between the club and
cha v o l u n t a r y organization - usually the St John Ambulance
brigade - -serving the ground.          The Football Association has a
very active Medical Committee, whose services will be placed at
the disposal of the Home office should it wish to -avail ita«i.t of
them in drafting amendments to c,hs Guide to Safety at Sports
'ar o u n d s .

              CFCH   ]
            OTHER MEASURES


           10,          1 Ths football Association spends a large amount aaoh
     ysar on its educational programme. In ths financial year 1988,
     ths amount was 61, 161, 440, mad© up of ths cost of running
     courses and Tha National Football school, and of supporting ths
    F h Youth Trust and ths FA National Sports Centre Trust,     Sines
     1932, when Mr Bobby Robson was appointed as National Coash* The
    Football Association has stepped, up ths marketing of its coaching
    and other educational activities, with the result that ths
    numbers attending courses have risen from 13,524 in 1982 to
    210, 309 in 1988.    Much of this increases ig accounted for by tha
    introduction of teaching and leisure programmes for young people.
    All Of these activities contain a strong emphasis on behaviour,
    discipline and personal responsibility. A code of conduct
    produced for young people- attending PA course is attached.
     (Appendix D) The Football Association has initiated an inner-city
    coaching programme for youths who are either criminal offenders
    Off "at ris k 1', A pilot scheme in Birmingham has already been
^   tested and the project will be extended to other areas with
    inner-city problems.     [Expand]



    11.    GOVERNMENT    [Mor* needed]

          11.     1 Some of Mr Poppiewell' s important recommendations have
    not yet bean implemented.  For instance, the- polio® should be
    given the unfettered right to search those entering footbai1
    grounds.  (Popplewall - Paragraph 4.38).

         11.      2 There is a simple common law which works excsllsntly
    in Scotland - breach of tha peace - which in practice covers any
    act likely to provoke disorder.   The law there is flexible, but
    in England and Wales the Government have not acted upon
    Popplaweii' $ admirable recommendations.  (Popplaweil - 4.74).



    12.    CONCLUSION

         3.      1 Football can survive the present problems and emerge
    healthy and vigorous.  Tha game' a governing body intends to lead
    our national sport into a future it can anticipate with pride and
    confidence.




    May   198 9                               C-raham Kelly
                                              Chi a f Executive
