FA/HILLSBOROUGH

I spoke to                 Herbert   Smith. He had seena
copy of the rinai report and had read the bit about
criticisms of the FA on leadership. Nothing had affected
the clean bill of health that              had given the FA
in the interim report. The FA had not been joined in any
civil proceedings and the letters from claimants had dried
up.

The civil action however against the police and Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club was still going. We had both read
in the press that the police's insurers' compensation
payments to the relatives were as yet not acceptable to
them.
 .   t»J
|fe w t still keeping a watching brief on the whole thing.
I had rung because              of the West Midlands Police
Force wfefevhad telephoned my secretary asking for a copy of
the FA instructions for the 1989 semi-final. I reminded
       [
       that this was the booklet that             ,had put
together and that was in evidence at the Tribunal.
Therefore the South Yorkshire police had copies in addition
to solicitors acting for all the parties represented -all
nine of them. I could see no reason why she shouldn't go to
her colleagues in South Yorkshire as some of my papers had
been consigned to the basement. However I thought I would
just check with him to ask him whether his clients would
have any problems in us handing this out. As I understood
it the West Midlands police enquiry into the officers'
conduct had now revitalised following the final report. He
said he would get back to me and thanked me very much for
calling.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation

Subsequently attending^HHBMRwhen he told me that his
clients had no problem with sending the      to the
police.

Engaged 5 minutes including dictation


Subsequently I telephoned »WF6>{    Ito try and find out why
she wanted these papers. She did not know, she had been
asked by senior ranks to get them. They were not in contact
with the South Yorkshire police because they were
investigating them.   She could not disclose whether this
was an internal police enquiry or whether it could lead to
criminal prosecution. Neither could she say to what use the
papers would be put. I said since they were in evidence at
the tribunal I could see no reason why she should not have a
copy. It may take me a few days to dig out.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
