                                                                   Registered Office
                                                                   Hillsborough. Sheffield S6 1SW
                                                                   Telephone: 0742-343123/4
Chairman:     H. E. McGEE
                                                                   Telegrams: Wednesday Sheffield
Manager:      J . L. CHARLTON, O.B.E.
                                                                   Registered No. 62478 England
Secretary:    E. ENGLAND



              The Secretary,                                        EE,
              The Football Association Ltd.,
              16 Lancaster Gate,                                    27th November 1980
              London, W2 3LW


                                          R E C E IV E D       j
                                                2 8 NOV !980
                                        ! M   t tit* * '




             Dear Ted,

             Further to your letter of the 25th November, our
             attendances at the no standing games at Hillsborough
             were extremely good and my personal thoughts on why
             this occurred are that the incident at Oldham was
             caused by a very small minority of so-called
             supporters, and the incident itself was blown
             up out of all proportion by the media, plus the
             fact that the Referee kept the players off the
             pitch for such a long period when really it was
             quite unnecessary.

             So many of our good supporters were at the game
             and in no way condoned what took place, but I
             believe the reaction in Sheffield when the
             punishment was meted out at the hearing was
             that they decided to show us and everyone else
             in football how loyal and well behaved they were,
             and this they certainly did, and we at Sheffield
             Wednesday were very moved and appreciative at
             this spontaneous reaction. Me had no trouble
             whatever and in fact rarely have a problem at
             Hillsborough,

             As far as the police were concerned, the numbers of
             police employed were no different to what they would
             have been, had we been using the standing areas*
             Best wishes.

             Yours sincerely.



             Secretary.
