                                         22 September 1989




 FA/HILLSBOROUGH

I spoke to Adrian Titcoxnbe and went through the draft
letter. He took my comments on board and agreed with them
all. He agreed that reference to Popplewell ought to be
made.  That was in case one of the residual recommendations
which had not been adopted by Taylor actually caused a
problem in the future and the FA had not referred to it. He
agreed that was sensible. He was concerned that some people
were taking the recommenda±icm s as gospel eg Aston Villa and
some clubs were completelyS^ftem?? Some police forces in
addition did not want to perimeter gates and others did. In
other words football in general'Vas not consistently
applying the recommendations.    In this connection the league
have sent a five page document style questionnaire to ask
the member clubs what has and has not been done. They were
taking a much more higher profile role on safety. The FA
were happy for them to do that and he would send me a copy
of the league document when he got it.

 He thanked me for all our help on getting the FA memorandum
 together. With regard to the suggested change of Rule 24 in
 order to give the FA more bite if there was misconduct, the
 normal course in a corporate structure would be for an
 executive decision to be made and then for the lawyers to
 redraft the rules.  However, here we agreed that the impetus
 for change may have to come from Adrian and myself. We
agreed that the rules as drafted at the moment were fairly
weak inasmuch that there was not a proper definition for
specific misconduct and in addition there was no sanction
for breach of any of the matters relating to safety eg some
of the matters contained in Taylor's recommendations. We
had to be careful not to become a compliance authority<^g
safety watchdog)but it would be good to strengthen the rule
and perhaps allow the FA to take action when it came to its
attention that clubs were deliberately flouting sensible
precautions. Adrian asked me to give that some thought
which I said I would and get back to him over the next
couple of weeks.

He asked whether I had spoken to               and/or      1
         Iin connection with the question of whether those
purportedly covered by the rules in the handbook were in
fact covered. He said he thought the Freshfields' view was
that there was a problem. I said I had discussed the matter
with                H who was taking it forward and in my
view as a matter of custom and practice and because the
