                SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. -v- COVENTRY CITY F.C.
                               F.A. CUP 6TH ROUND
                      SATURDAY 14TH MARCH 1987 8 3.00 P-M^-------




produce a very large crowd.

C a p a c i t y : 54,000.

Attendance:          48,005 (14,000 Coventry).

Average A t t e n d a n c e :   24,138.
Layout:   The Main Stand is to the South and has no st&nding area.                                   The
North stand opposite is all seating.


52  2S S3
for the North           West corner.
The stadium is modern by comparison with others and is exceptionally
well maintained.
Fencing- Perimeter fencing to the standard height is provided at each




corner.
The overwhelming ^ j o r i t y o f j i s i t o r s . c ^ b ^ s p e c i a l g r a i n s     an^these

 ofr t h ^ S t a d i u m ?   This reduced contact between rival fans considerably.

 Segregation at this ground is of a high order.

 Access:  The Ground is a 20 minute bus ride from the centre of Sheffield.
 It Adjoins the A . 61 road and is bounded by the river ’Don and private
 modest housing.
 There are 95 turnstiles and advanced publicity asking spectators to arrive
 early ensured that no large queues formed and no last minute rush
 problems occurred.
 A control room has been provided to monitor the turnstiles.                               Each set
 is viewed by C.C.T.V. and videoed.

 This room also houses the computer control for recording the numbers
 K •   Emitted       A V D.U provides immediate data on the numbers in each
 being f i t t e d . * V.D.U p r o ^ ^  stadium>  when an enclosure is
  nearing^naxium the computer warns the controller and spectators can
  be redirected to other areas.

  A Police Officer is also employed in this room with a direct
  the Police Control so that the Police Commander has knowledge of the
  spectator situation at any given moment.

                                                                                         C o n t d / ....
Access; (Contd)

The computer has another function.  Should any person climb over the
turnstile without paying a beam will detect them and this will be shown
on the V.D.U.  Should this happen several times at any one turnstile
it would indicate that perhaps a turnstile operator was allowing
unlawful entry and committing criminal offences.  The C.C.T.V and
the computer have virtually stopped these practices.

Stewards:   Distinctively attired and sensibly employed.  A retired
Police Officer is the full time Security Officer at the stadium and the
degree of efficiency of stewards reflected his involvement.

Racial:   None apparent.   Black players took part in the match.

Parking: Limited to official vehicles.   All approaches' to the stadium
have parking, mostly on the wide footways.  Once the game ends
considerable traffic congestion occurs lasting for at least an hour.
Pedestrian congestion does not last very long.

C.C.T.V.: Four monochrome cameras cover the outside of the stadium and
one colour camera the inside.  The receivers are housed in the police
control in the South West corner.  This control is smallish but
adequate and commands a good view of the interior.  Video and still
photography is available.

Police: There is a very friendly cooperative relationship between
police and Club, with mutual respect.  This match received extra
planning but each match is planned for according to its degree of
importance and potential.

General: One small incident, probably unnoticed by most, when home
supporters in seats nearest to the visitors in the North West corner
became agitated and remonstrated with the visitors.  Police were
quickly in attendance and discovered that some missiles, mainly coins,
had been thrown.  No actual contact due to segregated fence and the
whole incident was resolved in minutes.  No injuries reported.

Otherwise this was a thoroughly interesting and exciting match enjoyed
by a near capacity crowd who behaved extremely well without obscene
chanting.

The layout maintenance, and control at this stadium is of a high order.

Result:   Sheffield Wednesday 1 : Coventry City 3.


15th March, 1987
