INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                        Rt Hon Sir Peter Tavlor
STADIUM DISASTER    ; .                       ■f -   50 Q ueen Anne's Gate
                                                      London SW1H9AT



   NEWS RELEASE
11 May 1989               Press Contacts: Leeds 0532 438232-
                                                      x2418

                                          London 01 273 4610


OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE NOTE FOR NEWS EDITORS:


         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY : ORAL HEARINGS


On Monday 15 May at 10.30am, Lord Justice Taylor will open the
oral hearings in the Hillsborough Disaster Inquiry at Sheffield
Town Hall.

On Monday only the hearings will commence at 10.30am, adjourn
for lunch at 1.00pm, reconvene at 2pm and adjourn for the day at
5pm. On subsequent days hearings will be from 10am to 1pm and
2pm to 5pm Mondays to Thursdays and 10am to 12.30pm and 1.30pm
to 3.30pm on Fridays.

An initial facility was provided for filming and photography
before the preliminary hearing began on 28 April. No further
facility can be provided either before or after the daily oral
hearings.

Representatives of the press and broadcast media who wish to
attend the oral hearings on Monday should be at Sheffield Town
Hall at 10.15am for 10.30am. What is normally the public gallery
of the chamber has been made available exclusively for the use
of reporters. This accomodation offers between 40 and 50 places
with benches for reporters covering the hearings.

No television filming or photography of any kind will be
permitted in the Town Hall building during the Inquiry. Sound
recording of the proceedings will also not be allowed.

Order of proceedings
A notice of the order of proceedings together with a list of
witnesses giving evidence that day will be available on the
morning of each day of the oral hearings.
' Approaches to witnesses                                      .
  Lord Justice Taylor has made it clear that the witnesses should
  not be interviewed in any way before they have completed their
  evidence to the Inquiry. If this request is ignored it may have
  an adverse effect on the difficult task Lord Justice Taylor has
  to carry out.

 Statements
 Copies of witnesses' statements on a ’check against delivery’
 basis will be made available in the Press Room as each witness
 is called to testify.

 Transcripts
 Full transcripts of proceedings will be available by
 mid-afternoon for the morning hearings and the following morning
 for the afternoon hearings. These will be available from the
 Secretariat on request at £10 per copy. News organisations will
 be billed as necessary for copies requested. Contact Lynn
 Taylor/Paul Shaw of COI on the Inquiry Press Room number -
 0742-736820/736821.

 Models,plans diagrams etc.
 Where necessary, maps plans and diagrams will be displayed
 outside the chamber. There will be no objections to reporters
 viewing material inside the chamber during the lunch adjournment
 or once the day's proceedings are over.

 Technical terms
 The Secretariat and the Press Liaison Officers will be prepared
 to offer any assistance as may be required in the explanation of
 technical terms used during the hearings.

 Press room (0742-736820/1)
 In addition to the gallery, a press room in the Town Hall
 building with full telephone facilities will be provided. It
 will be possible for representatives of the media to follow the
 proceedings on a closed circuit television monitor in the press
 room. Filming or tape recording from the monitor will not be
 permitted.

 Further enquiries about the press arrangements should be made to
 either Roy Sutherwood in London on 01 273 4610 or Lynn Taylor in
 Sheffield/Leeds on 0532 438232 x 2418.
                                                                         '.'"   "...   'i..::;:.   ;:f




NEWS RELEASE .... NEWS RELEASE .... NEWS RELEASE .... NEWS RELEASE .... N E W S REL




                                              '

                                 HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

      The Health and Safety Executive has been asked to assist the
 Court of Inquiry into the disaster which occurred on Saturday 15
 April 1989 at the Hillsborough;'Stadium in Sheffield^-Lord Justice
 Taylor, who formally opened the Inquiry at the Sheffield Town Hall
 on Friday 28 April 1989, is to be assisted by Professor Leonard
 Maunder, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at Newcastle
 University, and Mr Brian Johnson, Chief Constable of Lancashire.

         The HSE team headed by Dr Chris Nicholson, Deputy Director of
 the Research Division's Safety Engineering Laboratory in
 Sheffield, will be working closely with Professor Maunder.

         Research Division staff from several scientific disciplines
  and engineers from Technology Division have already been involved
  in some of the work of the investigation at the Hillsborough
  ground and will consider, amongst other topics, the siting and
  strength of crush barriers, means of entrance into and exit from
  the ground and the structural integrity of constructions at the
  ground.




                                              Ends
