                          THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                         LIM ITED
                                                         ['O undcd IXf>3

                                        Patron: Hl-R MajF.STYTlifl OlTP.N
                                      President: H .R.H. TllE DwkeoP Ki-.N i
                                            Chairman: F. A . MlLLK'Hii*

    ( hief Executive:                                                                            - l i p 7151 '2624541
R. H . G. K l i L L Y   l-VIS                                                                 "i-it'x: 2 M 1II)
                                                                                           u simtie: i il-4H2()4X<-i



                                16 LANCASTER GATE. LONDON \V2 ;i.W
  ( >ur Ref:                                          Your Ret:


                  Competitions Dept



      24 February 1989



      Mr G Mackrell
      Secretary
      Sheffield Wednesday FC
      Hillsborough
      Sheffield
      South Yorkshire
      S6 1SW




     Dear Mr Mackrell

     FA CHALLENGE CUP COMPETITION
     SEASON 1988 - 89
     SEMI-FINAL TIES
     SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989

     As is customary this time of the Season, I am writing to
     enquire whether your Club would be interested in staging
     an FA Challenge Cup Semi-Final Tie on Saturday 15 April
     1989 or a replay during the following mid-week.

     I would inform you that you may charge 10% of all gross
     gate receipts, less V.A.T., for the hire of the ground.
     I would also like to take this opportunity of clarifying
     the position with regard to Executive Boxes. For Boxes
     leased out for the season, we would require a payment equal
     to the number of seats at top ticket price, while in the
     case of Boxes hired out on the one-off basis for the match,
     your Club will be entitled to retain 507» with the rest
     being paid into match receipts. These amounts, however, should
     not be included in the gross gate receipts when calculating
     the fee for the hire of the ground.



     continued.
                                    Registered Office: 16 Lancaster date, London W 23I.W
                                    Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
   In the event of your Club playing in a Semi-Final Tie, would
   you still be prepared to take the other Semi-Final Tie on
   your ground the same day, bearing in mind the administrative
   cost involved?

   Please indicate if your Club has the necessary insurance cover
   for matches of this nature. Clubs should also note the
   requirements of Challenge Cup Rule 26(b) whereby the two
   competing Clubs shall be entitled to 50% of the tickets for
   sale. The Association in its absolute discretion may vary these
   allocations.

   Details of spectator segregation should be provided together
   with details of the present ground capacity, number of seats
   and standing places also indicating if safety fencing is
   provided around the pitch.

   Clubs should also note that any special areas such as Executive,
   Vice-President, family or any similar seated or standing area
   cannot be retained by the staging Club. All parts of'the ground
   must be allocated entirely for the two competing Clubs with
   the exception of Directors Box, which will be controlled by this
   Office.

   An early reply would be appreciated as the Challenge Cup
   Committee will be selecting the venues at their meeting to be
   held on Monday 20 March 1989 and it is essential for the
   above information to be prepared for the Committee prior to
   the meeting.

   Yours sincerely




17 S R Clark
   Competitions Secretary
