                                                  23 October 1989




     FA: Hillsborough

                      rang. There was a qualifying round of the
     i?a   uup   1   V» and non-league clubs were going to stage
     matches against league clubs, with the attendant problems.
     Local authorities and police would need to be on the alert.
                . had sent out a memorandum last year which had
     upset a lot of non-league clubs as it was not couched in the
     best possible terms. He was proposing to send out the
     revised documents we had prepared this year together with a
     covering note which he wanted to fax to me for approval. I
     said I would be happy to look at that.
••




     Time engaged:        10 minutes


     Subsequently attending|                on my calling to deal
     with his faxed draft letter.

     In paragraph 2 I would insert "whatever the case and whether
     or not your ground is covered by the Act, you should comply
     with the minimum safety standards set out in
              Interim Report. In addition, should your club
     progress to the competition proper, we recommend that you
     consult with your local authority ...".

     He explained that "public interest” did not mean what it
     said. It made it sound as though they were worried because
     the eyes of the world were on matches. I said that it may
     be better to say "attendance at those grounds".

 He did not want to give the clubs the opportunity to pick up
 the 'phone to him at every stage because, as I knew, his
 department consisted of himself,             and the 3 crowd
 control advisers. However, he did leave them with the
 option of asking for assistance wherever necessary. He will
 be sending the letter out as amended this afternoon, and
 thanked me for my help.

 In relation to an interview to be set up with
        , there was a meeting of the league and FA committee
 that had met to produce the wider issues document next week.
No doubt we would be contacted. The league were making a
complete mess-up of the membership scheme at the moment. He
had no faith in them and thought that it was a good
opportunity for the FA to go their own way.

Time engaged:   20 minutes




                                                    MMF02L
