 F R E S M F I E M I g                                                                         Walden House 17-24 Caihsdral PJacs
                                                                                               London EC4M 7JA
                                                                                               Tdeohone 01-606 6677               rs>J
Fax Transmittal Form                                                                           Telex 263396



                         John Dyson                                                                        11 May 1989
To:                                                                                            Date:

Company:                  2 Garden Court, Temple                                               Time:

Country:                 uk                                                                    Fax No:

From:                         ? ^                                                              No. of pages (including this page).

Direct fax lines:

If you do not receive ail the pages, please telephone or telex immediately



                Uian Gifcson-Watt - fax


    Please find attached amended versions of Clark's m d
    statements.  You will see that some extra "points have Been actctea into
    both statements.  You should note the following points:

                       ’was unaware of the press cuttings in March concerning
                  Lillsborough.

                                        is unaware of any problems at Manchester in 1985,

                           [is unaware of the petition concerning Wembley
                  except that it exists. He knows nothing about any steps that
                 )/ere taken to deal with the points made.

                tfith regard to paragraph 9 or| ~    ~   statement, the type
                of problems the FA staff deal with areTpoints like one club's
                players taking over the wrong dressing room or the logo in a
                team's shirts being larger then it should be cor a television
                contract.

                 At present Clark's statement cross-ref ars to           do you
                 think it should be self-contained if so which oits trom
                            Ishould go into'

                   is seeing     at 9am tomorrow morning.   Ha is then
    hoping to go througf     ___ and       _____ statement with them.
    will try and call you for your comments after his meeting with
                 which should be about 10,30 to 11.00. Sorry to rush
    you for any comments.

       sgards




 ' h i o f o'-jf? n e t s ’ n ' l i n e s is ■ i v a i H b l ’; "-u tins i b o v e   a a d r ■; 3 s
                            Job 10S.24LL


                                                 DRAFT 11/05/39




                STATEMENT OF




                             of 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2
will say as follows


          i am 43 years old and have worked for the Football
Association (FA) for tha last 15 years.     I am a BA Oxon and
before joining the FA was a teacher of Arabic and Turkish at
MiIlflaid School.     I joined the FA as competitions secretary
and handed over that job to                  in 1982.   My
present main responsibilities are for the competitions
department, referees., regulations, discipline and fixtures.


          When I was the competitions secretary I was
responsible for dealing with the FA Challenge Cup
Competition and so dealt with the semi-final arrangements,
There are a number of clubs that have been used over the
years as venues for FA semi-finals and consideration would
ba given first and foremost to geographical location and
capacity of the grounds.     It would also be relevant that tha
club had experience in dealing with big matches and also had
a high ratio of seating capacity i.e. at least 20,000 seats.
The reason for this is that tha charge for seats is at least
double that for standing room and so greater revenue can be
generated from the match.    The grounds are chosen from a
List which includes from London: Arsenal, Tottenham and
Chelsea; from the Midlands; Villa Park, Nottingham Forest,
Test Bromwich and Birmingham; and from the North: Everton,
Liverpool, Manchester City, Manchester United, Sheffield
Wednesday, Sheffield United and Leeds United.     In fact the
                            Job 1052 4Lij




 final choice is generally much narrower because of practical
reasons.     For example this year Arsenal did not want to have
a Challenge Cup match, Tottenham was doing work on their
ground [not in correspondence] and Chelsea was not really
large enough as it only has a capacity of 3 9,000.


3,           The existing administration of a club would be an
important factor as there is a great deal to organise and an
inexperienced secretary and staff would be unlikely to be
able to cope effectively with the problems that can arise.
There is a general feeling amongst members of the Challenge
Cup Committee that the venues should be changed from year to
year so as to give different clubs the opportunity of
staging a semi-final.     This is because clubs have to
carry out a certain amount of work to their grounds to
provide for the reguired segregation of supporters and so
the proceeds of a match are a means of recouping some of
that expenditure.     With the semi-final draw this year the
only possible clubs for staging it would have been Villa
Park, Manchester United, Manchester City and Sheffield
Wednesday.     My own feeling was that the likely choice for
the match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest would be
Hillsborough because it had been held there the previous
year without any. reported difficulties.      If it had been
Manchester it would have been Manchester United rather than
Manchester City because it was their turn.


             I do remember that on 16 March
the secretary of Manchester City had telephoned me to
express great interest in holding a semi-final at City's
ground.    At that stage Liverpool, Everton, Manchester United
and Nottingham Forest were still in the competition.       I
suggested to               that he should find out from
Manchester police the views of City staging the match even
     Manchester United were involved.                phoned back
                            ob 10 62 4LL




 sither that day or the following day and left a message for
'me that tha police would be happy even if Manchester United
were involved,   1 was not surprised that the Manchester
police were prepared to allow a match involving Manchester
United to ba played at Manchester City,     This is because in
my experience the Manchester police ars one of the most
flexible forces and are probably the only force in the
country who would allow this to happen. 1 discussed the
position with Mr Clark and we agreed that he would telephone
Everton to see what its reaction would be to the suggestion
of playing at Manchester City,     I understood Everton refused
to play at City because of its concern as to how the police
would treat Everton's supporters.


5,         I had a brief meeting with Graham Kelly' the chief
executive of the FA on 17 March. :Hr Clark was at this
meeting.   The purpose of the meeting was to discuss
semi-final venues as I would be going to Birmingham to deal
with the semi professional match against Wales from 18 March
until 22 March and so would be out of tha office on 20 March
when the draw was to be made.    1 particularly wanted
tp be aware that there was no London club available for a
semi-final match,   ht that time Brentford, Wimbledon, West
Ham, and Norwich were still in the competition and a London
club looked as though it could be needed.    I also told
Hr Kelly about the telephone calls with Manchester City and
Sverton.   Sheffield Wednesday and Villa Park were
mentioned as possible venues.    I had some concern about
Sheffield Wednesday because depending which clubs were in
the final it could involve two lots of supporters travelling
on the same route and this could lead to problems,
was not as concerned as I was on this point.    The meeting
discussed other points and was fairly brief lasting about
15-20 minutes.
                            Job 10S24LL




 5.          After Hillsborough had bean chosen as tha ground
 for tha 1988 Liverpool/Nottingham Forest semi-final 1
 -attended a meeting there at which were present
representatives for Liverpool, Nottingham Forest and the
police.     The principal point of the meeting was to discuss
 the point raised by Liverpool as to whether the ends
designated by the police could be swapped.     The police had
allocated the Lappings Lane and to Liverpool based on
geographical considerations.     Liverpool was unhappy about it
and had asked for a meeting,     I would not normally have gona
to this meeting but Mr Mackrell had told me about it and as
I happened to be near Hillsborough on FA business the day
before the meeting I attended it.     I also wanted to inspect
Sheffield Wednesday's new facilities as I knew I would be
the FA representative at the semi-final match.     The meeting
was quite amicable but tha police made it clear that they
were not prepared to change their decision.     I cannot now
remember exactly what I said at the meeting but I am sure I
supported Liverpool from a football point of view but I also
understood the police's view.     I remember that the police
had a map at the meeting showing the various traffic
considerations.     I did not really participate in the
discussion,     I regarded myself as being there as an
observer.     I did not keep any notes of that meeting.


7.          The FA as a matter of policy does not become
involved with every day decision taking once it has
nominated a staging club for semi-final matches.     This is
because it is impractical and also the clubs are chosen
particularly because they do have the facilities and
-experience to deal with the arrangements.    Clubs are usually
approached by the FA in February to see whether thav are
prepared to stage semi-final ties and at that time are asked
to provide details on spectator segregation, present
capacity, numbers of seats and standing places and indicate
if safety fencing is provided around tha pitch.     a further
                            ■Job .10624LL




reason for leaving tha staging club to deal with all the
organisation and arrangements is that it will generally know
the behaviour and habits of tha supporters who are coming
from tha other clubs as it will no doubt have played against
them.    This means it has a much better detailed knowledge of
the type of arrangements that are needed and can liaise with
the police.


3,           Clubs attach importance to being selected as the
venue for a semi-final cup match as there is some prestige
involved as well as some financial benefit.       The rule is
that the competing clubs should receive 50% of the tickets
for sale.     However in practice this can not always happen as
the ticket allocation is governed by the ends which have
been allocated to the supporters.      The police have a- large
part to play in this decision as segregation of       fans is
regarded as an overriding consideration for safety at
'.Hatches.   Tha staging club technically should not be
allocated any tickets but it generally retains a very small
number for directors and club officials.      The FA usually
takes an allocation of tickets for each tie on the basis of
ail directors box tickets and (the number will depend on the
size of the box); 350 complimentary and 850 purchase
tickets.     These tickets are allocated to Council members,
County associations, members of staff, other football league
clubs and organisations connected with the FA.


3.           A .member of the FA staff attends each semi-final
.aatch and in recent seasons this has principally been
myself, jlen Kirton, or     Dickia Bird.    Our duties are to
return any spare tickets to the staging club, and       generally
to supervise the hospitality and protocol arrangements at
tha match As a matter of courtesy the club secretary often
informs the FA staff if any problems have arisen in
connection with ticketing or policing arrangements.
10.       Tha FA plays a very different role whan it comes
to tha staging of matches such as Internationals and the Cup
Final at Wembley.   The reason for this is that the company
which owns Wembley only stages about 5 football matches
during the year and is a commercial organisation.    It
therefore is not nearly as experienced as a staging club in
a semi-final Challenge Cup in dealing with the issues of
crowd control,   Further, many of tha supporters have never
been to Wembley before and lack of familiarity with a ground
often leads to a greater number of complaints.   Wembley has
generally been quite keen for the FA to attend a number of
the administrative meetings that have taken place with the
police and local authorities.    I think that the staging
clubs for semi-final matches would probably regard the FA as
interfering if they turned up for meetings and started
participating in tha same way,   I also tael that FA members
of staff would have little to contribute to any discussions
at the staging clubs because of their lack of knowledge of
the local conditions.
                                                  CRAFT % 11/05/89



                      STATEMENT OF




                                IS Lancaster Gate, London W 2 ,
WILL SAY as follows:



1.           I am 37 years old and have worked for the Football
Association (FA) for tha last 20 years.      Since 1982 1 have
bald the position as competition secretary at the FA and one
of my jobs is to deal with the organisation for the FA
Challenge Cup.      In particular, I have responsibility for
organising the semi-final arrangements for the Challenge
Cup.      Adrian Titccmbe did this job before me and having read
his statement, I agree with the general points he makes
about the reasons for the venues chosen for playing the
matches and the points he makes about organisation.


2,           In about February each year I sent out an
invitation to various clubs as to whether they are prepared
to hold the semi-final of the FA Challenge Cup.       Liverpool
Football Club was on the list until last year when it
replied to my latter to the effect that it did not want to
hold a semi-final because of the reduction in capacity of
its ground.     Liverpool had installed more seats and as a
result the standing room of each end was reduced to 3,000
and 20,000 respectively.     Such an unequal distribution of
-standing room made the ground unattractive for a semi-final
.natch.    It will be seen from the replies from the clubs that
Arsenal fait that the state of its pitch was unsuitable for
a semi-final, Tottenham was carrying out rebuilding work
(tha letter does not say this but shows reduced capacity to
                          Job 10 52 3I.L




33 , 000] and Leeds did not want to cancel a Football Laague
match.


3.        .Apart from the correspondence with the clubs there
was one telephone call which Adrian Titccmbe received on 16
March from Barnard Halford the secretary of Manchester City..
1 understand that Hr Halford asked whether a semi-final
match could be played at his club and had confirmed that the
police would be happy for this to happen even if Manchester
united were involved in the match.     At that time Liverpool,
Everton, Manchester United and Nottingham Forest were all
still in the draw.   Mr Titcombe and I discussed the position
and agreed that I should telephone Everton to ask for its
views about playing at Manchester City.      I then telephoned
                                           Ion 17 March.
             told me that Everton would not play at
Manchester City because it was felt that its supporters
would be intimidated by the Manchester police force.


                       and I had a brief discussion with
             |the chief executive of the FA later that
aorning about venues for the semi-finals matches.
Mr Titcombe'was going to be out of the office the following
Monday when the draw would be made and there were some
details lie wanted to sort out with 1Mr Kelly.     One of the
points was the fact that there was no London club prepared
or able to stage a semi-final    match and there was still
Brentford, West Ham, Wimbledon and Norwich left in the draw.
■>7e also told Mr Kelly about the telephone call from
Manchester City and Everton's reaction.      Hillsborough and
villa Park were also mentioned as possible venues for the
other semi-final match.   Other general points unrelated to
tha FA Challenge Cup were also discussed.      The meeting
lasted altogether about 15-2 0 minutes.
                              fo I i J o U L L




4,           This year the draw for the semi-final was made at
7,45am on Monday 20 March,     At about 10 o'clock on 20 March
I received a telephone call from Peter Rcbinsson oi:
Liverpool. I was expecting Sheffield Wednesday would be
chosen for the Liverpool tie because of the discussions on
Friday.   1 cannot now recall exactly what Mr Robinson said
during this telephone conversation and I did not make any
contemporaneous note.     However, I think that he also thought
that the match was likely to be played at Hillsborough and
lie was asking me whether it would be possible to swap ends
from those that were used last year.             Last year Liverpool
had been allocated the Leppings Lane end rather than the
Pennistone Lane end.     1 knew that the reason for the request
was that the Leppings Lane end resulted in Liverpool getting
4,000 less tickets than Nottingham Forest and bearing in
■mind the size of the supporters for the two clubs, Liverpool
had been unhappy about the allocation last year,             i do not
remember Mr Robinson asking for a venue other than
Hillsborough.     In my mind Hillsborough was the likely venue
in view of the draw.     This was because last year's
semi-final had been staged there and it had been very
successful with no complaints.


6.           I immediately rang Graham Mackreil, the secretary
at Sheffield Wednesday club, to tall him about the call I
had had from Mr Robinson ~nd to ask him to speak to the
police on the likely allocation of tickets if Hillsborough
were selected for the Liverpool tie.             The reason for making
this call was that I knew that only if the police agreed
could there be any change in the end that was allocated to
Liverpool.     I suspected that looking at the geographical
location of Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in relation to
Hillsborough that tha police would not be minded to change
"heir views from last year.      The police views on which and
should be allocated to which d u b are tha decisive factor
for the .staging club for obvious reasons.            -Shortly after
                            ■Job   10523LL




 that call I spoke to Mr Kelly about the arrangements for ths
Challenge Cup Committee meeting and mentioned to him the
call that I had had from s^ia®©J3iesaffi#coinpimining about ths
likely allocation of ends if Hillsborough were chosen,


7,           Shortly before 11 o'clock I received a telephone
call from JSMSffiSlfiSSKi5 to say that if Hillsborough were
chosen for the Liverpool tie then the police would allocate
the Leppings Lane end to Liverpool in accordance with last
seasons arrangement.     Ths reason for this was to avoid a
clash of supporters approaching and leaving the ground.
There was a Challenge Cup sub-committee meeting at 11
o'clock and I mentioned to Mr Kelly at that meeting about
the call I had received from Mr Mackrell.      The purpose of
the sub-committee meeting was to deal with artificial
pitches and had nothing to do with the selection of venues
cor the semi-final matches.


3.,          The sub-committee meeting finished before 11.30am
and I think that 1 went with*’4Hfe,£Kl§Wsy to the general office
•vhere we discussed the matter further. %ll*«?lli4gj^fjasked me
about what had happened last year at Hillsborough and I told
him there had not been any problems that I was aware of and
certainly no complaints had been received.      Mr KeLlv was
interested in my recommendation as to venue and I told him
that I thought that Mr Robinson's phone call should not
altar the recommendation that ths match should be played at
Hillsborough.     The only alternative venue would have been
Manchester.     My own feeling was that ths fact that Liverpool
:-7ould have gained some tickets (but might have had the same
number Nottingham Forest) by going to Manchester was not a
sufficiently strong reason for altering the venue from
lillsborough where the match had been so successfully run
last year.     I also thought that Sheffield would be more
neutral venue as Manchester and Liverpool are sometimes
considered to be part of the same conurbation.



                                   -4-
                              >b 10 6.23LL




             I then went into the Challenge Cup committee
 casting with Mr Kelly.    One of ths items on tha agenda was
 tiia venues for tha semi-final matches.        There were no papers
 cor this item but in relation to another item there was a
 list of the venues for the semi-final matches for the past
 10 years.
Grounds Committee\ recommended that the match between
Sverton and West Ham/Norwich should be at Villa Park and
that the one between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest should
be at Hillsborough.     Villa Park was accepted without any
debate from the members of the Committee.          Thera was a
suggestion made (possibly by Mr Brown the chairman) that tha
other match should be at Manchester. There was the briefest
ox discussions and the committee accepted Mr Wiseman's
recommendation that the Liverpool match should be at
Hillsborough. There was no reference during the committee
meeting to the phone call that 1 had had with Mr Robinson.
I did not consider it necessary for me to raise it as I had
mentioned it to Mr Kelly./


ID.          Tha meeting finished at about 12.30pm and at about
I o'clock I phoned both Sheffield Wednesday and Villa Park
•formally asking them whether they would be prepared to stage
the semi-final involving Liverpool.          They both confirmed
that they were happy to do so and I therefore told them to
go ahead xvith the usual arrangements and to contact the
police concerning segregation of supporters.          I then
telephoned Liverpool and Nottingham Forest briefly out of
courtesy to tall them of tha decision.          I think I spoke to
Sheffield Wednesday and Villa Park on the telephone later in
cha afternoon about some of the administrative details.


Li.          On 21 March I received a telephone call from
Mr Robinson in the morning to tsll me that Liverpool were
lotng to make public their disapproval of the choice of
venue of Hillsborough as they would be receiving less
                                 Job   L0S23LL




     tickets than Nottingham Forest.      I understood the call to be
     by way of information to say that Liverpool would be making
     these comments rather than as a formal complaint.      If I had
     thought that'Mr Robinson was in any way making a formal
     complaint then in accordance with standard practice I would
     have asked him to put it in writing or to speak to Mr Kelly
     direct,   Mr Robinson''thought that tha FA might also be
     receiving critical telephone calls or letters from Liverpool
     supporters who were unable to- get tickets.    There has been
     -some press comment recently regarding Liverpool's criticism
     of the choice of Hillsborough but so far as I am aware no
r"   such calls or letters were received from any Liverpool
     supporters until after tha disaster and nothing was received
     in writing from Liverpool Football Club.      I was also unaware
     of any media comment at the time criticising tha choice of
     Hillsborough.


     12,       It was my practice for the semi-final arrangements
     to be typed up into the blue booklet xvhich sets out all the
     details of the organisation required as well as the
     telephone numbers of the clubs and other contact points.        On
     2 0 or 21 March, I faxed to Sheffield Wednesday and Villa
     Park the details concerning the matches which had not at
     that stage been printed.     Ths booklet was printed by the
     22 March by the print department at the FA.     The booklet was
     in substantially the same form as that for previous years and
     was sent to the staging and competing clubs, members of the
     Challenge Cup Committee and match officials. Basically the
     FA'3 policy is to leave the staging clubs to deal with the
     organisation required.     They are generally familiar with
     -rfiat is needed for these matches and also have the advantage
     of the contacts with the police which are always needed for
     these occasions.   I was in touch with Mr !fackrel.l’from time
     to time but basically ray job was to ensure that the FA
     received tha appropriate number of tickets and that they
     '/are appropriately distributed as required.     The tickets are
                         •Job i 0623 LL




printed by the club and so tha FA allocation was sent to
once the tickets were ready and I arranged for their
distribution.




(10623LL)
