                                          ELJU sL& r$Z&                                VgJden House i7~24 Ca&iedral Place
                                                                                      London EC4M 7JA
                                                                                      Tsiephoae 01-606 6677
F a x Transmittal Form                                                                Teles 263396



To:                                                                                   Date:     D
                                                                                                                  ,   ■/c
Company;                                                                              Time:
                            fixjTftvHt $ Q Q C lO n to **
Country:                        , iA.                                                 Fax No:
                                  ut
From :                                                                                No. of pages (including this page):

D irect fax iines:

r^ o u do not receive all 'the pages, please telephone or telex immediately




                                r«Wi


                               A * &




 l i st o f o a r e r s '    n a m e s is i v n i i a b l e   hi   ■   os nbovs address
                              HILL3BQRQUGH INQUIRY




                                                   :

                  WITNESS STATEMENT OF JACK WISE



     J., '|a €K WISEMAN; of the Football Association, 16 Lancaster
     Gate, London W2 WILL SAY as follows:-


s*   1»     I am the Chairman of the Match and Grounds Committee
^    at   the .F,A ,   I am 72 years of age.    I was the Vice President
     of   the .Football League Management Committee for many years.
     I am a Director of Birmingham City Football Club and have
     been so since 1956,       I have been a member of the Football
     Association Council for 14 years,         I also sit on the
     International Committee,


     2,    The Match and Grounds Committee negotiates contracts
     >/ith the owners and occupiers of grounds for the staging of
     International and other representative matches including Cup
     Finals and Semi Finals of the F ,A . Cup Competition.         It is
     also responsible for the financial and other arrangements
'y   connected therewith,      including the allocation of admission
     tickets,    forms of entertainment and invitations to and
     hospitality for guests.


     3,    My practice is to attend normally with representatives
     of my own committee at meetings of the Challenge Cup Committee.
     I >/as invited to attend at a 'meeting of the Challenge Cup
     Committee on Monday the 2 0th March at 11,30.a.m. to decide
     the venues for this yea r /s F,A, Cup Semi-Final. I have
     attended at such meetings for nine vears.
     •i,   I had a copy of the Agenda before the meeting and was
     considering Hillsborough and Villa Park as the likely
     'faiiuas. in ay view there were only four venues worthy of
     consideration from a geographical point of view. These were
     'Hillsborough and Villa Park and Old Trafford and Maine Road
     in Manchester.


     5,    I spoke t o .Graham Kelly shortly before the meeting
     began,   £ told him that in my personal view Villa Park and
     Hillsborough were the best suited grounds.       It would not
     have been fair to make Norwich City travel to Hillsborough
     and so Villa Park was the obvious mid-wav point between
     Sverton and Norwich,    If West Ham had beaten Norwich it
     you Id not have been fair to make West Ham travel to
     Hillsborough.


     5,    We had had exactly the same match the year before and
     che general opinion was that it was well organised.        I
     attended last year's semi-final between Liverpool and
     ''lottingham Forst and was very impressed with the way the
    Match was organised.     My view was shared by other Committee
     Members who attended.


           [ was pleased to read a report from Ken E v a n s , \(a
)   #t*E   ''ey corsultant to the p.A.) of last year's match from
    which it appeared that he agreed with my views.        I know \en
    'fivans veil, he was before his retirement, Assistant Chief
    Constable at the West Midland's Police and had been
    personally responsible or a large number of semi finals at
    Villa Park.




                                      ..   5...
3,      X had visited Hillsborough last year prior to tha
semi-final between the same teams as this year and had seen
the police operations in the control room and had spoksn in
detail with the secretary as to how tha arrangements would
loe carried out,     I did not take notes of my meetings but I
left with a very favourable impression.        I also toured the
ground and looked at the set-up in general.


             I understood from $teva Clark the
                          that the police were happy and that
there were two separate routes into each end of the ground
at Hillsborough so that supporters could be kept apart,
There were no traffic problems last year and why alter a
system that had worked so well?       Exactly the same teams had
been invoIved.


10. ■,Ernest Brown the C
          S& and I were both agreed on the venues and it was a
joint recommendation.      A quick vote was taken and there were
no dissenters.


11.     I was not aware at the time tha decision was taken or
prior to this, of any complaint from Liverpool,         I spoke to
               after the meeting who said that > e t e r ;Robinson _
      Liverpool Football Club had said that we should expect
some publicity as he was going to say that Liverpool ought
to have been allocated more tickets and given the other end.
He said that the police were not going to play ball with
that and I asked him to keep me advised if there ware any
problems,     E did not receive any further communication,
                     HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY




            WITNESS STATEMENT




I          J;.^EVANS of
                    WILL 'BAY as follows


1,   I am 57 years of age.    In about November 198 6 upon
retirement from the West Midlands Police Force I obtained a
consultancy post with the Football Association              }. My
brief was to attend matches at the direction of the F.A.
which were usually viewed by the E1,A. as problem matches.


2.   I have considerable experience in policing Football
League Grounds and in related matters,


3.   As the Chief Superintendent at Sandwell I had
responsibility for tha Hawthornes at West Bromwich and as
Assistant Chief Constable for eight years, I covered all the
six Football League Grounds in West Midlands as one of my
responsibilities,


4,   Sandwell is a Metropolitan District with over 3 00,000
people resident in it.    Apart from Coventry it is the
Largest division in the West Midlands.     I had 35 years
experience as a oolice officer before retirement.
5,    At national level I was on a small sub-committee sat up
in 198.1 by the Association of Chief Police Officers, to
produce general guidance for senior police officers dealing
with hooliganism associated with football.        The guidelines
are in ay view still relevant today and they have been
amended, only to take account of improved intelligence
gathering and the recent legislation dealing with the sale
of alcohol at football grounds.     I represent the Midlands
Region on the ACPO Hooliganism at Sporting Events
Sub-Committee under the
jShiaf Constable, Greater ff«mch33t33: Police..    I have been the
Chairman of meetings of senior police officers from all over
the country who have responsibility for the policing of
clubs in the First Division and have attended meetings of
senior police officers involved with clubs in the second
division,


-5,   I was promoted from Chief Superintendent to Assistant
Chief Constable in 1978.


7,    Since taking up my employment with the F.A. I have
regularly attended matches every week as a crowd control
officer,    My practice would be to telephone the police in
advance to let them know 1 was coming and I would turn up
usually,    at least for a football league match, at least lk_
hours before kick-off. I would then walk around the ground,
meet the secretary and discuss the arrangements specifically
related to security;    and make contact with the senior
police officers in charge.


3.    My discussions with the senior police officers would
obviously not go into great detail because of time
constraints but I would gat an overview of how operations
were handled.     I should say operational arrangements at most
football League Grounds are pretty routine and follow
similar patterns,
3,     3varv Football League Club has a police liaison
officer,    This can be a Police Constable through avery rank
to an Assistant Chief Constable,     These officers exchange
intelligence between themselves on likely football problems
and related incidents.     There is a developed network
throughout the country,


10,    I understand that the F.A. have had crowd control
advisers for quite some time and two of my colleagues who
have been employed for longer than I have at tha F.A. are
  —Z im — —ZZZZZZHI andm „ .

3EMI-FINAL MATCHES


11.    I normally arrive even earlier for semi-final matches
than I would do for a normal league game.     This is because
these are generally better attended matches with perhaps
■:aore potential problems for the police because of the sheer
numbers of people getting to and from tha ground,     I have
only been to two semi-finals in a official capacity for the
F.A.    I went to Villa Park in 1987 and last year 1 went to
Hillsborough.


12 .   This '/ear none of the three crowd control officers were
assigned to a semi-final.


13 .   I wish to draw upon my experience as Assistant Chisf
Constable in the West Midlands in order to explain how
semi-finals are normally policed.     I speak specifically
about Villa Park in Aston Villa in Birmingham,     The detailed
arrangements are normally supervised by the local Chief
Superintendent although tha Assistant Chief Constable has
overall control,     I have personally had overall control for
3 semi-finals,   not including replays,   I have also attended
in this capacity at a league cup final replay at Villa Park.
14„     In mv experience with regard to responsibility between
the police and       the club, the police have by far the greatest
say in       staging the arrangements     forthe match.   For
example:~


        i)    We would look at the direction of travel of the
              supporters of the competing team.     At Villa Fark
              we would assess which of the two railway stations
              they   should go to and     from which motorway junction
              they   should travel to     the ground. On that   basis we
              would direct the club on the allocation of space
              to the two sets of supporters inside the ground.
              Our primary concern would be segregation inside
              and outside the ground and the movement of
              spectators inside and outside the ground.


      ii)    We would also concern ourselves to make sure
              there was sufficient coach parks, parking areas,
              and other amenities for travelling fans. We would
              liaise with AA and RAC to put up route signs in
              advance and make sure that information was given
              to the competing clubs to advise on which routes
              their fans should take.     We would also arrange for
              such matters to be published in the local press,
             We would advise the club to announce in the local
             press for instance that the match was sell-out and
             all ticket so there was no use travelling.


  iii)       I myself was the police representative as a
             committee for all Football League Clubs on
             ground safety since 1985 when as a result of
             the Bradford City fire, ground safety has been
             stepped up.   I have attended on chis committee
             with a member of the fire service who would
             usually be an Assistant Chief Constable; a
             member of the Engineers Department of the
             local authority; and a member of the Local


                                  =,4 =
Authority Legal Department,     This committee would
produce a skeleton draft which would contain the
local conditions relating to a particular club in
the region so that the Safety Certificate issued
under the 1975 Safety of Sports Grounds Act could
contain all the various measures we had
recommended.


The clubs that were covered by this committee
which I sat on would be all the clubs in the West
Midland i.e. Aston Villa; Birmingham City;
Coventry; West Brom     ; Walsall; and Wolverhampton
Wanderers.     The Local Chief Superintendent would
then look at our recommendations and see whether
the requirements were met with regard to the
specific grounds.


I should say that I did not get involved with
such matters as perimeter fencing and crush
barriers within the grounds which would be dealt
with by a particular provision in the Safety
Certificate.    This is a matter within the province
of the Engineers Department.    They would calculate
the ingress and egress and arrange for the
barriers to be tested.    The police therefore have
no real input as to the safety of tha actual
fencing or barriers at football grounds other than
arranging for proper manning and the opening and
shutting of gates in accordance with the
government green code on safety at sports
stadiums.    Part of the aquasion must be that there
is sufficent egress in an out of the ground which
the fire authority gets involved in? in relation
to emergency evacuation procedures.
       vi)    jvit.h regard to areas of responsibilities it would
              ha necessary for me to delegate certain aspects to
              tha Chief Superintendent who as I have said would
              have detailed control of the arrangements,


      vii)   I should however,, Bent ion that the police
             responsibility in policing a semi-final is not
             just confined to matters in and around the ground.
             Tha police are of course responsible for keeping
             public order amongst tha community and a lot of
             work is done in the surrounding areas,


198 8 HILLSBOROUGH F.A. CUP SEMI FINAL TIB LIVERPOOL -
NOTTINGHAM FOREST


15,    I have been asked to try and recollect my involvement
on the day in question.      Attached at pages 1-3 of this
■statement is my report which I compiled soon after attending
tha event,     Matters were then much fresher in my mind but I
should like to deal with what 1 can remember about the event
in view of what has happened there this year,


15.    I arrived two or three hours before kick-off,       I
intended to check the security arrangements there and tour
the ground,    I should mention that was my first visit to
Hillsborough as I had never been to Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club before,


17,    I went to see the Club Secretary Mr, Graham Mackrell'.
mo    personally showed me round the ground in tha morning,
This would have been about 11, o'clock. I knew that
Superintendent Marshall was present who did not have overall
control but was in control of the detail of what was going,
 1    3   The aan who had overall control on that day was
ViSsistant. Chief Constable .Jackson.    I knew him from the
 ACPO Committee that I sat on.      We met the police in tha
 control room.      As I have described in my report of tha
 LOth April 1988 that I was very impressed with the closed
 circuit T.V. control with 24 cameras covering all exits
 and turnstiles and other key areas.      This in my experience
was unusual. Three police officers were sitting in the room
monitoring these screens,


19,       I than decided to walk around on my own and I left the
control room and went first to the back of the East stand at
the Penistone Road and,       I checked that all the turnstiles
were open and tha general behaviour of the people arriving.
■These were Nottingham Forest fans and thair general
behaviour was good.


20,       I then decided to walk around past the back of the
north stand into Vara Road so that I could have a look at
the other end to see the Liverpool fans arriving at Lappings
Lane.       In order to get there there are various back streets
giving access from Penistone Road to Lappings Lane.         There
vara police officers patrolling these back streets to
.prevent a mix of supporters and in addition I was told in
the past damage had been caused to various properties in
this road and so they were checking to see whether people
 are residents or not.       They were only allowing residents
through.       I spoke to the officers and was allowed through.
I noticed that they were also checking tickets.       This would
have been about 1.3 0,- 2,00 p.m..      At around 2,00 p.m. an
hour before kick-off,      there ware a lot of people milling
about in the vicinity of Lappings Lane. There were quite a
caw mounted officers on horse back.       It seemed more
congested that the Penistone Road end.       This was because in
my view there is lass space for the supporters to congregate
2 3.=,    Thera was no evidence of any crushing or drunkeness or
crowd disorder.      1 had a couple of casual conversations with
the Superintendent on duty,      I cannot recall the detail of
these,


22.      There must have been at least 50 or 60 officers present
at the Lappings Lane end;      Some would be at the turnstile
checking for offensive weapons and drink;      Some would be
controlling the queues;      Some would be filtering people and
checking tickets before they got to the turnstile;         Some
■youId be on traffic duty and there were various mounted
police as 1 have said creating channels through which queues
could form.      I estimate that at least 12 horses were
present.      It was too crowded for me to get right up to see
the turnstiles in operation.      Although it was congested it
was not frighteningly so.      In other words I did not notice
any discomfort or what I would term undue congestion,         It
was just crowded.


23.      I should mention at this point that the South Yorkshire
Police were being very helpful in my opinion and did not
appear to be authoritarian.      They exhibited no signs of
aggression and dealt with people in a very courteous manner.


24.      I went back to the police control room between the
South and West Stand after having spent 15 or 20 minutes
surveying the scene at Leppings Lane.      I had a look to see
what was happening in the control room and I decided that I
ought to go back to have a look at the Leppings Lane area
close to kick-off as that was likely in my view at the time
to be where problems may arise with people not getting in in
time for the kick-off,




                                 -3-
25,    There was a general feeling among the police that they
may have difficulties in getting people in time for the
kick-off at the end,     No-one specifically said this to me
but that was the impression I formed.


25,    I stayed at the Lappings Lane end until very shortly
before kick-off.     Just before kick-off there were still
people going in.     I refer to this in my statement as a
’•trickle’1,   By this I mean a continuous stream rather than a
blockage or congested area.     The kick-off was not delayed
and I understand that neither the police nor the club
requested a delay,


27.    The through put on 'all ticket' matches like semi-finals
is faster through turnstiles than if the spectators had to
pay.    We used to work on an average of 1,000 people going
through a turnstile in an hour without paying i.e. having
tickets.    We worked on the assumption that 600 people
could get in if they had to pay at the turnstiles.     At about
5 minutes before kick-off there were still people going in
but it was considerably less congested around the turnstiles,
Everything seemed under control and so I left and went back
inside to take up my position in the director's seats.


28.    I did not get the opportunity to take a close look at
tha fencing inside the ground although I do make reference
to it at paragraph         in my report.   I did not have a
chance to look at the tunnel area leading from the
turnstiles into the West stand.


29.    I inention in my report that there is stout narrow gauge
fencing,    By that I meant that it would be very difficult to
get a foothold in order to vault up and over the fence.        I
was concerned in paragraph 9 of my report with the security
vis-a-vis people coming onto tha pitch.
'30.   I cannot say whether thers were people lingering
outside the West stand hoping to buy tickets,      'There are
always touts at semi-finals but I did not notice any great
number of them.


31.    I did not think what I had seen at Leppings Lane last
year ought to brought to the attention of either the police
or the club or the F.A.    I would refer to my report as to
what my feelings were at the time.      There was certainly
congestion with large numbers of people outside Leppings
Lane but not so much as to worry me.     The police were in
control.    The only question was whether it would be
practicable to get them all inside the ground in time for
kick-off.    That was why I stayed to watch.    It became more
and more manageable and the situation continued to improve
until the time I left to take up my position.


32.    I have been asked whether I was aware of any secondary
screening i.e. the stopping and checking of people for
tickets at various areas around the ground last year.         I
remember that I was told by a police officer last year that
there was such screening of coaches and mini buses to check
for drunkeness , weapons and tickets.    I do not know the
extent of this.


33.    I have been asked whether I know of any reputation that
tha Liverpool fans have to turn up to semi-final matches
without tickets.    In my experience Liverpool fans are better
behaved than their nearby Everton rivals vis-a-vis crowd
control at matches.   X have been responsible as an Assistant
Chief Police Officer for semi-finals in the West Midlands,
would suggest that if there is any reputation it is for
minor offences such as pick-pocketing and stealing items
from snack bars etc. rather than hooliganism that Liverpool
supporters have got a reputation for.
34,   I have also been asked as to the responsibility in
relation to allocation of space and segregation at a
semi-final venue.   In my experience the cross migration
of spectators across a city can have disastrous consequences
with regard to hooliganism.     It would be my decision as an
Assistant Chief Constable policing a semi-final venue, with
regard to what operational policy I lay down in the
segregation of fans going to and from a match.     Likewise it
would foe my decision as to segregation inside the ground.
We would not thank the club or the F.A. for interfering with
that decision although of course we would consider their
views.


35.   No doubt due to the fact that my report had not
highlighted any serious problems last year the F, A. did not
send any of its three crowd control officers to either
semi-final this year.   I was actually sent to the Bury-
Cardiff match as Cardiff had been subjected to an all ticket
requirement and had introduced a voucher system which had
been criticised recently.     I should mention that it is
always my practice after the final whistle goes at a
semi-final match, and indeed every other match I attend in
an official capacity,   to have a look round the ground to
check on people making their way home.     I did this at
Hillsborough last year and did not see anything untoward.


{L0664LL)
