The first topic discussed was seating and facilities.
John Dyson referred to the fact that further information was
being obtained from Scotland concerning the improvement in
crowd control and behaviour since they went all-seater.
There was also the experience in Coventry and the effect
that had had.    Ron.Noades considered that going all-seater
was pandering to the media.     In Germany there was only one
all-seater stadium. He said that behind the Liverpool goal
the supporters stood on seats at one of the finals. He
himself did not want to promote all seats as he thought
there was a real problem with people standing on them.
Ian Stott^was in agreement with this view and suggested
there should be paddock areas. These would be of a maximum
depth and would generally be in front of all-seater areas.
John Dyson? explained that it would be necessary to give
reasons as to why the FA were not advocating all-seater
stadia.            made the point the European stadia are
designed in a different way.     Apparently it is possible in
Europe to walk around the complete circuit of the stadium
and also to sit on the terracing.        _    referred to
paragraph 222 of the Green Guide which those present seemed
totally unaware of.


One of the issues that arose was
whether the seats could be made cheaper if there were more
of them. It was also suggested by       ’-'des» that it may be
easier to obtain funding for seats if it were a safety
requirement. John Dyson- referred to the Football Trust's
report of '85 and thought that it might be possible to obtain
an update on it.     It appears that there is a later addition
which              is getting a copy of.   Mr Noades-pointed out
that it is necessary to look at the Club's contribution
itself to grant aid.    The Football Trust should have the
information as it has to be given when the application is
made for a grant.     There was a limit to the grants that
could be made in the early days.     Mr Stott referred to the
encouragement of family areas and the number of clubs that
now have them.     He specifically referred to Watford,
Huddersfield and Stoke. He thought that the League would
have this information.     It was also thought that it would be
possible to get figures showing attendances at matches over
the last 10 years. The figures would show an initial dip
and then a steady rise over the last 4 years. It was agreed
that it would be necessary to have some very clear ideas as
to what was being recommended if the FA was not going for an
all-seater stadium.


With regard to safety requirements generally Mr Noades
explained that he was rather fed up with the idea that on
Friday Croydon councillors will be deciding what is going to
happen at his ground for the major game on Saturday.        His
complaint was that the Croydon councillors would have no
idea or expertise on the matter and the ground is covered by
the building control department which knows little about
safety. He thought that the idea of a central body was a
good one.    The design of fences should be dealt with
centrally.     At the moment you have Chief Constables who in
some cases want an 8ft fence and in other cases don't want
them at all.     Again this was another issue where the FA
would have to try and be as precise as possible,
said that the Football Trust advisers had come up with two
figures with regard to all-seater stadiums. Apparently it
would cost £30m to convert all clubs to all-seater and a
further £10 0m to put covers over those seats. It would
therefore be necessary to get information about how far it
should be recommended that seats should be installed and
over what period of time. It may also be necessary to put
forward maximum depths of standing areas.        The Committee
generally seemed in favour of the idea that there should be
standing areas only behind goals.        There seems to be a
difference in percentage terms whether one looks at a
percentage of the ground or a percentage of the capacity.
The Committee generally would prefer to look at the




                                ~   4~
percentage of the ground because it gives a higher
percentage although in fact less seating.


There was some considerable discussion about safety
standards and the way in which they were enforced. There
was concern that generally local authorities would apply the
Green Guide in different ways in different parts of the
country. The Committee generally accepted that perhaps
there should be some parts of the Green Guide which were
mandatory and some that were advisory. That would allow
some laxity of interpretation at a local level.     It was also
thought that there should be some form of inspectorate that
would see how the local authority was actually performing
its job in dealing with licensing.           thought that
there was quite a lot of expertise in some local authorities
concerning safety and referred particularly to his area
where he deals with the planning officer and building
department.    Again       _    jointed out that it was not
good enough merely to put forward ideas in a general way.
Someone should go through the guide and deal with the bits
that should be mandatory, the bits that should be advisory
and make any suggested amendments to other clauses.


There was a very brief discussion about the membership
scheme. It was clear that            m d Mr Stott" had some
views on        suggested for it. It was was agreed that
this would be discussed at the next meeting.               had
to leave the meeting.


Ticket touts    There was some discussion about the allocation
of tickets for cup finals.     It was agreed that it was
unlikely that any measure of agreement would be reached on
it. Apparently most of the tickets on the black market come
from players.    Players at finals are entitled to 30 tickets
each.   Everyone agreed that the best way would be the
suggestion to ban sales of tickets on the day.
Pre-match entertainment There was a letter from Watford
saying that they offered quite alot of pre-match
entertainment but found that it did not have any material
effect on getting people into the ground any earlier.
Hr Stott made the point that there is a difficulty in
providing it as it can ruin grass pitches.     Oldham have a
synthetic pitch so do not have this difficulty. They have
had elephants and other forms of entertainment on their
pitch without any adverse effects. There is a reference to
pre-match entertainment in the 85/86 FA Guidelines to League
Clubs.


Alcohol     There was a strong view that it would be better to
have it available in the grounds. It would ensure that
people got into the grounds earlier. Apparently at some
clubs they have permanent cabins serving bovril, tea, coffee
and cold drinks.     Seated spectators have ready access to
these cabins, it is probably more difficult in the terraces.
It seems that when there is a bigger capacity less sales are
made of refreshments.


Kick-off time There was considerable discussion about this
and the reason why there were no kick-offs earlier on a
Saturday.     There was a strong feeling from the Committee
that it was a traditional time (3 o'clock) for the kick-off
and it should remain.     The only other reasons that they were
able to give were the number of overnight stops could be
vastly increased if one started with a kick-off at say
11 o' clock in the morning. The players have to eat 3 hours
beforehand for their digestive system.     Amateur football and
schools football is played on Saturday morning.     There might
be a greater police commitment for a longer period as one
would have to start in the morning and run it through most
of the day.    Apparently at present, with a match finishing
at about 4.40 most of the supporters go home and then they
may go to the pubs.     If the match finished at, say, 1
     o'clock then they would be tempted to roll into the local
     pubs. There should not be any difficulty with the pools
     contract for Saturday morning.          Usually at present if game times ar

     changed it is that they are moved to Friday night or Sunday
     morning. There are problems in playing on a Sunday because
     legally clubs cannot fully charge for all their tickets.
     They should have one free turnstyle.           agreed that
     probably if the police were asked for their views they would
     prefer morning kick-offs.


      Fences Glen said that the fences at Nimer seemed to be
)    very successful. The Committee was generally reluctant to
     recommend that there should befences at all clubs.               Some
     grounds do not have any fences          and some have moats. No
     English club has a moat although Naples has and         G l& n   was
     going to get some information on that. Liverpool is
     considering installing a moat.    Everton apparently had a
     semi-circle behind the goal which acted          as a form of moat
     but was taken out.


     Medical Provision    A league committee is looking at it and
     some information on this should be available next Tuesday.


'y   Stewards John Dyson suggested that perhaps clubs should
      take some of their own Stewards with them to away matches.
               said that this already happens with his club.
     Leeds had sometimes brought their Stewards with them to
     Oldham. Stewards are let in free and the club pays a
     contribution to the costs.    The Stewards have to know the
     ground or be at an earlier briefing.         At high-risk matches
     it should certainly be encouraged.         'Mr       said it had
     happened at Liverpool as well but the Stewards had merely
     accompanied people on the travelling and had not gone into
     the ground.




                                    -   7-
It was agreed that there would be a further meeting on
Tuesday that would last all day and if necessary would run
into Wednesday.     It would agreed that there was no need for
Glen to do any further drafting before Tuesday. However it
would be necessary to reach some definite conclusions on
Tuesday so further drafting could be done.


Attending i         on her telephoning. She said that she
had some further information about the FSA petition.
           iiad written on the note saying that it had been
sent to the police. Having asked her further it appears
that she thinks that there was some publicity about the
petition and someone from the police rang up and asked for a
copy. The FA has checked and they have no more
correspondence on the matter. Ited^crocker did not recall
anything about it. The letter had         Bird's reference
on it. It could be said that the points had been taken into
account.   I confirmed there was no need for Pat to put this
in writing to us.


Total time engaged:


Travelling: 2 hours 15 minutes (tube strike)
Attending at meeting and speaking to
            nd                 5 hours 15 minutes
