                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                            TELEVISION DEPARTMENT
                                 FAX: 0707 44190
22 The Broadway i
Potters Bar
Hertfordshire EN6 2HW   FOR THE ATTENTION OF:               GLEN KIRTON
                                                            F.A. LANCASTER GATE
Telephone: 0707 42426   DATE: May 18, 1989
Telex; 22737 (FA TV)
                        PAGEfl     of       1




    Re your query, Satellite transmissions of the abandoned
    Nottingham Forest v Liverpool       match   15th April.           We   using   4
    separate satellites with the intention of transmitting both
    semi-finals and booked enough time to transmit these matches with
    allowances for extra time and a 10 minute gap in between each
    game.  The main countries covered are as follows!

    Hong Kong                            Ireland
    Italy (for recording)                 West Germany (for 10 minute
    Malaysia                                                  recording)
    Mauritius                            Algeria
    Saudi                                Morocco
    Singapore                            Iceland
    South Africa                         Israel (for recording)

    In addition, we were feeding a separate satellite for the
    Caribbean area where the distributors had the right for the
    following territories however we do not know which ones were
    taking the match.

    Trinidad, The Bahamas, St. Kitts, St, Lucia, St. Marten, Haiti,
    Curacao, Grenada, Antigua, Dominica

    The suggestion that the Association would not delay a kick off
    because of satellite bookings is absolutely false.  In the first
    instance enough satellite time would have been available for even
    a delay of half an hour.  However, as far as I am aware none of
    the Association’s officials attending the match or the referee
    etc.  had any knowledge whatsoever of these satellite
    arrangements because as you know we do not normally inform
    Headquarters of such arrangements as it has not been necessary in
    the past.  I certainly had no direct contact with the
    Hillsborough ground, I was only receiving incoming pictures and I
    had direct control from TVI of feeding three of the satellites
    mentioned above covering the majority of countries«

    Should our solicitors require a sworn affidavit to the above, I
    will be happy to oblige.


    Best
                                   C.C.    f l V . R .U .G r. k d W
