         Dear

              Os a Senior Town Planner with Sefton Metropolitan Borough Council and
         supporter of Liverpool F.C. for over 30 years, I consider that I am competent
         to comment on the tragic events which my wife and I witnessed at the
         Hillsborough disaster.

               In my professional capacity I am required to observe, assess, analyse
         and produce intelligent informed opinion based on logic and facts. Together
         with my long standing association with Liverpool Football Club as a
.)   g    supporter, in excess of 20 years as a season,ticket holder, I may be able to
     V   contribute to the inevitable inquiry.

              I have prepared a report of observation, questions and comment which I
         trust may be of assistance to any such inquiry. In the main I have
         restricted the report to those issues immediately relevant to the matter.

              There are two other issues in a broader sense, however, that are of
         concern. Firstly, I am not convinced that identity cards would have
         prevented this dreadful tragedy; indeed I suspect, on sound logic, that
         matters could arguably have been worse. The other matter is that 'informed
         personnel* are suggesting that Ulembley be used for semi-finals as well as
         finals. May I suggest that these people try and gain easy access to Wembley
         Stadium from 2.00 onwards on Cup Final day. It is one of, if not the most,
         dangerous and frightening grounds to gain access to because of the method of
         entry. For years I have been expecting some form of fatal tragedv to happen
         which, in my opinion, has not happened by virtue of good luck and not good
         management.

              Please accept mv report in the context of one who wishes to offer
         constructive criticism with positive recommendations. Needless to say I am
         extremely sad and still slightly shocked not only about this traqedy but to
         have actually witnessed it as a bvstander unable to helo. Hopefully,
         however, if my report can assist in any manner it will be worthwhile from mv
         point of view.

              □n a note ofoptimism may I suggest that this tragedy can be used as a
         catalyst to provide a modern purpose-built stadium for Liverpool and Everton
         in a strategic position relataAto motorway connections; there are several
         sites on the periphery which would suffice. This new stadium could be a
         powerful influence on the attempt to bring the Olympic Games to the North
         West, in conjunction with Manchester. Such a stadium could be the model and
         flagship for others and would be a lasting tribute to the memory of those
         unfortunate   'scousers* who needlessly perished.

              Should further comment, views or assistance be required I am   only   too
         pleased to assist in any form or manner required.

                                       Yours sincerely,
1.    Observations

1.1   Rt 2.10 pm it was clear that there were many people outside the ground
      without tickets (evidenced by requests fur spare tickets and audible
      comments to the effect that access would be gained with or without
      tickets}.

1.2   We gained access reasonably easily and were in seats by 2.20 pm. Rt
      that time it was evident that the centre position of the Lepping Lane
      standing area was over capacity by virtue of the swaying and violent
      movements caused by pressure from the rear. Me were almost on the half­
      way line 30 rows back in the North stand - similar in line and height to
      the TV cameras and commentary boxes, therefore the problem was clear to
      those people and presumably the professional observers, police/stewards
      etc.

1.3 It was also clear that the two wings of the Leppings Lane terrace were
     well under capacity to the extent that at least half of the terracing
    could be seen to be empty. There appeared to be no means of access to
     these areas from the central portion (other than climbing over the iron
     railings, which some people resorted toi.

1.4   Whilst not an expert in crowd control, inover 30 years of spectating I
      was of the opinion that a serious incident was developing unless
      positive action was taken; firstly to relocate some of those people in
      the centre; and preventing further people gaining access there and
      directing fans to the wings (comment: crowd crush and disporportionate
      dispersal of crowds is not uncommon but is usually of prime concern in
      qrounds used to large crowds and monitored by police and authorities,
      even to the extent to allow temporary access to the perimeter track to
      enable re-distributian).

1.5   When the traqedv occurred it appeared that there was confusion in police
      ranks as to whether to extract people or move them back. Some people
      were collapsing onto the pitch in obvious distress with police trving to
      ‘throw* them off as thouqh they were invading the pitch! Blthouch there
      was confusion there appeared to be little cohesive guidance           or
      leadership bv the police.

1.5   hatters were not improved by repeated Public Address announcements for
      spectators to leave the pitch when it was clear that there as an
      incident   of enormous and tragic consequences. This enraged        the
      Liverpool fans and (in ignorance of the situation) encouraged the Notts
      Forest fans to taunt and jeer, thus further enraging the Liverpool
      suporters. The consequence of this action was for Liverpool fans on the
      pitch to advance towards the Forest 'end*, many of who were trying to
      inform the Forest fans of the enormity and scale of the problem. Some
      even broke down in tears in the attempt.

 1.7 The 'armv* of police that appeared across the pitch to 'divide* the fans
     further angered people in view of the obvious mayhem and need for help
     with the dying and injured. This was further exacerbated by the
     introduction of police with dogs which were barking and leaping around
     at the confusion. I witnessed two people bitten by one very excited
     dog. This occurred at a time when people clearly knew that             a
     catastrophe had taken place.
          1.8   Rgain during this time the P.O. was still 'requesting* people to leave
                the pitch. In fact those people on the pitch (spectators) were either
                clearly injured, dead, in shock and dazed or were actually acting as
                emergency service personnel in carrying people on makeshift stretchers
                to the clearing area on the pitch. The P.O. should have informed the
                public at an early stage of the enormity of the incident, thus taking
                the levity out of the situation. The Forest fans were still under the
                impression that it was little more than spillage onto the pitch with
                possibly some minor injuries. I believe their attitude would have been
                different with further information relating to the degree and facts of
                the situation.

          1.9   There appeared to be difficulties getting the ambulances to the area of
                most confusion. The 'goal' and especially the net proved to be a
                problem to the extent that police and helpers eventually 'pulled' the
                net off the posts and supports to enable better access to the area.


          2.    Questions
(         2.1   Why was it not possible to move easily to the extreme wings   Cfrom   the
                centre) of the terracinq?

          2.2   Why were spectators not channeled to the wings?

          2.3   Before the opening of the outside qate by the police (admitted to and
                much publicised) why was the centre portion not sealed physically by
                means of a qate or police to prevent the inevitable stampede?

          2.4   Why were police not apparently aware of the numbers of ticketIess people
                and provide better vetting before access to the stadium grounds? (There
                were certainly enouqh police available^   witness the TV pictures)

          2.5   Why did the P.R. announcer not qive the correct information instead    of
                inane comments that added inordinate insult to tragic injury?


          3.    Cament

          3.1   Should fencing in of fans be continued there must be means of some or
                aLl of the following: removing them quickly in similar situations;
                adequately opening gates provided (not 1 metre wide); enable them to
                fold down to provide a method of quick access over them. Ideally they
                should be removed and alternative means employed if still necessary (the
                much mentioned 'moat' approach or similar}.

          3.2 Better vetting of tickets outside the stadium grounds.

          3.3   More equitable distribution of tickets (especially at semi and final
    v&T         stages). The majority of the supporters without tickets are Likely to
                be qenuine fans (derived from fanatic) who support their clubs home and
                away season after season and genuinely deserve the right to see their
                clubs at the prestige games. It is a well known fact that there are
                many privileged people who only attend these games, especially the
                final, as a social event. Ticket distribution should relate to average
                gates of the participating teams where practicable.
3..4   Easily demountable goal-posts and netting to enable unrestricted access
       in emergency and better means of access and egress for emergency
       vehicles.

3.5    It would seem from informed comment that there is no standard or policy
       relating to the availability or provision of essential emergency medical
       equipment or facilities. From observation it would appear to be a
       standard   provided by voluntary emergency services e.g. St.        John
       ambulance Brigade and therefore to a large extent on charity. The
       clubs, especially the more affluent therefore the more popular, should
       provide reasonable facilities and equipment for their patrons Cwho
       indirectly employ/fund them).

3.6    I am of the opinion that this tragedy would not have Cand virtually
       could not} have occurred at flnfield, Goodison, the Manchester clubs and
       similar stadia where the police and stewards are more accustomed to
       handling   and controlling such crowds on a regular basis. Che would
       assune that the views and methods employed by those people at those
       grounds are souqht by those not so experienced in such matters; however,
       sadly it would not seem to be the case - perhaps puerile professional
       jealousy! This is literally a matter of Life and death and traqically
       now deaths to an inconceivable and unbelievable Level.

3.7    The method and content of how announcements over P.R. systems are
       presented should be considered by a P-fty £.hologist as an expert in
       Likely consequences of misinformation in a hysteria crowd situation.

3.B    Rpart from the obvious safety advantages of "all seater' stadia it also
       provides a better method of crowd dispersal, control and comfort. This,
       therefore, has to be the inevitable consequence to ideally build new,
       modern, comfortable multi-purpose all-seated stadia Cperhaps        with
       Government aid) for family use Cto replace the ageing structures that
       provide cold comfort and little else). Rdequate car parking facilities
       with good quality means of accoss and egress and facilities commensurate
       with the safety, health and comfort of its patrons and supporters. R
       verv much poor second is to at Least convert all stadia to all-seating
       especially those clubs who regularly have large capacity attendances.

3.9    R major    contributory factor in this disaster is the number of people
       outside the ground immediately prior to kick-off and the consequent and
       inevitable crowd hvsteria to gain access. Consideration should, in
       similar circumstances, be given to delay the start of the game until the
       situation has been resolved - and further to inform those outside to
       relieve pressure and panic.

3.10 'We* (especially politicians) keep saying that 'we must ensure that this
     cannot, must not, happen again*. Unfortunately it would appear that
     little or no changes take Diace,or lessons learned^are not implemented,
     taken on board or are even ignored. Let those words mean something this
     time and let us hope that these innocent people have not perished in
     vain and new standards/legislation should be as a memorial to them.
