                                                          DRAFT; 11/05/89      ^


                        STATEMENT OF MR S R CLARK



                                                                        t
I , STEPHEN RICHARD CLARK of 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2,                 /2 /V “
WILL SAY as follows:



1.           I am 37 years old and have worked for the Football
Association (FA) for the last 20 years. Since 1982 I have
held the position as 'Competition Secretary at the FA and one
of my jobs is to deal with the organisation for the FA
Challenge Cup. In particular, I have responsibility for
organising the semi-final arrangements for the Challenge
Cup.     Adgian-Titcombe ditl~~trhiffl job before m
ilia-afcafcement, I—aeortacr-with tho gone-cal points hU makas-—.
about the re^ o n s - £og--;tehg--vgRuei~chosen for p l a m n g the
matigHes-^and ^ ,e points -he—gtatees— about organisation-*


2.           In about February each year I sen^ out an
invitation to various clubs as to whethe.r they are prepared
                                                ftLfi&uirs
to hold the semi-final of the FA Challenge Cup./ Liverpool
Football Club was on the list until last year when it
replied to my letter to the effect that it did not want to
hold a semi-final because of the reduction in capacity of
its ground.     Liverpool had installed more seats and as a
result the standing room of ^ach end was reduced to 3,000 ?
ami- 20,000 mnrpuctivulyo            Such an unegujal distribution of
standing room made the ground~                   clive- for a semi-final
match.    ft- will b&-sK>cn—f-rom tho ropl-
                                          ies-frcrnr"Llm ulul3s~"tftart
Arsenal felt that the state of its pitch was unsuitable for
a semi-final, Tottenham was carrying out rebuilding work
               Hne s n o t   fifty      1™+- r hnt.T
                                                   Hi             fry .frrv—
                                               ^
         3-3rQ{£e-}-!’
                     ‘and Leeds did not want to cancel a Football League
         match.                       ^   ^        2 3   ^   ’


        3.        Apart from the correspondence with the clubs there
        was one telephone call which Adrian Titcombe received orf/16
        March from Bernard Halford the secretary of Manchester City.
        I understand that Mr Halford asked whether a semi-final
        match could be played at his club and had confirmed that the
        police would be happy for this to happen even if Manchester
(It).
        United were involved in the match.                                     At that time Liverpool,
        Everton, Manchester United and Nottingham Forest were all
        still in the d r a w ^ ’Mr Titcombe and I discussed the position
        and agreed that I should telephone Everton to ask for its

%       views about playing at Manchester Bmksf'.  then telephoned
        Jim Greenwood the secretary at Evertoh onTlT^’March.
        Mr Greenwood"-botd-me that EveiLun WOUlJ "liot ~plaVf^afe-
        Manchester_JIity-*ecaxis^ it was teic tnat its supporters
        w rvtX T X - intiv- i n+- i           Hy    fh a     M a n r -h o e j-.e r   p n l i re>   fo r m   .



        4.                   Mr Titcombe and I had a brief discussion with
        Graham Kelly the *€fhief Executive of the FA later that. a ^.
        morningwabout venues for the semi-finals matches.
        Mr Titcombe was going to be out of the office the following
        Monday when the draw would be made and there were some
        details he wanted to sort out with Mr Kelly. One of the
        points was the fact that there was no London club prepared
        or able to stage a semi-final match and thecs-swas—
 %
        Brentford, West Ham, Wimbledon and Norwich/left in the draw.
        We also told Mr Kelly about the telephone call from
        Manchester City and Everton's reaction.                                         Hillsborough and
        Villa Park were also mentioned as possible venues,
        ofeber-3-entdr-fina-l- matok. Q%ke-g-general points unrete'feed—feo
        the^-EA- Cfaal-l-
                        e nge-Cup w^^e—a^se—ddrgL’trs^red. The meeting
        lasted altogether about 15-20 minutes.




                                                              -2-
4.           This year the draw for the semi-final was made at
7.45am on Monday 20 March.     At about 10 o'clock on 20 March
I received a telephone call from Peter Robinson of
Liverpool. I was expecting Sheffield Wednesday would be
chosen for the Liverpool tie because of the discussions on
Friday. I cannot now recall exactly what Mr Robinson said
during this telephone conversation and I did not make any
contemporaneous note.    However, I think that he also thought
that the match was likely to be played at Hillsborough and
he was asking me whether it would be possible to swap ends
from those that were used last year.     Last year Liverpool
had been allocated the Leppings Lane end rather than the
                      I knew that the reason for the request
was that the Leppings Lane end resulted in Liverpool getting
4,000 less tickets than Nottingham Forest and bearing in
mind the size of the supporters for the two clubs, Liverpool
had been unhappy about the allocation last year.       I do not
remember Mr Robinson asking for a venue other than
Hillsborough.    In my mind Hillsborough was the likely venue
in view of the draw.    This was because last year's
semi-final had been staged there and it had been very
successful with no complaints^ f&j~


6.        I immediately rang Graham Mackrell, the secretary
at Sheffield Wednesday club, to tell him about the call I
had had from Mr Robinson and to ask him to speak to the
police on the likely allocation of tickets if Hillsborough
were selected for the Liverpool tie.    The reason for making
this call was that I knew that only if the police agreed
could there be any change in the end that was allocated to
Liverpool.    I suspected that looking at the geographical
location of Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in relation to
Hillsborough that the police would not be minded to change
their views from last year.    The police views on which end
should be allocated to which club are the decisive factor
for the staging club for obvious reasons.    Shortly after
that call I spoke to Mr Kelly about the arrangements for the
Challenge Cup Committee meeting and mentionecM:o him the
call that I had had from Mr Robinson                   the
 likely allocation of ends if Hillsborough were chosen.


7.        Shortly before 11 o'clock I received a telephone
call from Mr Mackrell to say that if Hillsborough were
chosen for the Liverpool tie then the police would allocate
the Leppings Lane end to Liverpool in accordance with last
seasons arrangement.      The reason for this was to avoid a
clash of supporters approaching and leaving the ground.
There was a Challenge Cup sub-committee meeting at 11
o'clock and I mentioned to Mr Kelly at that meeting about
the call I had received from Mr Mackrell. The purpose of
the sub-committee meeting was to deal with artificial
pitches and had nothing to do with the selection of venues
for the semi-final matches.


8.         The sub-committee meeting finished before 11.3 0am
and I think that I went with Mr Kelly to the general office
where we discussed the matter further. Mr Kelly asked me
about what had happened last year at Hillsborough and I told
him there had not been any problems that I was aware of and
certainly no complaints had been received^             Mr Kelly was
interested in my recommendation as to venue and I told him
that I thought that Mr Robinson's phone call should not
alter the recommendation that the match should be played at
Hillsborough.     The only alternative venue would have been
Manchester.     My owi^feeling was that the fact that Liverpool
would have gainea se»e tickets frtoate mi-gfafc—ha-ve had-the-same
numbe-E-Ncttdjigteaa—Eogeste^by going to Manchester was not a
sufficiently strong reason for altering the venue from
Hillsborough where the match had been so successfully run
last year. He--ajraor-'ferhought thatrHJhci f field would be more
neutral venue as MangheslSerand Liverpool are_sometimes
consA=d^ ^ T . o ^ e--pgt:F~of the same conur6atiorf|

                            flirty s                          J it*
                                          P    *
                                          ft
                                  _ 4 _            ^     v        •
9.          I then went into the Challenge Cup committee
meeting with Mr Kelly.    One of the items on the agenda was
the venues for the semi-final matches.     There were no papers
for this item but in relation to another item there was a
list of the venues for the semi-final matches for the past
10 years.    Mr Wiseman, the Chairman of the Matches and
Grounds Committee, recommended that the match between
Everton and West Ham/Norwich should be at Villa Park and
that the one between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest should
be at Hillsborough.    Villa Park was accepted without any
debate from the members of the Committee.     There was a
suggestion made p ossibly by-Mr- Brown the-t±rarxrma«-)f that the
other match should be at Manchester. There was the briefest
of discussions and the committee accepted Mr Wiseman's
recommendation that the Liverpool match should be at
Hillsborough. There was no reference during the committee
meeting to the phone call that I had had with Mr Robinson.
I did not consider it necessary for me to raise it as I had
mentioned it to Mr Kelly.


10.       The meeting finished at about 12.30pm and at about
1 o'clock I phoned both Sheffield Wednesday and Villa Park
formally asking them whether they would be prepared to stage
the semi-final^.invo-
                    1v-irng Liverpool.• They both confirmed
that they were happy to do so and I therefore told them to
go ahead with the usual arrangements and to contact the
police concerning segregation of supporters.     I then
telephoned Liverpool and Nottingham Forest briefly out of
courtesy to tell them of the decision.     I think I spoke to
Sheffield Wednesday and Villa Park on the telephone later in
the afternoon about some of the administrative details.


11.         On 21 March I received a telephone call from
Mr Robinson in the morning to tell me that Liverpool were
going to make public their disapproval of the choice of
venue of Hillsborough as they would be receiving less



                               -5-
tickets than Nottingham Forest.      I understood the call to be
by way of information to say that Liverpool would be making
these comments rather than as a formal complaint.      If I had
thought that Mr Robinson was in any way making a formal
complaint then in accordance with standard practice I would
have asked him to put it in writing or to speak to Mr Kelly
direct. Mr Robinson thought that the FA might also be
receiving critical telephone calls or letters from Liverpool
supporters who were unable to get tickets.     There has been
some press comment recently regarding Liverpool's criticism
of the choice of Hillsborough but so far as I am aware no
such calls or letters were received from any Liverpool
supporters until after the disaster and nothing was received
in writing from Liverpool Football Club. I was also unaware
of any media comment at the time criticising the choice of
Hillsborough.


12.       It was my practice for the semi-final arrangements
to be typed up into the blue booklet which sets out all the
details of the organisation required as well as the
telephone numbers of the clubs and other contact points.      On
20 or 21 March, I faxed to Sheffield Wednesday and Villa
Park the details concerning the matches which had not at
that stage been printed.     The booklet was printed by the
22 March by the print department at the FA.     The booklet was
in substantially the same form as that for previous years and
was sent to the staging and competing clubs, members of the
Challenge Cup Committee and match officials. Basically the
FA's policy is to leave the staging clubs to deal with the
organisation required.     They are generally familiar with
what is needed for these matches and also have the advantage
of the contacts with the police which are always needed for
these occasions.   I was in touch with Mr Mackrell from time
to time but basically my job was to ensure that the FA
received the appropriate number of tickets and that they
were appropriately distributed as required.     The tickets are



                               -6-
    printed by the club and so the FA allocation was sent to me
    once the tickets were ready and I arranged for their
    distribution.




     (10623LL)




m
••




                                -7-
