                    THE     FOOTBALL   ASSOCIATION

       Meeting with Football League Club Representatives
               at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W.2.
       ___________ on Friday, 12th April 1985.____________


     Present:    The Football Association        Messrs. E.A. Croker,
                                                 H.N. Bird, G. Kirton,


                 The Football League             Mr. J.D. Dent
                 Arsenal F.C.                    Mr. K. Friar
                 Chelsea F.C.                    Miss S.F. Marson
                 Derby County F.C.               Mr. M.J. Dunford
                 Leeds United F.C.               M r . D . Dowse
                 Leicester City F.C.             Mr. A. Bennett
                 Luton town F.C.                 Mr. J. Smith
                 Manchester United F.C.          Mr. L. Olive
                 Millwall F.C.                   Mrs. S. Shaw


     An apology for absence was received from Mr. P. Robinson of
     Liverpool F.C.


     Mr. Croker welcomed and thanked the Club Representatives
for attending the meeting, which had been called following the
meeting with representatives of The Football Association and
The Football League and the Prime Minister and other Government
Officials.    Those present had received a summary of the dis­
cussions with the Prime Minister via The Football League and
Mr. Croker said that he was optimistic that the Government
would, in the near future., take more positive action in con­
nection with those arrested and  charged in relation to crowd
problems at or near football matches.

1.   Membership Cards

     (a)   National Basis

           The general view was that Identity Cards on a national
           basis would not be practical for many reasons, including

           (i)   Fundamental changes at entrances to grounds,
                 which would cost a considerable amount of money.

           (ii) If an individual misbehaved and was in possession
                of an Identity Card that did not belong to him,
                what positive action could be taken against him.
                (In reply                  suggested that if the Card
                had a v a l u e , t h e person could be charged for
                receiving stolen property, or stealing, but this
                would mean that the Card had to have a face value.
                             2.



          (iii) It would be impossible for turnstile operators
                to inspect each Card individually.

          (iv) It was quite probable that such a scheme would
               deter the genuine supporter, but would not be a
               deterrent for the'villain'.

          (v)   Genuine supporters may not wish to take up Identity
                Cards as, in all probability, it would mean that
                their full names and addresses would be available
                to finance companies, etc., who circulated people
                at random.

          (vi) Executive Boxes, etc., are bought for the Season
               by Companies, but different people used them at
               each match.

          (vii) What would happen to the supporters from Europe,
                which in Arsenal's case was sometimes in excess of
                1000 per match.   It was considered a large
                majority of the overseas supporters would stop
                attending if they had to be in possession of an
                identity card.

    It was agreed that as the current trend was for troublemakers
    to be in the seated areas, it would not be worthwhile having
    an Identity Card scheme restricted to the Terraces.

    (b)   Local Schemes

          Mr. Dunford reported that Derby County were keen to
          introduce an Identity Card Scheme.    Their average gate
          at present was nearly 12,000 and they believed their
          potential if they were in the First Division could be
          18,000 per match.   They proposed encouraging local
          support and excluding visiting supporters. . The Club
          believed that the only way to generate a family atmos­
          phere would be to exclude visiting supporters.   Their
          proposal had been considered by The Football Trust,
          but financial support was rejected.

          Mr. Dent confirmed that there was nothing in The Football
          League regulations which would prevent Derby County making
          itself a Limited Membership Club.   However, it was noted
          that in accordance with the present Rules of The Football
          Association Challenge Cup Competition, Clubs were obliged
          to supply visiting Clubs with 25% of the total number of
          tickets available.




\
Mrs. Shaw stated that Millwall F.C. and their local
Police had different views on the issue.   The Police
had made it clear that although a match may be all­
ticket, they reserved the right to put individuals
without tickets inside the ground if they considered it
to be in the public's interest.   This would obviously
mean they would override an Identity Card scheme.
However, Mr. Croker reported that the Government had
given a strong indication that if matches were all
ticket, individuals without tickets would not be put
into the ground.

Mr. Smith said that Luton Town was considering the
possibility of not admitting visiting supporters in
Season 1985/86, possibly making the Club a Limited
Members Club.              confirmed that in such a
situation the Police would not have the right to put
troublemakers inside the ground as it would be a
private club.

Mr. Dunford said that if Derby County went ahead with
their proposal to make the Club a Private Members
Club, they anticipated the loss in revenue in the first
season would be approximately £130,000, but after that
perhaps only £6,000 to £7,000 per season.   Each turn­
stile would be modified and would have a 16 person
rejection system, whereby the Identity Card would be
accepted and the operator would allow the person through
and that card would be memorised for the next 16 people
to prevent the possibility of it being passed back to
the next person.   The system would also automatically
reject any individual who had previously been arrested
in connection with one of the matches at the ground.

Mr. Friar pointed out that Arsenal F.C. took on
average 500 supporters to every away game and the
Club would be quite happy to guarantee the behaviour
of them all.   He suggested it was the individuals who
travelled on their own that would be likely to cause
the trouble.   Mr. Friar said that at a game where the
average attendance was 34,000, about 20,000 would arrive
in the last half hour and in the last fifteeen minutes
if an evening match and he could not envisage any
computerised card system that would meet these require­
ments .
     Mr. Dunford said that if Derby County introduced such
     a scheme, they would still keep a section of the ground
     free for the visiting supporter, if the visiting Club
     agreed to accept responsibility for the behaviour of
     their supporters.   Such supporters would then be given
     day passes.

     If such experiments were carried out The Football
     Association would have to look at its Rules with regard
     to 25% to visiting supporters at F.A. Cup Ties and
     serious consideration should be given to relaying the
     match to the grounds of the away Club to discourage
     supporters from travelling, although it was noted that
     the cost for such relays may make it prohibitive.

     During the discussion it became apparent that one of
     the problems Clubs faced when trying to dissuade their
     supporters from travelling to away games was the Cheap
     Day Tickets or "Specials" offered by British Railways.
     Another problem was coach operators who carried
     supporters to away matches without the knowledge of
     the Clubs.   It was suggested that coach operators
     should have a special licence to carry supporters to
     football matches and should be obliged to liaise with
     the Police and the Clubs concerning their arrangements.

Close Circuit Television

It was noted that Chelsea F.C. operated a CCTV system in
conjunction with the Police.

A portable system is available in the Manchester area, through
The Football Trust, and had been used at Manchester United F.C.
on one occasion.

Arsenal F.C. have used CCTV on occasions, but Mr. Friar said
that the Police did not think it was necessary, particularly
as the ground is constructed in such a way that it can all
be seen fairly clearly at one time.

Miss Marson reported that both the Club and the Police found
Chelsea's system extremely helpful in monitoring the areas
around the stadium, the turnstiles and within the stadium
itself.   The system is operated by a member of the Chelsea
F.C. staff from the Police Operations Room.    The system was
installed about 2 % years ago at a cost of approximately
£35,000, and a further £10,000 has been spent on improvements
to it since that time.
Mr. Dowse said that Leeds United's system was similar to that
in use at Chelsea, although they did not have a colour or
video facility.   At present they have a request before The
Football Trust for financial assistance to up date the system
to colour, extra cameras, video and play back facilities.
The approximate cost of these improvements would be £18,000.
Mr. Dowse has 4 monitors in his office and there are a further
12 in the Police Control Room.   These monitors cover the turn­
stiles, railways and inside the actual ground.

It was noted that CCTV had been used to make arrests and sub­
sequently in evidence against the individuals.

M r . Dunford reported that Derby County had used CCTV to monitor
the crowd build up outside the ground since 1977 and their
system was directly linked to the local Police Station.

It was generally agreed that at a Club such as Chelsea, CCTV
is particularly beneficial due to the close proximity of the
ground to the various Stations, whereas at a club such as
Oxford United far more cameras would be required because of
the distance between the ground and the local Station.

It was agreed that on the whole CCTV seemed to be of considerable
assistance to Clubs and if, in the long term, it was likely
to become standard equipment at most grounds, the Football
Authorities should look into the possibility of using just
one supplier at a special rate.

Perimeter Fences

It was noted that at present 59 Football League Clubs were
Designated.   This was because, although only First and Second
Division Clubs had to be Designated, when a Club was relegated
to the Third Division it remained Designated.

There were mixed views on the necessity or otherwise for
perimeter fencing, but those present stressed that there
should be a standard specification throughout the country,
whereas at present it was left to each Local Authority to
lay down the specifications.   However, it was agreed that
football had to be careful that by requesting standard
specifications it did not then become compulsory for all
Clubs to have perimeter fencing.

Mrs. Shaw reported that Millwall had, on occasions, used
'anti smear paint' at the top of their fencing.

The general view of those present was that they did not like
fencing, particularly in front of seated areas, but that if
some kind of material could be found which would not obstruct
the view in any way this would certainly be a great assistance.
It was agreed that a solution as far as this issue was concerned
may be to leave without fencing the areas which would be
allocated to Club Members.
Ticket Only Matches

It was noted that whilst all ticket matches may be worthwile
where problem matches were concerned, it was not a guaranteed
safeguard, as those intent on causing trouble would always
find a way of getting into areas allocated to the supporters
of either team.

Alcohol

It was noted that few Football League Clubs sell alcohol
on the Terraces and where it is sold the amount consumed
per person is minimal.   It was considered that it may well
be beneficial to publicise this fact

In the event of trouble the Police always had the authority
to close down bars at any time before, during or after a
ga m e .

It was generally agreed that drinking within the ground was
not the problem.   The problem was the availability of drink
in the vicinity of the ground.

One or two Club representatives also referred to the fact
that drugs were becoming a problem within the ground.

Early Kick-Off

It was agreed that in some cases there was merit in bringing
forward the time of kick-offs to Saturday mornings, but this
depended on the fixtures.

It was thought that it may be beneficial if The Football
League sent out a reminder to its Clubs that in accordance
with their regulations, Saturday matches could kick-off
between 11.00 a.m. and 3.15 p.m.

Local Police to Attend Away Matches

All present agreed that it may be beneficial for three or
four policemen from the visiting team's police force to
travel to away matches, as had in fact happened on a few
occasions in recent months.

Clubs To Take Action Against Individuals

It was noted that many Clubs did in fact take legal action
against individuals who were causing trouble, although they
all stressed that it was very difficult to obtain information
concerning trouble makers through the Police.   Where possible
Clubs also publicised details of those individuals who had
been found guilty of offences related to football matches.

Mr. Bennett asked whether the parents could be charged in
cases which involved youths under 18 and The Football
Association agreed that it would seek clarification on this
point.
9.   Any Other Business

     (a)   Mr. Smith drew attention to the fact that it was
           becoming increasingly apparent that many of the
           recent demonstrations at football grounds have been
           anti police.   He thought that this may be connected
           with the recent Miners' Strike, but believed that the
           Government should be aware of the Clubs' concern on
           this point.

     (b)   Mr.  Smith also referred to the value of meetings
           between Clubs to exchange views on subjects such
           as crowd control and requested that The Football
           Association and The Football League consider the
           possibility of having regular meetings, say two or
           three times a year.

     (c)   Mr.   Dowse referred to item 2 of Mr. Kelly's letter to
           Football League Clubs following the meeting with the
           Prime Minister and the fact that there was a possibility
           that at The Football Association Annual General Meeting
           a proposal to delete the words "reasonable precautions"
           from Rule 31 would be considered.     He believed that
            this would be an unfair step to take.

           Mr. Croker stressed that if The Football Association
           put forward any amendments to Rules at the Annual
           General Meeting its only motive would be for the benefit
           of the game as a whole in the long term.

     (d)   Mr. Bennett stressed the financial burden if Clubs had
           to play Football League Matches "behind closed doors"
           and said it may be The Football League would be requested
           to set up an insurance scheme using the 4% Pool, to
           protect such Clubs.


     At the conclusion of the meeting on behalf of all those
present, Mr. Friar thanked Mr. Croker and The Football Association
for calling the meeting and for the hospitality extended to those
present.




     afs/321
 275/85
