         F. A. Cup Semi-Final - Nottingham Forest v. Liverpool
       at Sheffield Wednesday F. C. - Saturday, 15th April, 1989


 Notes of a meeting with Freshfields on Wednesday,     19th April,
 commencing at 10. 00 a. m.


 Present :   The Football Association :
                                          Glen Kirton
                                                 ~| (part only)

             Freshfields : Jo Rickard




Freshfields advised that Counsel had been appointed.  Julian
Gibson-Watt was the Junior Counsel and John Dyson was the Leading
Counsel.

There was a general discussion concerning the insurance details
which          had on file.    Freshfield requested a copy of the
file of correspondence and          confirmed that he would put this
in hand.

Freshfields requested that they have a contact at the Scottish
Football Association in order to discuss the Ibrox Disaster and the
results of the enquiry that followed.             agreed to contact
Ernest Walker, Secretary of The Scottish Football Association and
advise that Jo Rickard might be in touch.

          agreed that he would check whether there were any insurance
implications for The Football Association following the Bradford
Disaster.

Glen Kirton agreed he would draw up a list of the points that he
would normally expect to deal with if in charge on the occasion of
an F. A. Cup Semi-Final tie.

Reference was made to the petition that was submitted by the
Football Supporters' Association approximately two years ago after
the 1986 F. A. Cup Final.

There was a discussion regarding the relevant Rules concerning the
semi-final ties in the Rules of the Challenge Cup Competition and
the manner in which the police had been consulted.

It was noted that in accordance with Football League Regulations,
each Football League Club was obliged to lodge plans with The
Football League as to how they would deal with crowd control on
match days.   It was agreed that The Football Association should
obtain a copy of these plans relating to Sheffield Wednesday from
The Football League and pass them on to Freshfields.

                                                Contd/.
                                        -   2   -




        Freshfields asked what if any agreement there were between Football
        Clubs and the St. John's Ambulance Brigade with regard to attendance
        on match days.   Some of those present seemed to think that there
        was an agreement between The Football League and the St. John
        Ambulance Brigade and           agreed to ascertain further details.

        Freshfields asked for as much information as possible on the Bolton
        Disaster in 1946 and the Wheatley Report.

        Freshfields indicated that they would like statements from Council
        Members who were present at the Semi-Finals giving their
        observations and any relevant comments they thought should be made.
        Freshfields stressed that these statements would be purely for the
^   *   information of our solicitors and if there was anything within the
        statement that they wished to use in our evidence to the enquiry
        they would contact the individual concerned and prepare an agreed
        statement for submission.

        Freshfields asked for as much information as we could gather
        together with regard perimeter fencing, i. e. which Clubs have
        perimeter fencing and which Clubs do not have perimeter fencing; any
        reference in the F. I. F. A. and U. E. F.A Regulations with regard to
        perimeter fencing.

        Freshfields also asked for copies of any instructions we may have
        given to Clubs relating to medical facilities that should be
        available for spectators attending matches in case of injuries.

        Freshfields anticipated that Lord Justice Taylor would probably hope
        to commence the enquiry at the beginning of June, completing the
        enquiry by the end of July and announcing his findings possibly in
        September.    They stressed therefore that the information they
        required should be gathered together with speed.

        It was agreed that Freshfields should be given an opportunity to
        attend all the forthcoming matches at Wembley Stadium being
        organised by The Football Association.

        Freshfields indicated that there would be no objection if The
        Football Association wished to invite Lord Justice Taylor to attend
        any matches at Wembley Stadium.




                                                    Contd/
                                 -   3   -




At the commencement of the meeting            had given Freshfields
copies of relevant documentation that had been gathered since 15th
April, including Graham Kelly's initial report which had been handed
to the Executive Committee on 18th April, the extract from Hansard
of the discussions in the House of Lords on 10th April, the Guide to
Safety at Sports Ground and a photostate copy of the Safety at
Sports Grounds Act 1985.  During the course of the meeting
Freshfields were also handed a copy of Glen Kirton's initial report,
a copy of Steve Clark and Adrian Titcombe's initial report, the
correspondence regarding the petition submitted by the Football
Supporters' Association in 1987, a copy of the printed document
relating to the arrangements for the F. A. Challenge Cup Semi-Final
ties, a copy of the Rules relating to the Challenge Cup, Challenge
Trophy, Challenge Vase, Youth Challenge Cup and Sunday Cup
Competitions and the following files:-

        Bradford City Disaster/Justice Popplewell Enquiry
        Crowd Control
        Liverpool v. Juventus Disaster
        Memorandum to Football League Clubs on crowd management
        Sporting Events Acts/Bill, etc.
        Anti-Hooliganism Committee
        European Liaison Officer
        F. A. Initiative to Combat Hooliganism

        Storage Files

        Crowd Control - May 1978 - December 1980
                        January 1981 - November 1982
                        January 1983 - October 1984
                        November 1984 - August 1985




21st A p r i l , 198 9

                         /
c. c.   Freshfields
        Mr. R. H. G. Kelly
        Mr.
        Mr. G. Kirton
        Mr. A. R. Titcombe
