                                    —T r > ^ . ^ y /- T U U   ‘    V W   i U A iJU   A O O W
O Q   ' W T C ' 1'   At/ -




                                              THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


                                                    EXECUTIVE! COMMITTEE

                                     MINUTES OP A SPECIAL MEETING
                              held at 16, Lancaster Gate, London, W. 2. ,
                                     on Tuesday, 18th April, 1989
                                       commencing at 11*00 a.m.

      Presents               Messrs. F, A. Millichip (in the Chair), W. T, Annable,
                             J. J. Dunnett, D. R. Goodchild, A. D. McMullen and H, R.
                             Smith.
                             Mr. R. H. G. Kelly,      ~                                   Messrs. M, Day
                             and G. Kirton and Miss J. Smith.
                             Messrs. £. A. Brown (Chairman of the Challenge Cup
                             Committee) and J. F. Wiseman (Chairman of the Match
                             and Grounds Committee) attended as co-opted members.
  Apologies for absence were received from; Dr. J. O' Hara and
            Messrs. R. B. Strachan and C. H. Willcox.


      132.           F. A. CUP SEMI-FINAL - LIVERPOOL F. C. V. NOTTINGHAM FOREST
                        P. C. - 15TH APRIL, 1989 - SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F. C. The
                        Committee expressed shock and sorrow at the disaster
                        that had occurred at Hillsborough on Saturday, 15th
                        April and, at the time of the Meeting, had resulted in
                        the death of ninety-five supporters of Liverpool
                        Footbal 1 Cl ub.
                         The Committee expressed deep condolences to the
                         bereaved families.

                         A Report was received from the Chief Executive who had
                         been present at the match, giving full details of what
                         had taken place and the action taken up until Monday
                         evening, 17th April.  Mr. G. Kirton, who had also been
                         present at the match, gave a brief report covering
                         aspects not dealt with in the Chief Executive's Report.
                        The Committee confirmed the decision that had been
                        reached the previous evening, following full
                        consultation with the members, that plans should proceed
                        for the continuation of the Challenge Cup Competition,
                        with the Final being played as a Memorial Match to those
                        that had died and the proceeds of the match being
                        donated to the Disaster Fund.  The decision had been
                        taken only after considerable deliberation and thought
                        as to the feelings of the bereaved families.  The views
                        of various organisations and individuals had been sought
                        and public opinion, expressed in telephone calls to the
                        office, taken into account.



                                                                  (1 )
y o W T T i   iv -X y
                                             l OO i
                                                                          i£jW,




               It iiQ,d. been felt that# despite the harrow!ng
               circumstances, The Association should give a clear
               indication of its position at the earliest opportunity.
                 it was further agreed that the proceeds of the
                 Semi-Final Tie at Hillsborough on 25th April 2989 be
              \ donated to the Disaster Fund and the Committee
               ' confirmed the immediate donation of £250,000 to the
               : Fund.
               The Committee also confirmed that should the Competition
               proceed, the ticket allocation for the F. A. Challenge
               Cup Pinal would be amended whereby the two competing
               teams would receive the large majority of tickets.   The
               Football Association would allocate the other tickets on
               the basis of 2 tickets for each Council Member, Club and
               Association, etc., to whom tickets are normally
               allocated.

               Members of the Match and Grounds Committee present,
               including the Chairman o£ that Committee, fully
               supported the decision of the Executive Committee
               regarding the revised ticket allocations for the Cup
               Final.
               During the meeting the Committee were advised that
               Liverpool F. C. had decided to defer making a decision
               regarding their continued participation in the
               Competition until Tuesday, 25th April.  The Chairman and
               Chief Executive were authorised to take appropriate
               action as necessary following advice of that decision.

               The Committee requested that its grateful thanks be
               recorded in the Minutes to the Chief Executive who had
               shown dignity and compassion at all times whilst dealing
               with the tragedy and to the Staff who had supported him
               and for his part, the Chief Executive thanked the
               Chairman and Vice-Chairman for their unflinching support
               over the weekend and Monday.
               It was noted that clubs had been instructed to urgently
               consult their Licensing Authority about safety measures.

               The engagement of Counsel was confirmed.
               The Committee accepted the Chief Executive7 s
               recommendation that Mr. G, Kirton seek an urgent
               interview with the President of UEFA in order to apprise
               him of the true nature of the disaster, to enable M.
               Georges to perhaps lessen the offence his Immediate
               public comments had caused and to seek to minimise any
               possible rift.




JS/ja/211
EXECMINS/ml8489
                                          (2 )
