                                          Tel;


                                                 18th April, 1989.

         Mr. Graham Kelly,
         Chief Executive,
         Football Association,
         16 Lancaster Gate,
         LONDON W2.                     .,        -

         cc. 'Liverpool Echo'


         Dear Mr. Kelly,


                  I am writing in regard to the recent  Hillsborough
  disaster.   I was aspectator at this game, along     with my two
  brothers.   Although all three of us held tickets for the fatal
  section of the terraces, we were incredibly lucky, and survived
  the tragedy. A friend of ours, Barry Bennett, was less fortunate.

                 It is blatantly obvious to all the fans who passed
  through the terrace turnstiles that the disaster had two root
  causes.  (Those who live in football's 'Ivory Towers' have no
  comprehension of the events outside the turnstiles, and on the
  terraces. I did not see you caught up in the crush and the queues;
  those who died did not enjoy the directors box, executive
  lifestyle of some).

                 The first cause was the grossly unfair allocation
  of tickets between the two clubs. It is disingenuous of you to
  state, (as you did after the disaster on TV), that this was due to
  police advice,   (concerning travel congestion etc). The police
  request that the Liverpool fans be accommodated at the smaller end
  of the ground, as opposed to the Kop end, stems from the f a
  decision to have the tie plaved at.Hillsborough.

                 Since Liverpool had protested the previous year,
   (as they did again this year), about ticket allocations at the
  corresponding fixture, why was the tie not moved to Old Trafford ?
  This would have resulted in a more equitable ticket distribution,
  and less inconvenience to Liverpool fans. (Neither Hillsborough or
  Old Trafford is equidistant from Nottingham or Liverpool, but why
  should Liverpool fans be twice inconvenienced with distance, and
  then   be   inconvenienced   twice again    with   paltry   ticket
  allocations). A similar problem concerning allocations for last
  years FA Cup Final also serves as an example of your Association's
  attitude.




Apr-89                                                          FACUP.DOC
               For   a   club with an average home       gate   of
approximately 39,000 to receive less tickets than one which only
attracts approximately 20,000 is scandalous. For our objections to
be twice brushed aside illustrates the contempt with which you
view supporters in general, and ours in particular. These same
supporters ultimately pay your salary.

                Your comments as to the FA decision to stage the
tie at Hillsborough, despite the LFC objections, would be most
welcome. Your televised comment that the additional Forest tickets
were 'irrelevant' was manifestly untrue, and is insulting to those
who died. Try telling it to those pictured on the front pages of
our newspapers, being crushed to death.

               The   second   cause of the     tragedy   was   the
pathetically inept policing of the crowds at the Liverpool end,
both inside and outside the ground. This is obviously outside your
sphere of influence, and is the subject of a separate letter to
the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.

               However, the decision to play at Hillsborough
without furnishing our supporters a fair proportion of tickets
inevitably made the Police task much harder.

               In light of the foregoing, I feel that the only
decent course of action left open to you is to resign from your
position. To accept the post of 'Chief Executive' results in your
accepting the responsibilities of your position, be they good or
bad. Not to resign, and to attempt to foist the blame on others by
obfuscation, reflects great discredit on yourself personally, and
the game generally. It is also, once again, an insult to the 95
dead killed by your Association's inept decisions.

               I trust you will at least do me the courtesy of   a
reply to my letter.


                        Yours faithfully,
                  (On behalf of those who died)




                    (A lucky one who survived)
