                                                              17th April 1989

Dear Sir,
         I enclose copies of two letters recently sent to Manchester City
Football Club pic, the first written on 21st March 1989 regarding inadequate
crowd control measures at the match against Chelsea.
The letter highlights the fact that the events at Hillsborough could have taken
place at any football ground at any time. Time unfortunately ran out on football
on 15th April 1989, with disastrous consequences.
In general, I am concerned that no connection is being made with the people who
currently attend football, the so-called ’supporters’, and the accident at the
Hillsborough semi-final - they are why the fences are in place, they are the
people who create the hostile environment that exists at every match currently
played, they are the people who turn up without tickets and they are the people
who caused the problem on Saturday. They are the socially irresponsible.
The true, socially responsible, football supporter has turned his back on the
game for more enjoyable sporting events.
Every day for two weeks approx 30000 people queue all night to attend Wimbledon
without a policeman in sight, 65000 attend rugby internationals again with no
major police activity.
Please order the terraces to be closed immediately, with an increase in the cost
of admission to £20 per seat to compensate for the loss of revenue, and
legislate for all-seater stadia with maximum 50000 capacity.

                             Yours sincerely




Copies s Mr Hurd, Mr Moynihan, Mr Kelly
                                                              17th April 1989

Dear Sir,
I have just listened to your comments on the BBC news programme ’World at One’.
As a result I feel I should draw your attention to a letter I sent to Mr Halford
on 21st MARCH 1989 regarding conditions at the Manchester City v. Chelsea match
(see enclosed copy), some time BEFORE last Saturday.
I conclude that the events at Hillsborough could have happened at any ground in
the country at any time during the last 10 years, including Maine Road.
The conditions at Maine Road on the day of the Chelsea match contravened the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, and whilst the reply received was courteous,
with an assurance of investigation, I did not get a ’warm feeling’ that I was
being taken seriously. The ground on that day was the nearest to a potential
death trap that I have encountered at any sporting event.
In view of subsequent events I will be forwarding copies of my letter to the
Home Secretary and the Minister for Sport with my observations, for the enquiry.
(Although I did not mention my thoughts on how the overcrowding at Maine Road
 had happened I made it clear in an earlier phone call that I thought the
 gatemen were taking back-handers, something you would only detect at a capacity
 attendance. On a normal week these anti-social elements would just move to
 another seat)

                             Yours sincerely
I




                                                                  21st March 1989

    Dear Sir,
    Further to my conversation today regarding my observations on seat allocation
    and crowd marshalling at the City v. Chelsea match on Saturday 18th March 1989,
    I thought it worthwhile documenting the facts for investigation :-

    1. My eldest son purchased 10 x £4 tickets in the North Stand ; Section ’K * ,
       Row 19, Seats 1 to 10.
       Seats 1 to 4 were occupied by 4 people, 2 without tickets and 2 with tickets
       for Row 23. My lad thought they would at least use the 2 seats in Row 23 but
       found they were occupied - they didnt ask what tickets these people had. An
       official marshal investigated but said he couldnt do anything. This resulted
       in the four people sitting on the steps for the match, along with between 50
       and 100 other people in the immediate vicinity.
       As a designated club under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 you will
       know this is illegal (the point being we dont want another Bradford Disaster)

    2. My colleague, who had flown from Guernsey for the match, and myself, had 2 x
       £5 tickets in the Main Stand ; Section ’H ’, Row J, Seats 101 & 102.
       These two seats are next to the gangway at the North Stand end. Again, there
       were many people occupying seats without tickets, but as the genuine ticket
       holders arrived they moved. This resulted in an estimated 200 standing in the
       aisle and at the back of Section ’H ’ - I counted to 100 and stopped.
       I suggest this is more than a minor incident and cannot understand how this
       could happen legitimately, unless they were officials of the club.
       As the language used by most of these people, all of the time, is unprintable
       I suspect they had no formal connection with the club - although they all
       would see themselves as City supporters, and unfortunately are not untypical
       of the person attending football matches in England at present. Several had
       also been drinking.

Whilst I would not expect the clubs to tackle the problems of society in general
they could make some effort to target a different audience - as I mentioned,
these problems do not exist at rugby internationals, tennis, golf, motor racing,
athletics meetings, ice skating, the Palace or major concerts around the country
due, I believe, to a more aggressive pricing policy (Wimbledon tickets, for
example, on semi-finals day this year are £32 each and have been 10 times
oversubscribed). This would also help to fund the game properly and pay wages
to world class English players on a par with continental Europe.
There ARE enough people willing to support football if the majority of people
currently attending can be replaced - unfortunately until this happens none of
us are likely to attend.
                             Your8 sincerely
