                            THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

                             THE F.A. CUP SEMI-FINAL
                         NOTTINGHAM FOREST V LIVERPOOL
                       PLAYED AT HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD
                              SATURDAY 9 APRIL 1988


INTRODUCTION: A near capacity gate was expected for this attractive semi­
final between two leading teams in the First Division.

GROUND CAPACITY: 54,000

LOCATION OF GROUND: On the A61 Penistone Road North about three miles
North-West of the city centre.
ACCESS TO THE GROUND: Liverpool supporters travelled the M62/M1 to
junction 36 and followed the A61 to the ground. Nottingham supporters
t r a v e l l e d the M1 to junction 34 from where the route was sign posted to the
parking areas. The police used a 'spotter' plane to direct traffic on to
alternative routes if required.

There were three special trains (550 on each) from Liverpool to Wadsley
Bridge Railway Station from where they walked the half mile to the ground
under police supervision. A further 1100 Liverpool supporters travelled on
scheduled services to Sheffield (Midland) from where they were transported
by special 'buses.

There were five special trains (550 on each) from Nottingham to Sheffield
(Midland) from where they were transported by special 'buses.

There were about 75 coaches carrying Liverpool supporters and a similar
number for Nottingham. Many supporters travelled by mini-bus or transit
van.
PARKING: Liverpool coaches parked in Claywheels Lane, a long cul-de-
sac and the overspill was parked on a dual carriageway in Halifax Road.
Nottingham coaches parked in the South Yorkshire Transport Garage, Herries
Road South which is close to the ground with the overspill on a road
nearby.

Transit vans and private motorists were directed to designated areas on
housing estates within reasonable walking distance of the ground. The
parking areas for each set of supporters were some distance apart.

LAYOUT OF THE STADIUM: The Main Stand (8877 seats) runs the whole length
of the South side of the pitch. To the right, is the covered Spion Kop (21,000).
Both these areas were allocated to Nottingham supporters.

The impressive North Stand (9882 seats), the West Stand (4465 seats), the
West Terrace (4465) and North West Corner Terrace (2906) were allocated to
Liverpool supporters. Sections of the North and South Stands which were
adjacent to supporters of the opposing team behind each goal were allocated
to neutral supporters to minimise possible conflict. The whole of the
stadium is covered except the North West Corner Terrace.

ALLOCATION OF SPACE;    This was determined by the direction of travel of the
supporters.
                                          -   2   -




 8   TURNSTILES: There were 90 turnstiles in operation which were adequate for
     this all-ticket game. Most people were in the ground in time for the kick-
     off. I saw a trickle of Liverpool supporters entering the West Terrace up
     to five minutes after kick-off.

 9   FENCING: Stout narrow gauge fencing to a height of about 10' with inward
      facing angled section at the top behind the goal at each end of the ground.
      Even so at the end of the game the jubilant Liverpool supporters managed to
      scale the fence to join others who gained access to the pitch from the
      North Stand to congratulate their Liverpool heroes. The police had advised
      that players should leave the pitch immediately after the final whistle but
      a few Liverpool players stayed on the pitch to acknowledge their supporters
      and they soon found themselves engulfed by well wishers.
10   SEGREGATION:   Satisfactory.   I saw no mixing of rival supporters.

11   POLICE CONTROL ROOM: A separate elevated construction in the South-
      West corner of the ground with a good view of most of the stadium. It is
      just big enough for the purpose. It has the usual facilities including a
      P.A. override.
12   C.C.T.V.: A four camera scheme - two colour inside the ground and two
     monochrome covering outside including the A61 Penistone Road. After the
      game about 5 youths were spotted on C.C.T.V. waiting on a grassed area near
      the railway line probably waiting to throw missiles at passing trains.
     Police were despatched to investigate - it would have been difficult to
     spot them from the road.

13   CLUB CONTROL ROOM: The club has a separate CCTV control room with 24
     cameras covering all exits and turnstiles and other key areas. They are
      also able to monitor the pictures from the Police Control Room. The VDU
      for the computer controlled turnstile counter is also in this room. The
      operator is a club official but there is a police liaison officer in the
      room and there is a regular exchange of information including updating
      crowd figures for each section of the ground.
14   STEWARDS: Ample stewards on duty wearing numbered tabards.     They were
      v i s i b l e and active where necessary.

15   INTOXICATING LIQUOR: No public bars at the ground. The public houses in
      the city were well patronised by supporters who arrived as early as 10.30 am.
      It was difficult to judge whether high spirits were linked to drink or the
      special occasion of a semi-final but walking around outside the ground I
      saw no drink related offences. A few of the arrests inside the ground were
      drink related but there weren't many.

16   RACIAL:   One black player in each team - no problems.

17   POLICE/CLUB LIAISON: Excellent. The lively and alert club secretary and
      the local police work well together.

18   CROWD BEHAVIOUR:   It was an entertaining game played in a good spirit
      although three Liverpool players were booked by the referee in the first
      half. Crowd behaviour was good. I heard no obscene chanting and both sets
      of supporters concentrated in the main on supporting their team rather than
      taunting the opposition supporters - there was the usual good natured
      banter but nothing to give cause for concern.
                                              -   3   -




           CROWD BEHAVIOUR CONTINUED: About 250 or more Liverpool supporters managed
           to gain access to the pitch after the game despite the presence of a large
           contingent of police in front of the low fenced North Stand and the fencing
           behind the goal. They were joyful and good natured but a sizeable number
           ventured towards the opposite end to taunt the Nottingham supporters who
           were slowly leaving the ground. The Nottingham supporters didn't really
           respond - they were too downhearted. The police moved in with a cordon and
           calmly and effectively cleared the pitch. There was no serious disorder or
           conflict and their behaviour was good natured - however it doesn't take
           much to turn a crowd nasty and we could do without them on the playing
           area.

      19   ARRESTS: There were only 28 arrests and 41 ejections. There was a
            stabbing incident in a nearby park after the game. My impression was that
            it wasn't a serious injury - a person was arrested for the offence. I
            thougl.t it was a well planned police operation and well executed,:. The
            total police manpower employed on duties connected with this semi-final was
            47 Inspectors, 109 Sergeants and 731 Constables plus chief inspectors and
            above. Chief Superintendent Brian Birch was in charge but ACC (Ops) Mr Jackson
           was also present in uniform.
      20   BREAKDOWN OF ATTENDANCE: Spion Kop 18,564; North Stand 9335; South Stand
            (both sections) 9519; and West Stand and Terraces 15204. Attendance 51,622

      21   RESULT: Nottingham Forest 1 Liverpool 2




           K.J. Evans
           10 April 1988




<%V
