                     THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

               MINUTES OF A SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETING
             held at 16, Lancaster Gate, London, W. 2. ,
                  on Wednesday, 2 6th April, 198 9




Messrs.              ind            of Freshfields, The
          Association's legal advisers were in attendance.

Prior to the business of the Meeting the Chairman: -

(a)       referred with deep regret to the death of Mr.    H. N.
          "Dickie" Bird (former Deputy Sectretary) who had joined
          The Football Association staff in August 1939 and,
          apart from his wartime service, worked continually for
          The Association until his retirement at the age of 65
          in June 1988.  He had remained, however, a Consultant
          to The Football Association, responsible for the Hard
          Surface Play Area Scheme and Drug Testing and would
          have completed 50 years' service in August of this
          year. Mr.  McMullen represented The Association at the
          Funeral which had also been attended by Mr.   J. J.
          Dunnett, President of The Football League, the Chief
          Executive and many other members of the Council and
          Staff of The Association;

(b)   reported with regret the death of ________________
        Northern Counties East Referees' Society Secretary, who
        had been killed on his way to a Contributory Leagues
        Selection Meeting in Manchester on 24th April, 1989;
(c)     expressed deep condolences to the Officials, Players
        and Staff of Liverpool F.C . , the City of Liverpool and
        the families of those bereaved in the tragic disaster
        at the F. A. Cup Semi-Final Tie, Liverpool F. C.   v.
        Nottingham Forest F. C. played at Hillsborough on
        Saturday, 15th April, 198 9 and expressed the hope that
        those injured would soon be restored to good health.

Council stood in silence as a mark of respect.


61.                                           [(Reference Council
        Minute 58 - 13. 3. 89) In accordance with Standing Order
        18, a vote was taken and the necessary majority
        obtained for Council to again consider the proposed
        Wembley International Tournament 1989.

        The Chairman reminded Council that at its Meeting on
        13th March, 1989, a recommendation of the Joint Liaison
        Committee that permission be refused for the Tournament
        to be staged had been supported by Council.  Since that
        time, however, further information had been received.

        In accordance with Standing Order 11, Council resolved
        itself into a Committee of the whole Council for the
        purpose of discussing the matter further.

        The Chairman gave a detailed report of the events that
        had taken place following the decision taken at the
        last Council Meeting, including details of a Meeting he
        had attended with Mr. B. Wolfs on, Chairman of Wembley
        Stadium Limited.

        The Chairman said that the Executive Committee had
        discussed the matter fully at its Meetings on 30th
        March, when representatives of The Association's legal
        advisers had been in attendance, and again on 25th
        April.  As, however, it was a decision of Council that
        the Tournament should not take place it had been
        necessary for Council to meet again to reconsider the
        matter.

       _________________ advised Council of the legal position,
       as he saw it, regarding the application to stage the
       Tournament.

        Council was given an assurance that the proposed
        Tournament would not be in breach of F. A. Rule 15 (a)
        and that various stipulations laid down by The
        A ssociation regarding the staging of the Tournament
        would be met.

        It was noted that the request to stage the Tournament
        complied with the stipulations laid down by the
        Executive Committee at its Meeting in October 1988.
            Concern was expressed that despite what had happened
            the previous year reports had again appeared in the
            Press that the Tournament was to be held, prior to it
            being sanctioned by The Association.

            Various members expressed views both for and against
            the Tournament taking place, following which Council
            came out of Committee.

            The Chairman asked Council to vote on whether the
            Tournament should be permitted to go ahead which
            resulted by a large majority in permission being given,
            subject to certain stipulations being met, including: -

            (a) £25,000 to be paid to The Association towards
                the Charity Shield fund;

            (b) the number of substitutes    to be restricted to
                two from five named;

            (c) the UEFA Agent to receive not more than 10% of the
                gross profits, in accordance with F. A. Rule
                15 (a);

            (d) Wembley Stadium to receive a fee not exceeding
                32% nett for the hire of the Stadium;

            (e) Any remaining profit to be paid to The
                Association for the Charity Shield fund;

            (f) Revised Regulations to be submitted,    within which
                it must be made clear: -

                (   i) that only two substitutes will   be used     of
                       five named;

                ( ii) the names of those forming the Management

c               (iii)
                      Committee;

                        full details of security arrangements;

            (g) Final Accounts to be submitted to The Association
                following the Tournament.

    The Chairman thanked                                          for
            attending the Meeting.
•A.   CUP SEMI-FINAL TIE - LIVERPOOL F. C.  V.
 NO TTINGHA M FOREST F. C. AT HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD -
 15TH APRIL, 1989 The Chief Executive summarised for
 members the events that had taken place since the
 tragedy at Hillsborough on 15th April.    He reported
 that The Association's legal advisers were obtaining
 considerable information from the office for use in
 respect of the Inquiry which was being held by Lord
 Justice Taylor in Sheffield.    It was apparent that
 there was a clear breakdown of crowd control on the day
 but due to the pending Inquiry it was not felt
 appropriate to go into further details at this time.

The Chief Executive said that the Executive Committee,
together with the Chairmen of the Match and Grounds and
Challenge Cup Committees, had been kept closely
involved as events unfolded and it had been decided
that, despite the harrowing circumstances, The
Association should give a clear indication of its
p osition at the earliest opportunity.    It had,
therefore, been announced that the Competition should
continue with the date for the abandoned tie between
Liverpool F. C.  v.  Nottingham Forest F. C.   being set
for Sunday, 7th May, kick-off 1. 00 p. m. , at Old
Trafford, Manchester.   The match would receive
live television coverage and would be played to a
conclusion with penalty kicks if necessary.

It had further been decided that the net proceeds from
the Semi-Final Tie at Hillsborough on 15th April, 1989
and The Association's share of the Cup Final profits
should be donated to the Disaster Fund.  In fact an
immediate donation of £250,000 had already been made.

The decision of Liverpool F. C. to postpone the decision
as to whether it wished to continue in the Competition
was understood and the Chairman asked Mr. N. White, who
was attending the Meeting, to convey to Mr. J. W. Smith,
the Chairman of Liverpool F.C., the kind regards of the
Council at this very difficult time.

The Chairman   said that he was very concerned at various
reports that   had appeared in the media which he felt
were totally   out of order and he had asked the Chief
Executive to   contact the Press Council in this respect.

With regard to the financial implications on Football
League Clubs it was agreed that close liaison would
take place between The Football League and The Football
Association on this matter.  It was felt important that
the financial arrangements should be equitable to all
parties.  Clubs had been instructed to consult their
Licensing Authority on safety procedures.
           ________________ Cheshire County Football Association,
           reported that he had attended a Memorial Service at
           Tranmere F. C. on Saturday, 22nd April and expressed
           admiration at the way in which the Officials and
           Players of Liverpool F. C. had made themselves available
           for counselling the bereaved.

                              registered the concern of the
           Leicestershire and Rutland County F. A.  at the decision
           to suspend the allocation of tickets to Clubs and
           County Associations and to allocate approximately
           37,000 tickets to each of the two competing finalists
           should the Cup Final be played.

           The Chairman said that it had been apparent that the
           decision was not supported by some of the County
           Associations and their views had been noted.  The
           decision was not, however, a precedent for future years
           although he was sure that following the Hillsborough
           disaster pressure would be brought to bear on The
           Association to change the present method of allocating
           tickets.

                         thanked the Chief Executive for the
           dignity and compassion he had shown whilst carrying out
           his duties during this tragic time for football.
           Council endorsed his sentiments.   The Chief Executive
           thanked Council and referred to the work undertaken by
           everyone at Lancaster Gate following the disaster and
           particularly that undertaken by his Management Team.
           He also thanked the Chairman and Vice-Chairman for
           their support.




3. 5. 89
