                       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY




                 WITNESS STATEMENT OF GRAHAM KELLY   j



I, GRAHAM KELLY of the Football Association; 16 Lancaster
Gate London W2 WILL SAY as follows


Personal Details


1.          I am 43 years of age and have qualified asa
Fellow of the Institute of Chartered Secretaries and
Administrators.    I am the Chief Executive of the Football
Association Limited ("FA").    I have held that post for three
months, having succeeded Mr E A Croker on his retirement in
February 1989.    I was previously Secretary of the Football
League from 1979 to 1988, having joined the League in 1968
and progressed through the post of Assistant Secretary from
1973 to 1979.    I came to the FA in September 1988 for a
short transitional period before assuming the Post of Chief
Executive on 14 February 1989,
       2. The Events of 15 April 1989


       I should say something about my personal feelings about the
       incident which occurred at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.                                                  I
       have a deep and lasting memory of the events of that day.
       On behalf of the FA and people in football generally I
       should like to express my great regret that such an incident
       occurred.           I have offered sincere condolences to various
       families of the bereaved and injured.                                        Needless to say the
       events of 15 April 1989 have left a lasting impression upon
 *
)C     me and left me feeling shocked/ distressed»
       I should like to say that I feel very deeply indeed for
                                                                                                              —       **


       those people who have been so tragically affected by the
       incident.                   pnt- 1-hi a                      ymir OTO wnrtis
                                                 Q r ty & f j s a   (,   '■H   l—   ■■■ ^   W                         ■

       th±s~~sottndis-ti-bit~£oKmaA4-»1                                                                                   ■S'Sk— .

     \o yL   t         ^              «\&r                                      g&vji h

       3.               I attended the Match with Glen Kirton, who is head
       of external affairs at the FA.                          We were the only officials
       "on duty” as it were.            I am informed by Glen Kirton that he
      arrived at the ground at 10.35am.                                  I arrived atvi2.20 p.m..                           X
      axxA       nrvHfiftH many      ingh-ttw FurwHl. PaTTH ^n 4 v{my.                                I believe

      that about 35 Council members were present.                                               There was a
      build up of traffic at exit 34 and I left the Ml Motorway at
      Junction 35 and went through Ecclesfield, joining the
      traffic from Liverpool at a traffic lights controlled by
      police officers.            I was not stopped by police as I had been
      the year before.



                                                  -2-
4   .        I am informed by Glen Kirton that he contacted

Graham Mackrell and went to the VIP accommodation, the
dressing room area and pitch to familiarise himself with the
layout of the ground.        I met various people and attended a
lunch hosted by the Sheffield Wednesday directors.


5o           i am also informed by Glen Kirton that at 2.40pm

Graham Mackrell and he were on the perimeter track by the
player's tunnel.        The ground was nowhere near full at that
stage.     Graham Mackrell said to Kirton that he thought about
20,000    people were still outside at that stage.


             Glen Kirton tells me that he asked Mackrell
whether the police had asked to delay the kick off.
Mackrell told him they had not because delaying the kick off
caused all sorts of organisational problems at the end of
the game.         I was unaware of this conversation at the time.
    Both Glen Kirton and myself were unaware of any danger to
    spectators at that stage.     If a request for a delay was
    received we would of course approve the recommendation from
    either the Police or the Club.     The 1987 semi-finals at
    Villa Park and Hillsborough were both delayed at the request
    of the Police as was the replay at Old Trafford on

    7 May 1989.
        7.        Soon after kick-off my attention was diverted from
        the game and I noticed that fans were scaling the perimeter
        fence at the Leppings Lane end.         I saw a number of people on
       the running track in front of the stand.         In fact I did not
        see the incident when Peter Beardsley hit the bar because I
       was looking at the Leppings Lane crowd.         My first thought
       was to question what had happened to cause the problem.
       Hooliganism did not spring to mind.


       8   .     A Police Officer came over to speak to a linesman
       on my side of the ground.      I should mention that I was
       sitting in the South Stand so that the Leppings Lane end was
       on my left.    The linesman carried on and did not stop or
       take any other action.    At   6   minutes past 3pm another
       policeman walked onto the pitch from behind the goal at the
       Leppings Lane end and then the referee Mr Ray Lewis,
       suspended play.
• it




       9.        After about 15-minutes I went to the Police
       Control Box with Graham Mackrell and Glen Kirton which is
       situated between the South Stand and the West Stand and
       affords a good view of the terraces in question looking
       directly along the goal-line from the corner of the stadium.
       Closed circuit television cameras placed at various places
       around the ground scan the terraces and areas just outside
       the grounds.




                                          -4-
                                               • S ip i 'i- 'o ’'®*
                                                                                  XL
10.         The Police in the Control Box were^under the
impression that a gate or gates had been forced.                      They told
me so and showed me a picture which purported to represent
this.   They said that the match would have to be abandoned
because there had been fatalities.     They did not know how
many.   The Police Commander was present in the Control Box
together with the Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson.
The Police Commander was Chief Superintendent David
Duckenfield.     We were told that when the gate had been
forced there had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters.


11.         About 10-minutes later I convened a meeting of the
three clubs concerned together with the referee and the
Police Commander in the main boardroom of the club.                     The
police at that stage were not ruling out a possibility that
the match would go on having moved slightly away from their
previous indication to me that it would have to be
abandoned.     In my view this was because they were probably
worried as to what would happen if the full extent of the
situation became known to the supporters still inside the
ground at that stage.     I imagine they also wanted time for
the emergency vehicles to have access to the ground.                     There
followed a long period of uncertainty with people from all
three clubs and the media milling around not knowing what to
do or what to say as it became apparent that the number of
fatalities and casualties were higher than previously
realised.



                               -5-
      12 •        1 requested the Police Commander to stay in close
      contact with the referee with regard to whether the match
      should continue or not,    I do not know whether they had any
      further contact.    My concern was to keep administrative
     control over what was obviously a very confusing and
     difficult situation.



     13 •         I am informed that the two team managers gave a
     tannoyed announcement over the ground's system but I did not
     hear this.    Also I did not see what was happening on the
1    pitch because I was behind the scenes dealing with the
     various parties.    At 3.45pm I went back to the directors box
     to check that my wife was OK.       I saw a lot of activity on
     the pitch but did not stay very long to survey the scene.


     14•       Mr Brian Clough, the Manager of Nottingham Forest
     sent out word that he wanted to take his players home and I
    went into the dressing-room to explain to him and to the
    players that although there was a less than 50:50 chance at
4 ) that stage of the match being resumed we ought not to say it
    was abandoned until the police said so.       This was at*4p£T    ^   K
    At about 4:2 5pm I understand that an announcement was made
    to the effect that the match had been abandoned.       I believe
    that the crowd were told that there had been a serious
    incident and that people were requested to keep their
    places.




                                   -6-
15.       I had been informed at that stage that there had
been about 50 deaths.     The media had been trying to get an
interview from me for some time and I spoke to BBC
television and radio and gave a short press conference to
the waiting reporters at about 4:40pm.


16.       I understand that throughout this period of
uncertainty the back-room staff, many of them who were young
boys and girls on the staff of Sheffield Wednesday, were
involved in supplying hot water and stretcher facilities.
In my view they gave a super-human performance.


17.       I did see I            I the Sheffield Wednesday
physiotherapist running up and down the pitch in the middle
tending to the injured.


18.       When the two teams had departed the Chairman of
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Mr McGee, was persuaded
to leave the ground by his relatives.


19.       Later that evening I was called to a meeting of
the remaining directors of Sheffield Wednesday together with
the Club Secretary, Mr Graham Mackrell.     I was also
interviewed subsequently extensively on TV and radio.     Later
on that evening I met Mr Colin Moynihan the Sports Minister
and Irving Patnick, M.P. who were touring the ground with
police officials.
20.          I have been asked to give my responses to   a
questionnaire provided to me by officers of the West
Midlands Police Force acting on behalf of the judicial
^nquiry.     I gave my answers to Chief Superintendent   Baker
and Superintendent Fancott at a meeting at the FA on 9 May
1989 at which the FA's solicitor was also present.       I should
in this statement deal with those matters raised in the
questionnaire which have not already been dealt with in my
statement.


21.          I did attend the same fixture last year.
Dealing with the events of this year:-


        i)   I did not witness any disorder or consumption
             of alcohol in the streets.


       ii)   I did not see any crowd build up or crushing
             at the Leppings Lane entrance       * oW* *
               v




      iii)   I did not view any of the turnstiles at any
             of the entrances to the grounds.


      iv)    I did not witness alcohol being brought into
             the ground or being consumed inside the grounds,


       v)    I did not witness any situation which I
             thought at the time was of a disorderly nature.



                                -8-
 As I have explained I did see the standing
 area in front of the west stand clearly.     I did
 not see any incident in that standing area which
 could have contributed to the disaster.


 I did not see anything which I believe was
 directly concerned with the breaking of a barrier
 in Pen 3.


I did not see any unusual crowd surge in either
Pen 3 or Pen 4.


I did not witness the death of any person.


I did not assist any of the deceased or injured.


I did not witness any act by supporters which
obstructed either the police, stewards or medical
persons. However I did see a supporter who
distracted the police.      A male person ran from the
Leppings Lane end to the Nottingham Forest
supporters stand at the Kop end and danced in
front of them.     After a little while he was
apprehended in the centre circleobut I ea-rmefe
r-eaemfcrer"liow—he wag-^pprefaondedk,
       xii)    With regard to the question relating to

               any comment I have about the actions of the police
               officers at the time of the disaster I would only
               make one comment of a general nature.      Immediately
               after the disaster everyone was looking to the
               police for direction.     I should say that I did not
               personally receive the reassurances I was looking
               for. No doubt this was because of the commitment
               of the police to the needs of the situation.      For
••




               instance I asked the senior police officer^ to           ^

               keep in touch with the referee but the referee and
               I seemed to be left "in the air" for quite a long

                                                                        X
              was-deve-lepineh.   However I should add that I have
              no experience of a similar situation and so have
              no yard stick to measure this comment by.


     xiii)    I was subjected tot'abuse on two occasions from
              supporters* who- werer-positioned’"in Llie stands I—




     xiv)     I did not witness anything that I considered
              to be a criminal act (apart perhaps from this
              abuse).




                                  -10-
      XV)   I have never been present at or had

            personal experience of any other football tragedy.
            The only significant thing I can think of
            different from last year's match was that last
            year I was stopped by the police aa-ay/way   J&o   the
            ground and my ticket was checked.    This year I was
            not checked,#**' This may nave been because I took a
            different route to the ground or that officers
            were stationed at different check points.




  Graham Kelly




(31127L)
