                      ARSENAL v LIVERPOOL

               LITTLEWOODS CUP - 3rd ROUND REPLAY

                  WEDNESDAY 9th NOVEMBER, 1988



INTRODUCTION

The meeting of two such prestigious Clubs is always a big
attraction and an additional 'edge' was added by Arsenal's
performance at Anfield in the earlier match.

GROUND CAPACITY

55.000

AVERAGE GATE

34.000

ATTENDANCE

54,029

LAYOUT
There are stands on the East and West sides - the former being
the Main stand. At the North end - generally known as the North
Bank - the terracing except for two small triangular areas at
the N.E. and N.W. corners is covered. During the close season
the South side has been re-modelled but work will not be
completed until March 1989. There are still six sections on this
side and more detail on the changes is set out later in the
Report under 'Improvements'.

FENCING

No modern style fencing is provided at this Stadium.

SEGREGATION

Visitors are allocated one or more sections on the South side.
Altogether satisfactory.

ACCESS
The Highbury ground is well served in this respect. Arsenal
Tube Station adjoins the South end whilst Finsbury Park has two
Tube Lines and one B.R. link and is readily accessible to the
Stadium. Other B.R. stations are relatively near.

TURNSTILES

All open and manned. They were adequate but no more than on this
occasion.
10.   STEWARDS

      Ample in number and easily identifiable. They were under much
      greater pressure at this match than normally and coped well.

11.   LIAISON

      Very good.

12.   POLICE CONTROL

      From the lower level of a two storied Portacabin - as a temporary
      arrangement   at the S.E. corner beyond the East stand.

13.   C.C.T.V.

      Operates from the upper level of the above building in rather
      difficult conditions. There are three cameras - one in colour
      which is located in the centre of the East stand and operated
      by police. Pictures are no more than reasonable from the latter
      and less so from the Black and White cameras.

14.   INTOXICATING LIQUOR

      Not available to those occupying the terraces.

15.   RACIAL

      I heard no racial chanting. (Arsenal had two coloured players in
      their team and Liverpool one). However there was a note in the
      programme about the continuance of racial taunts which - as the
      programme noted and on which I reported last season - has been
      referred to several times in the 87/88 Season. According to the
      latest note the Club intend to take action through the Courts if
      the necessary evidence can be obtained.

16.   My understanding is that the taunts are anti-semetic in the main
      and, of course, Arsenal have, and have long had, a strong
      following amongst the Jewish community.

17.   VISITORS

      Liverpool were thought to have brought about 6,000 supporters
      but no one could be really sure on the conditions that existed
      at Arsenal last evening just how many were visiting supporters
      or neutrals.

18.   IMPROVEMENTS AT HIGHBURY

      The South end   is being rebuilt though as related earlier the
      layout of the   terraces will be unchanged. The new building, from
      the front, is   in the shape of a very shallow 'W' and provides
      partial cover   to nearly all the terraces. Fronting on to the
      pitch are two   levels of Executive Boxes.

19.   At the rear the former gymnasium has been demolished and an
      extensive building of two storeys has been erected on columns.
      The new building will provide Restaurants, Offices, Sauna/
      Treatment Room etc., and the space underneath will enable more
      parking than formerly.

20.   GENERAL

      As expected this match aroused enormous interest. On my arrival
      at 6 p.m. there were about 3,000 persons queueing in Gillespie
      and Avenell roads which in itself was a surprise since supporters
      at Arsenal have the reputation for arriving late at evening matches.
21.   By 7.15 p.m. there were about 30,000 inside the Stadium with
      thousands outside. As a special courtesy I was allowed inside
      the Stadium Control office - part of the Box Office off the
      Main Hall - where the build up could be monitored on V.D.U.
      and where a Police officer is posted to liaise with the
      Assistant Secretary of the Club on information from Police
      Control on the conditions prevailing outside.

22.   By 7.30 p.m. it was obvious that if the match were to begin at
      the time scheduled i.e. 7.45 p.m. thousands would not have been
      admitted and it was felt, in all the circumstances, that the
      start should be delayed till 8.00 p.m. I agreed with this view.

23.   Part of the difficulty which appears at almost all grounds is
      that capacity attendances afct so rare that stewards are not
      sufficiently alive to the need to pack spectators on the
      terraces so that all the room available is used to the limit.

24.   However I would like to pay tribute to all concerned in the
      operation. Getting more than 54,000 people safely to a football
      match - many travelling in peak hours on transport facilities
      that are normally bulging at the seams - marshalling and
      controlling them and getting them away safely may not be
      'headline' stories in the Press, on Radio and T.V. but it is a
      sad reflection on our standards that such commendable exertions
      by those responsible are not worthy of a single mention from
      any quarter.

25.   It was estimated that as many as 6,000 failed to gain entry to
      the match. Getting rid of this number added to the problems and
      although there were some incidents reported I am informed none
      were of a serious nature.

26.   Some damage was caused to the front walls of a few houses in
      Gillespie Road not by malicious action but by sheer pressure of
      congestion at this point. The exact details had not been fully
      assessed by the end of the match.

27.   As would be expected the later kick-off plus 30 minutes extra
      time meant that the game did not end until 10.20 p.m. and
      traffic conditions were exceptionally bad, particularly for
      those pedestrians seeking to gainentrance to theunderground,
      until well after 11.00 p.m.

28.   The match itself was a hard fought affair - a typical Cup tie
      with enormous passion from the Arsenal supporters. Whilst there
      were some hard tackling no players were booked. A more fussy
      Referee might have added to the tension.

29.   RESULT

      ARSENAL   0                       LIVERPOOL

      10th November, 1988
