                                                        0           Gcfc. r e e f ^ c c,




    Telephone

                                                   PRIVATE & CONFIDENTIAL

    24 April 1989

    R H G Kelly Esq
    Chief Executive
    The Football Association
    16 Lancaster Gatf*
    LONDON
    W2 3LW


    Dear Mr Kelly


%   F A CUP SEMI-FINAL AT SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY ON THE 15 APRIL 1989


    I attended the above match and travelled from Leeds arriving in the vicinity
    of the ground at 1.45pm. I parked my car in a local Council Car Park and
    walked to the ground entering the ground through the Leppings Lane entrance.
    It was 2pm when I went through the main entrance and there was quite a lot of
    congestion, particularly near A and B Turnstiles where some 200 Liverpool
    supporters had congregated opposite the turnstiles. There were very few Policeman
    in attendance outside this part of the ground.

    At no time prior to "><? r<?»chi.no Turnstile H was I asked to produce my ticket,
    nor did I see any other person stopped. There were many Liverpool supporters
    without tickets approaching people to ask if they had any spare tickets.

    At 2.55pm I noticed that the crowd in the centre of the standing accommodation
    in the Leppings Lane enclosure were swaying backwards and forwards and it
    appeared that there were too many people in that section although there was
    plenty of space in the enclosures at each side.

    I noticed just after the start of the game that people were attempting to climb
    the fence in front of the centre enclosure of the Leppings Lane Stand and within
    a minute there were over 50 people behind the goalposts. A Policeman then ran
    on to the pitch and spoke to the Referee who stopped the game.

    My only other observation is that from then on there seemed complete confusion
    and it seemed strange that there were a number of Police requests over the
    Loud Speaker system for people to clear the pitch. It was quite obvious to me
    from where I was sitting that many people were seriously injured and there was
    no where for those on the pitch to go to.


    Yours sincerely




    A C‘TAYLOR
    Council Member
