                  INSPECTION VISIT TO NIMES FC, FRANCE


                              30 MAY,    1989




Inspection Party:  Glen Kirton (Football Association) Chris
Whalley (Football League) Richard Faulkner (Football Trust)
        (FLESA)             (AMA)



The party was met by a large delegation representing the club,
the Municipality of Nimes and Ets Gargini, inventors and
manufactureres of the automatic fence system, the inspection of
which was the purpose of the trip.

The following information was ascertained:

    1 The stadium had been built on a green-field site by the
municipality.   It belonged to the municipality.     The cost of the
enterprise had been some 170, 000, 000 FF (£16, 000, 000).  The
stadium was used for Rugby as well as Soccer.     There were, on the
site, four sport/exhibition halls.    The ground had been opened in
February of this year.

   2 Security at the ground was in the hands of the club and the
police but a representative of the municipality was at each game
and had the power to overrule the club in matters of public
safety.

   3 The accomodation consisted of two seated stands plus a
terrace behind each goal, capable of converting to bench seating.
The capacity, with standing, was 28, 000. With seating only,
22,000.

   4 The party was given a.demonstration of the automatic fence
system.  The system consists of a series of interlocking gates.
The first gate can be opened by the pressing of a button in a
control room.  The second gate then opens automatically, followed
by the third, and so on.  At Nimes, there are six separate
sections, all of which can be addressed separately.   Each section
opens totally in less than a minute.  In the case of electrical
failure, the system is opened just as swiftly by hand.


                                -   1-
   5 The total cost of the system at Nimes was 1,000,000 FF
(£95, 000).

   6 Ets Gargini were looking to find a partner in England to
help promote their product.  They would find a manufacturer in

England if the volume of demand warranted it.  An entire system
could, however, be transported to England inside two lorries.

   7 The fences have been tested to a load of 220 kilos per metre
(150 lbs per foot. )

   8 The shape, height and construction of the fences can be
changed as required.  FC Koln in Germany have purchased a system
made of plexiglass.  There has been no need in France to produce
fences of a lesser height than that seen at Nimes, because it is
not acceptable by French safety regulations for terracing to
finish below the level of the pitch.

The party attended a match on the ground in the evening between
Nimes and Brest.   This was a promotion play-off game in the
French Second Division.   The atmosphere was tense as the home
side needed to overcome a 3-0 deficit from the first leg.    There
was much foul play and violence on the field and considerable
disorder among the standing section of the Nimes supporters.
Towards the end of the game, the fencing in front of these fans
came open.  It was later claimed that this had been opened,
contrary to instructions and practice, by a security man who
wished to gain access to the terrace.   The system did have fixed
gates specifically for this purpose.   The fencing was quickly
closed and no-one gained access to the pitch.   At the end of the
match, one or two supporters subjected one of the fences to some
heavy kicking.   It did not give way.

A debriefing meeting was held by the party the following day and
these conclusions were drawn:

   1     The system was impressive in its context.   It would need to
be tested in English conditions to assess its practical worth in
England.   In particular, it would need to withstand the corrosive
effect of the damper English climate.   It would also have to
comply with English safety standards.   (For example, the test
load of 150 lbs per foot that the fence had withstood would have
to be increased to 400 lbs to meet the requirements of the Guide
to Safety at Sports Grounds. ) It was also felt that the
electrical system would have to be reversed in England to make
the system fail-safe.   In other words, the system would be
expected to open automatically if the electrical supply failed.
(NB The system at Nimes has its own back-up generator).



                                -   2-
   2 While the system apparently combined the dual requirements
of safety and security, its success still depended entirely on
human beings making the right decision as to when the gates
should be opened.  It was also vital for provision to be made in
the system for access by the police and stewards to the terraces.

   3 It was felt important that an experiment should be arranged
in England if possible.  The FA and the Football Trust would look
at the possibility of bearing some of the costs of the
experiment. As the installation of a pilot scheme would be of
considerable commercial value to Ets Gargini, they also should be
expected to bear much of the cost of such an experiment.

   4 The party would not be recommending the system to clubs at
the expense of others.  There was no intention to imply that
existing fencing was inadequate.  The purpose of the visit had
been to examine alternatives to existing systems for those
building new grounds, installing new fences or replacing existing
fencing. There was no intention to prejudge any findings that
Lord Justice Taylor might arrive at.




Glen Kirton
2 June 1989




                               -   3-
