                    ?A SUBMISSION TO TAYLOR ENQUIRY
DRAFT


1.   INTRODUCTION

     1.    1 Football is Britain's national winter sport.   It
attracts a wide ranger of people. It transcends barriers of
class, race, religion, politics, age, sex. It is close to the
heart of millions of people. It is little wonder, therefore,
that the people who go to football matches should also mirror
what is best and worst in our society.


    1.      2 It has become fashionable to point the finger at
football and somehow the game, or those who are responsible for
its administration for the behaviour of some of the millions of
people who attend games. That is akin to blaming the householder
for being burgled, to allocating guilt to the victim instead of
the mugger.   The Football Association unequivocally condemns the
conduct of the minority who have threatened the legitimate
enjoyment of a great game for the overwhelming majority.
Football is not to blame for hooliganism.   Football is, however,
saddled with the burden of coping with it. It has tackled the
problem - successfully, we contend - it is continuing to do so.


     1.    3 An observation that needs to be made at the outset is
that the problem is complex. It involves safety as well as
behavioural considerations.     It requires educational solutions
long-term, just as much as it needs effective short-term answers
in the area of crowd control. Football itself cannot alone
provide the necessary results. It has, however, taken on more
than its fair share of responsibility, in the realisation that it
cannot depend on help from elsewhere.     That is not to say that
such help has not been forthcoming.     Liaison between the clubs
and the police is excellent.     The Pools Promoters Association has
provided much needed finance - through The Football Trust and The
 ootball Grounds Improvement Trust - for safety work, other
Sround improvements and, significantly, close=circuit television,
 overnment has p-dHe&wall^d legislation covering safety, public
„rder and alcohol consumption.     The net result has been - despite
public and political perceptions to the contrary - a dramatic
reduction in serious incidents in grounds.


    I.     4   let the public perception is still of a game beset by
the twin problems of hooliganism and outdated facilities.
Football needs a dynamic approach towards regenerating its image.
The game enjoys a vast fund of goodwill.   Increasing numbers are
playing and watching the game. In the wake of Hillsborough,
football must capitalise on this base.   The Football Association
is the game's governing body. In the following pages, we outline
the lead that we shall be taking in fitting football for the
requirements of today and tomorrow.



2.   3EATING AND FACILITIES


    2.     I First, we aeed to get aore seats into our major grounds.
The First Division is 33% •seated, sxperienee at Iberdsen and
 become better places to visit.  Spectators can stand and watch in
 4afety, but the ratio of seats to standing accommodation must be
 altered so that there is a preponderance of seats.


     2.     2 Second, we need to improve our facilities at grounds.
 There is little incentive for the fan, particularly the
 travelling supporter, to forego the pub unless the ground can
 offer reasonably-priced, wholesome refreshment.  The Football
 Association can put resources into a drive for better amenities.


     2.     3 Action is needed therefore to allow our existing major
 stadia to become safer, more wholesome arenas. They enjoy
 permanent bases of support and ancillary activities and do not in
 general, need to consider moving or sharing. Many will, however,
 wish to become all-seater.

        2.      4 To supplement these existing stadia we need, however,
•vnew multi-purpose grounds, on green field sites, ready and
jFwilling to host major international tournaments, such as the
  F. I, F. A. World Cup, in which a number of grounds with 100%
  seating is essential.    This nucleus of all-seater stadia would
  also provide the pool from which The Football Association would
  draw the FA Cup Semi-Final venues.


      2.    5 There are many clubs that would welcome the opportunity
 of moving to areas that provide better communications, better
 parking, perhaps shared use of facilities.   Many spring to mind
 as candidates: The Bristol clubs, one of whom has no current
 home, Fulham and Brentford, Blackburn and Preston, Bolton and
 Bury, Rochdale and Oldham, Leeds and Bradford, Chester and
 Wrexham, Stoke City and Port Vale, Huddersfield Town and
 Halifax, Watford and Luton Town, Enfield and Barnet.


      2,     6 As a first phase, The Football Association will look
 fegain at the feasibility study carried out in 1983 based on a
 ground sharing proposal.   The brief: to provide a model
   ulti-purpose, two-club stadium, on a green field site.    The
  finance would not necessarily be out of the question, given
 willing partners from the areas of construction, property
 development, local authority and finance.   Public money might be
 made available to the consortium, both U, K. and E. E. C, to support
 this private invitiative.


     '2. 7 The Football Association will itself look creatively
 with new ways of raising revenue.   One of its most valuable
 properties is the FA Cup Competitions,   The Football Association
 has already set in motion a search for a sponsor who, uniquely,
 will provide, in addition to a basic sponsorship payment, a
 lump-sum loan of substantial proportions at low or -zero % to
 assist the above project and/or to provide clubs with a
 circulating fund for the purpose of seat installation.   The
 Football Association will propose to other bodies, such as The
 Football Trust, chat further capital sums be found to help swell
 this fund.
                      uois is a strong case for the governmsnt to
                      duotion in the pool batting tax from 42, 5%
to 40%.   This would release £16million per annum which the Pool
Promoters might be persuaded to allocate for ground improvements,
thereby platting the game in receipt of over £30 million per year
from, pools sources. There is no need to create a Football Levy
Board, as proposed by the Rothschild Commission in 19 77 when it
recommended a reduction of duty to 37%, because the Football
Trust/Football Grounds Improvement Trust already acts as a
suitable vehicle with proven track record.


    2.     9 ' There is also the need for ready access to expertise in
the area of modernisation and construction of football stadia.
The Football Association is investigating ways of providing a
consultancy service.


3.   MEMBERSHIP


     3.     1 The government is convinced that a national, compulsory,
^membership scheme is the prime need, together with a range of
other measures, in the quest for a solution to the hooligan
problem.   The football authorities believe such a scheme would
contribute nothing to the struggle against violence in society
but would threaten the very existence of a game that has so much
to offer to the community. In 1985, the Prime Minister asked us
to tell her what football was going to do about implementing a
 100% membership scheme. We said then that we believed such a
.scheme would be impractical, ineffective in terms of the same
total of anti-social behaviour it was required to stop and
disastrous for the football industry the scheme was presumably
intended to protect.    Since that time, the government has decided
to legislate a membership scheme into existence.    Football
remains opposed.   It has stated, however, that it has not
intention of opposing the law of the land and would wish to be
given control over the scheme, should it come into existence as
the will of Parliament.    The Football Association and The
Football League have appointed a highly respected Management
Ipnsultancy to advise on all aspects of the establishment of such
/scheme.    The Minister for Sport has stated that the government
   11 not wish to sanction the introduction of a scheme until such
cime as it is clear that the necessary technology exists to
ensure its successful implementations.    It has to be said that
the football authorities have not yet seen any such technology.
One of the principal concerns expressed by the football
authorities and many other individuals and organisations is that
the process of computer-reading membership cards might produce
delays at turnstiles with the concomitant problems of safety.
This concern must be deepened following Hillsborough.


     3.    2 The Football Association and The Football League have
also stated that they would wish to be given real powers to take
action on a discretionary basis against persons known to be
trouble-makers.   Given football' a stated opposition to the
principle of the scheme on the basis that it would alienate
genuine supporters and result in a drop in attendances, it is
.scarcely Likely that those responsible for running the scheme
■would arbitrarily exclude persons from membership.   Nevertheless,
cha government has not seen fit to accede to football's wishes.
The offences for which a person may be excluded from the scheme
irs limited to those considered ‘'football related".   The
  Association sees practically no difference .between the
  :}ircumstances that would apply after the legislation and the
  present system of exclusions.


      3,     3 The Football Association would not wish to give the
 impression from the foregoing that it is against the concept of
 membership per ss.   Quite the contrary.  We .recognise that it is
 in the interests both of the clubs and the supporters for a
 closer relationship to be developed between the parties.    Ths
 examples of clubs such as Barcelona and Real Madrid, each with
 some 100, 000 members, illustrated what can be achieved through a
 close identification of club with community.   Eventually, The
 Football Association would like to see clubs operating near 100%
 - but reciprocal - membership schemes that would, on a voluntary
 basis, make provision for the away fan and for the casual
 supporter.


       3.     4 The confrontation between supporters needs to be
’^eliminated.  This can be achieved not by embracing the National
^Membership Scheme, but by going down a different road whereby the
  away fan must belong to the away club's membership scheme.


       3.    5 These plans need the wholehearted backing of the police
 and the clubs.    The police, A. C. P. 0. , have already endorsed the
 “partial home, 100% away'1 membership scheme, although it will
 require rigorous policing in the early stages (and, incidentally,
 early filtering and exchange of information about travelling
 people) to prevent away non-members gaining access to home
 non-members areas.    It may be necessary to bolster the scheme by
 3 el active all-ticket matches for a short period.


     OTHER PRACTICAL CROWD-CONTROL CONSIDERATIONS


     4,     1 The Football Association will take the lead in
 Establishing a common policy on delaying kick-offs.   The safety
 and security of spectators should be the only criterion.


      i, 2 Fencing will continue to be required for the foreseeable
 future, given that there is insufficient space for moats.   The
 ideal pitch protection affords ready access to the playing area
 in cases of emergency,   The Football Association is inspecting
 che latest designs and will assist clubs in setting up common
 standards,


     4,     J There is a number of Lord, popplewell's important
 recommendations that have not yet been implemented.   For
 instance, the police should be given the unfettered right to
 search those entering football grounds.


        4         There is a simple   common law which works excellently in
 Scotland - breach of the peace -     which in practice covers any act
 likely to provoke disorder,    The   law there is flexible, but i:a
 3ngland and Wales ths Government     have not acted upon Popplewell' s
 ?.dmirabl e recommendations,
     5,     1 The Football Association has a. very active Medical
Joaimittae, concerned primarily with the safety and well-being of
.players.  This Committee will offer assistancs to the Home Office
in drawing up a schedule of minimum medical facilities which
should be incorporated in to the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds to rectify the glaring omission from the present code.


     SUPPORTER RELATIONS


    6.1   There is undoubtedly a need for better communication
with those who support our game.  The Football Association is
consulting organisations with relevant experience in the area of
customer relations.  The Association will establish an effective
system of consumer relations.


7,   MEASURES


!   7, 1 The Football Association is looking to invest resources
in strengthening its activities across the board.   It will
conduct a major, national survey, of the leisure needs of our
towns and cities.   There are plenty of people who still want to
play football.   The game is booming.  There are not as many
people interested in refereeing the game.   The Football
Association will put a substantial sum into a programme for
recruitment, training and incentives' for match officials.


    7. 2 The Football Association will take steps to ascertain
and meet the likely demand,


     7, 3 The organisation of women's football will benefit from
investment in coaches and facilities.   Schools and voluntary
organisations likewise.   The County Associations can be helped to
meet the demand for football by The Football Association's
"\nstigating a comprehensive programme of staff training and
Compute ri s at i on.


3.   CONCLUSION


     5,     1 Football can survive the present problems and emerge
healthy and vigorous.   The game's governing body intends to lead
our national sport into a future it can anticipate with pride and
confidence.
