                                                           \ iJ i'­
                                           ll   May 1989




 ?A/HILLSBOROUGH

1............. _ ifrom the Express Group of Newspapers Legal
 DepartmentT FSrtg about an article that appeared in the Sunday
 Express,   The article was entitled Enfield Cup Cash and
 dealt with how the semi-final and Wembley proceeds would be
 handed out.

 He had received a letter from lawyers acting for Liverpool
 football Club which complained of libel,

 He wanted to get the right information from the ?A„and he
     spoken to a secretary,   He confirmed it was' filer*
          secretary who had apparently answered various
 questions. He had not obtained her name.

  His associate editor of sports wanted to know whether it was
  right that the FA were going to give their third of the
  proceeds of the Cup Final to the disaster fund and Liverpool
  and Everton would be keeping the balance of two-thirds? The
  question was whether or not it was ever the intention of the
  7A to give all the proceeds of the Final to the Hillsborough
  Fund.    I said I had no idea why was he asking me the
  question? Apparently the secretary had said that Glen
fSSigM M W     not in and he should phone the lawyers,   I said I
  would have to get back to 31en Kirtotf and get all the________
  relevant information.    1 took his number as being

Engaged 15 minutes including dictation


Subsequently 1 spoke bo Glen Kirton and reiterated my phone
call with \                 S S m r said he would deal with it,
He said the difficulty was that the chairman had shifted his
position so many times since he made the statement that all
the money from the final would go to Hillsborough,      At the
moment the position was that the FA would not be profiting
out of it ia after expenses any money would go to
Hillsborough,  I said in view of the Inquiry that was
mtirely sensible!   I gave h i m             [number to phone
back.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
Subsequently attending Chief Superintendent B a k e r Ha
wanted an update.    I explained that va ware trying to comply
with the deadline to get ile'i ly's statements to him tomorrow,
I vas lass confident of getting the others done by tomorrow,
we confirmed we would be working over the weekend. We had
bean served Ttfith the Treasury Solicitor's evidence.

Engaged 10 minutes including dictation
