                                        BY HAND
                                        4 September 1989

Dear Adrian
Letter to Football League Clubs
Please find enclosed a first draft of the letter to be
sent to all League Clubs with the recommendations from
the Popplewell and Taylor Reports attached. I have not
attached extracts from the Green Guide and leave it to
your discretion as to which sections you want to
include.
I know John Dyson QC wishes to see the letter before it
is sent out, so if you return the amended version to me I
will forward it to him for comments.
Perhaps we could then arrange a meeting to finalise the
letter.
Yours sincerely




A Titcombe Esq
Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
London W2 3LW
Enc
       [ON FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION HEADED NOTEPAPER]


                                                    [Date]


Following the extensive investigation into crowd control
and safety at the Public Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Disaster, the Football Association consider that their
Memorandum on crowd management dated 18 November 1985 has
been superseded by the Interim Report produced by Lord
Justice Taylor.

The Football Association have therefore compiled in one
new document the recommendations from both the Taylor and
Popplewell reports (see attached) which, it believes,
will be a helpful guide to all football league clubs.
Also appended are extracts from the Home Office Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds (1986 Edition) (the Green
Guide). [Relevance of pages 342 and 343 of the Football
Association Handbook 1989/90?]

The recommendations take the form of guidelines.
However, the two inquiries were so far-reaching that the
recommendations represent, in the words of Lord Justice
Taylor, the minimum necessary to ensure that existing
football grounds can, for the present, be safely used.

Many clubs will already have implemented the
recommendations. Nevertheless, there has been
considerable press comment that even some of the
asterisked ones (to be carried out before the 1989/90
season starts) have not been implemented. This is a
matter of grave concern to all those involved in
football. Accordingly, these documents have been
assimilated in order to give you a convenient reference
point from which to ensure that safety issues get the
priority they deserve.

The Final Report has yet to be produced and the Football
Association may be writing to you further. One of the
issues Lord Justice Taylor has still to deal with is the
problem of ticket touts. The Football Association have
been [focussing on this issue] OR [advocating the
undesirability of ticket touts] for many years. The.
Football Association see the main problems associated
with ticket touts as:

        (i)   bona fide supporters without a ticket can
               only obtain one at an inflated rate;

       (ii)   a build up of non-ticket holders outside
              the grounds; and

      (iii)   rival supporters end up in the same area
              thus reducing the effect of segregation.

The Football Association appreciate all the difficulties
associated with the removal of ticket touts but we urge
clubs to do their utmost to minimise the number outside
grounds.
                                                        3




The Football Association should be interested to hear any
of your comments on or difficulties with the points made
in the enclosed documentation.



                                                   [EAN8]
                              CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOMMENDATIONS
  315. The recommendations which follow are the minimum necessary to ensure that existing football
grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard at Sheffield and other
information I have received. They complement the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out
after his inquiry at Bradford.
   316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.
Maxima* Capacities for Tem ctt
*     1. When a riewiag terrace is dividsd lata peas or areas which are salfrcsataiaad, ths Sality Certificate
    shaaidspsctfythsawrfaMai ■w h ir efspsctataw tile adadttadtsoachsachpsasfsrsa.
    A p e a ^ ana is to bsdeeaMdMsstf-coatalaed"Batwtthataadiag that it hasagatasr gates sflbidiag access ts
    aastfeer pea or ana aed whether sach gate or gates bsopea or shat
     2.     Each flgane far m b I— capsdty siwM Is assessed hi arraidaa n with Chapter l i r f t l s Grass
    Galds (“the Groea Gskls figaro”) sabjsct ts the feUowiagtaaHWratioaar


I   (a) fa arriTing at “the Greta Gskls Agars’’, proper aad reslistic allowaacs aunt be made for all factors
        which sboaidradscs the penaissibledeasityiaaccardaacs with ths range efauudnaaiflgares specified
        ia paragraphs 221 and 222 oftbs Grass GaMs;
    (b) after assessing “the Greea Gaids figars”, a dcdactioa of 15% shsald be made ts hapiefe tbs safety

★     3. Arraageswats shsald he leader-
    (a) ta llstit ths aaaber of spsctaisia eatcriag each seUksataiasd psa er area ta the anxtaaai capacity
        flgare assessed la accardaaca with Recoafead atiea 2 abate either electrsakally. ■srhaairslly, hy a
        ticfcetiaganraagoaiBl, by ceaatiag or otherwise, aad
    (b) to close offfbrther access to sach pea or ana whoa its aaudawa capacity is aboat to be reached.


Filling and Monitoring Terraces
★     4. There shsaM bs a writtea agrcemat betwesa the dab aad the polks settbg oat their respective
    responsibilities far ciswdssJsty sad caatiai sad iapaitkaiarfif tbs filttag of each ssifesataiasd pea or
    other terraced area aai the swaHsrtag of spectalses la each sach psa ee area teaieide«srerewdiag.Aay
    TsriatioaefthoigwiMiat la rispir tofaaiadhldaalsMrtchshoaldheaireodiawritiagiaadTaacs.

*     S. At each ■aU fc.thm shsaM hssa ths perfaaetertrsch, fee esdi self csatsiaed psa ee ether terraced
    tn a , a stew ard**tied* Is ■eateelag that ana) or apelks officer (if the peUce an ■oaiteriag it) whose
    sale daty is ta chock crawd naadMaw la that aiaa tm passible siw iewjisg m distreos thisoghaat the
    period the area Is i rraj li I by n ertaSees.Whaerer is saappiiaSsi ilsald bsia additioa to aay ether steward
    sr police pwseacsbHe shoald hats ready accses la ths pslfce sfBcer aathorieod sadsr BerssH naistiia »
    bekm, aad by radiate the ceatiei

Fences and Gate*
      «. All poHce officers aad stewarda with datiesiardadea la the terraced anas aad espsdally those with
    daties sadsr n ic sM ia iitiea 5 abets, shoald bs hlly briolsd aad tralasd with regaid ta the rscsgaltisaaf
    crowd deasities, ta ths recsgaitioa of slgas of distress sad Is crowd dyaaafca. Traiafag shsald iadads
    ikawastratioas at ths gn aad aad phstsgyapha, dealgaed ta eaahia stswaida aad officers ta wagaise
    diffcwat crowd doasities.
*     7. All gates ia radial or periawter (eaces sf peas or other scif-csataiaed areaa shoaM bs paiated ia a
    diffcnatceloarfiroaa the rest oftfcefeace aad aurkeduEaKrgcacy Exit”.


                                                      57
    *    8. Where there ar* perimeter fences, til gates ts tb« pitch shoald be kept folly opea dnriag tiM period
        whoa spectators a n m the terrace.
    *     9. There sboaid be ia respect ofeach gate ia a perimeter fence(or gn>epofgates ifthey are doee together)
        a police officer aathorised ta decide whether or not to allow spectators throegh a gate ta relieveovercrowding.
        The officer sa aathorised ia respect ofeach gate shoeid be MeatilM for each match aad kaowa ta be sa byall
        stewards and polke officers ia that vidnity. He shoaid be able ta make radio coatact with the coatrei room
        either himselfor via aa officer dose at hand.
*         10. SaitaWa aad saffideat catting eqaipamat shoald be provided by the dab at each groaad where there
        are periawter feacea ta perarit the imawdiata removal ef eaeagh feadag ta release Hambors ef spectatars if
        necessary. Agm awat shaald ha reached as ta whether the eqaipamat shoald he esed by pelta, the Ora
        brigade or stewarda. Whoever is tease it shoeid be traiaedte da so. Whethertease it shoeid beadedsiea ofa
        noadaated sealer peiice officer at the groaad.

C rash Barriers
*      11. All crash barriers shoald he visaaUy inspected iaunediatdy far sigaa ef carreeiea. Aay barrier ftaad
    ta be affected hy a sigaiflcaat degree of corm ioa shoald be repaired or replaced.
★          12. The layaat of barriers ia each pea or terraced area shoald be reviewed inuaediateiy ta easare that it
        complies with the criteria coatalaed ia Chapter 9 of the Greea Gaide. If It dees not, the assesaamat of the
        maxima* capacity flgare for that pea or termed area, ia accardaact with Kecaaoaeadadaa 2 abate, shaald
        reflect the fact.

Safety Certificates
      13. There sheaid be aa iauMdiate review of each Safety Certifkata by the respoasible lacal aathority,
   which shaald caasait the dab ia respect ef whkh the Certificate is iasaed. the polka, the fire service, the
   ambahuce serviceaad the baUdfag aatherity. Sach a reviewsheeldiadadeaaiaspectioa ofthe stadftaa. Its
   object shaald he la easara that the operative coaditieaa ef the Certificate are coa^liod with aad ta add er
   sabsdtata aay caadMea ihawa ta ha aecessary as a matter of argeacy followiag the flndlags aad
   recoma» adatiaae la this riport.
         14. Any local aatharfty withlawhaaeareathereexistsaspartsstadlaaidesigaatedBaderthel97S Act far
        whkh aa Safety Certificate has yet heea issaed shaald proceed forthwith la remedy the sitaadaa.
          1& Every Safety Cet«*flca*o abaald he reviewed hy the local aatharity at least oace aaaaaMy aad each
        Certificate shoald tagataetebsieiaewadaaaaeUp,

            14.     b i U M i a a e k t d a i l m h w Hs arraaaeamata fer isn ia a ameitorian. eaferdaK reviewiaa.
        ameadiag Mdla— afcag Safety r irtiflratoa Sach review sheaid reiaire that there exists er ia ptavidid aa
        accaaatsUaaAaW slnilae stractaee whereby tha hartisas of the local aatherity are regalariy aad
        i ffii liu lywg—hadh| laaiai iflfiew aad ili rtidm im >i»aaffirii1nnnirTr -r irtT~-‘-T-1           *----
           *** . a a I,       ..I. - a- -
        Wit* (M M K M M IIq il K IM

           17. lb assist the lacal aatherity ia exeidsiag its faactioaa, it shoald set ap aa Advisory Creep ceasisdag
        of apprapriata members of its owa stag, represeatadves of the police, of the fire aad ambalaace services, ef
        the baiidlag aatherity, ef the dab aad ef a recogaisod lappettera*dab. The Advisory Creep’s tenaa ef
        refereace sheald racompaaa aH aattin coariraad with crowd safety sad iheald h # i rrgilar visits te the
        groead aad atteadaace at amtchea. The Advisory Groeg sheaid have a chaframaftaai the local aathorit*
        aad aa effective procedare. Its resejatiaaa sheaid he recaided aad it sheaid he reqafced le predate regalar
        writtea reports fee eeasideradaa by the local aathoritfr

Duties ofeach Football Clab
★          18. Each tarastile sheald he iaagected aad its peteatlal rate ef flew measand» Thereafter regalar
        iaspecdeas shoald be made ta easare that each tarnstik remaias capable ef sdmittiag ipertaters at the rate
        aatidpated.
    ★     19. Tha canriadaaketaraea each vlewiag ana ia the stadlaa aad the tanstilesseiviat it sheald ke sach
        aa ta m a n that all ths spectators iateaded to he adaittad to tkat viewiag ana caa past throagh the
        tarastiles wftkia aaa hear. if tkat caaast ka Awe, tka capacity of tkat Hewing area shoaid ka redaced
        accerdiagly.
    ★     2ft. Tkaasdlaa sheald he daaed whea the penaitted capacity ef the ana served by thea la akeat to ke
        reached aad arraagwaewts skoald ka aade to easan fakk aad effective camanakadaa witk tarastile
        operators foe this parpooo.
          21.    Cfcsadd»calttelerislaBsfcaaldhesaiBstalladaetoeaakleqrswd deBsMcsoatsidetkogwaad,witkia
        taacaana anas sadia peas aad other staadlaganaa, to koaaaiten d bcfen aad throaghoat a aatch.
    ★     22. All sigapeetfat far ipectatan katk eataida aad iaafda tka paaad ikaald ka co«ipreheath*ly
        reviewed. It sboaid, ia reiattaa to tka uraaanw ats for tack match, ka aaaaUrfgaoas, eye-catchiag, simple
        aad dear aad ihoald ka disigaed to easan tka rapid awwawat of spectatan to their appropriate vkwiag
        ana.
    ★      23. Iafonsatieaoa tickets shoald be aaaaMgaoas, simple aad dear aad sboaid correlate absoiately with
        tka iafctaatlaa provided ia respect efeack aatck katk aatslda aad iaaMt tka traaad. Bataiaad ticket ttaka
        i kaald ceataia lafenaatiea accessary to gaidospectatawoacolaaidctkognand.
          24. Iaforautleaaa tickets ra^aeetiaispcctaton to keiapeaM aaky a partlcalartlaMikoaldkc reviewed
        by daks ia coajaactioa witk tka police to easare tkat it correspoads witk tka planned amaceawats for
™       adaittiac spectator* to tka groaad.
          25. Eack dak tkaald coasait witk a recognised importers’ dak as to tka provisioa of pre-match
        eateitaiaaMat aiaad at attractias apactaton to Ike groaad ia gaad daw.

    Police Planning
    ★     26. Tka Cllef CeastaUe ef eack peiice foite ia wkeaa ana tken is aae desigaated stadias ar more
        ■kaald noariaate a cklef officer to liaise witk tka a aaap aaat ef eack feetkall dak aad locaLaatharity
        coaceraedia respect of the safaty aad ceatrol of crowds.
    ★     27. Tka Opaiatlaaal Order far eack watch at a doslgaatod stadlaa aad the pit aistrh brkflat of all
        ofBcarsaatetytkanskaald alert sack offlcen to tka iatoartoacaefpnveatfag aay avercrawdbm aad, ifaay
        ia detected, ef takiagapprapriato stspa to n a idy H.
    ★     28. TheOperadaaal Older far each aalch atadsiigaatoditadlaaifcosldiaabls tka peBcetocepe witk
        aay ikreseeakle patttra ia tka arrival of spectators at a aatck aad ia their depaitara. It skaaM provide far
        wriHdsat reserves to laahliraplU ipleyaiatofofficontobo—ado at aaypelatiasidoor oatside thegnaad.
          29. The apdaa to peetpaas klfk i> sheald beta the dieendoa of the officer ta man n ed at the gnaad.

§         Crowdsafaty siiaiik ath a paraaaaai csasidmrtna la deddjag whether to exercise it.

           3C. There shsaM ke available ia tka paika coatral raaa tka resahs ef aU closed d ra ft televisiaa
        awailariageataih aad iaalde the yaaad aad the record ofaayelectnakerawchaaicalcoaatiag ofaaaikew
        at tarastiles or ofaaakin sdalin dtoaay area of the gnaad OfBceratathecoatnlrooa shaald ka skilled
        to the iBtcrpntatiea aad aeeaf these data

    Conumuakadoas
          31. T hen shaald be saflldeat operators ia the paticecaatroinoatoeaakleaU radio tnasadssiaas toko
        received, evahated aad aaswoed. Tha radla systea shoald ha sach as to ghe operators ia the coatral n o a
        prierity ever aad the capacity to override, others asiag the saae ckaaad. Addideaal ckaaads sbeaid be
        used, when accessary, to prsveat everaewdlag of tha airwaves. Coasideratioa shaald ha givea to
        Hiaad pranflag thr raatrel rnna a p iait nrrm iiT nrmrd nnhr
     32. Tfr ri f i w i t n t i i raanaaaIf rim , thaw ahaald haa caa^lataly aapatata ayrtaai af had Baaa
    with talapi— Mala kafwaaa tha coatrai m m lad toy paiatt at t i t paaai.
      33. WltMa tit coatral raaaa, thara ifcaaid W a pahite iddm a ayataai la conn—rirate with iadbidaal
    area* aatsida aad laaida tha paaad, with paapa aI a w ar with the whate p a a i Ta^anaat
    aaaaaacaattataahaaldkapftcadadkyalaadsitBalta catch tha attaatiaaaf tha aawddaapteahiphlavalaf
    noiai ia tha paaad. Thia airaapiaaat shaald ks praariaaady adratiaad m navy pnpaaaaa said tar sway
    OMWOB*
      34 Um iknM ka suds whara > m llli af ilhaaiaatad l iw rir in h a * to ( N a n tha o i * i
    C iaiHa id w iha M tii» li|tw ia (h iM tlT i» to i(le w rf» ila | l i cadaafhaadilp alalaiadfcataia
    thacaattatiaaaithasxIrtancaafcaftaiBaaMfpadaasaispdraBaatSb

Co-ordiaathHtofEawfseacy Servlets
*    35. Thapsttca>ifaasadaariialaacia aa»flcasahaald MaiataiBthisa| h iaala raaariaatad alltos»BHipla>
   Uaisaa csacacaiag cvawd aafrty at tack atadiaaa.
★     3d. Balm aach aatfch at a dasfenlad atadfaaa, tha paUea ih arii saaars that tha Ika aaivfea aad
    aaihalaaca «mfea aw gfoaa IMI datafla « h t tha m a t, iadadiag Ha waaa» its tfariaa I h i a a d a d
    apsctaMta tq ic m , thafcr Uhdy »aataa rf tatty aad aadt, aa* aay aaddpatad a pataadal HBaM hi
    cwafaialaB tha d a m i at aiawan at al tha o w t Sach datalls ahaald ha wadlly atailakla la tha caatrai
    roaaMaf aach aftha aaMvpacy aarvicaa*
*     37. Coatfapacy piaaafiwtha arrival at aachteitBatadttaftaaaftaM rpacyY chidtsftaB all thias
    sawteaa ahaald ha rariawad. Thty ahaald iachwli raataa al accaaa, n adaiwaaa palais, aad accaaaMHty
    wtthiathapsaad HaaMt
★     38. FaUcaofllcmpartad atthaaatraacaalathagraaad ikaaldkakrialM aalalka caaria p ary>taaa far
    the airhai af aawip acy u n rfcaa aad ihaaid ka lafcnaid whaa rach aarrfcaa aia called aa la whara iad why
    thayacaiapM h

Flirt Aid, Medical FacUWaa aad Amhalaaces
*     39. Thaaa ahaald ka at aaehatadfaai at aach aartchrtliaatiaatfaiaad flnt aMar p r l,088 ipiitatais.Tha
    elah i b d i ham tte mMaalfellltv flv aacaftaa aaeh attaadaaaa^
      48c Than ahaald ha at aach atadfaataaaaraaaa that aid vaam H a aaariwraf aach faaaa aad tha
    m aipaaattakaaalalalaadwitkiathaanhaaldkatpadfladkythalacalaathadtyaftaytakiaiirafcariaaal
    medical adtlca aad shaald ha aaadaai i iafcpwartafaay SadrtyCwtMlrala
*     41. Tha fla t ilaald iaglar aMidtralprarHiiiain afcepttaeaiataarhaMfrh aad wailaHatadaal with
    aay ani iral itip a ry atthapsaad. He iheaM ketiaiaed tad caaqjataatlaadwHcced ftratald. Heahcaldke
    pm aat attlioppplatlaaataa haaa kal awIrirh iff sad ifcaald n aiala aatMhalf aa haar aftafthaaadafths
    match. HiswfcawahaataahaaldkekaBwa la theeaia the pallet caatralreeai aad he ahealdketaMaiflaarty
    coatactakte^ ••-
*     42. At laaaEaaafcBy i p lppi i aaikalaara ftaaa tha apptspriaaa ■■ kalaana atharity ahaald ka ia
    attaadaaraataMaadihaa with aaaapectcdqawdef1808 araawau
      43k ThaaaaterafaadaiaacaatakalaattM daaealwaM felM awhafalaiaarcrawdaaiacxpactadshaaid
    bt specified ky tha lacal aathavky aAar caaaaKadaa with tha aaifcalaan am ka aad thaaU ka awda a
    itpiw ataataf tha flafcty Cwtlllrala
                    ' * /‘                        CHAPTER
                      rT
                                       Summary o f all Recommendations
 A Recommendations in the Intaiim Bepoct
    t. Evacuation procedural should be a matter o f police training and form part of the briefing by police
 officers before a football match. (Now see paregrephs 4J7 to 4J9)
  2. The local authority team responsible fo r issuing safety certificates in respect of designated grounds
shouldas heretofore, include police officers.
   3. Early attention should be given by the Home Office Directorate of Telecommunications to consider
 the practicality o f producing a more suitable personal radio fo r the police. (Norn see paragraphs 4J02 to

  4. The Green Guide should be amended to include in Paragraph 11 a provision that, whereverpracticable,

I
roads within a quarter o f a mile o f a sports ground should be kept entirely free o fparked vehicles. {Now see
Appemdbc E,paragraphE3S)-                                                       ■>           ~

# 5. Consideration should be given ta making it a criminal. offence in England and W oks to hate a smoke
bomb or similar thrice at sports grounds.                                         »•-* - ■
  6. Those managing sports gromtda not govermdby safety catificataa shouldgive seriemtcensideratioit, w itkr
the assistance o ffirm authorities, to tha presence in a ground o f suitable fire fighting equipment. (Nowsae
AppaadbtR, paragraph E33!fi            ‘           .       -t-s .. -oa jh.> :o(              A (s;.r. ■
                                                     . ■ ■ ".i’? :'.'I: (■.•"'•/'t    hi.-.'orU i.oi^
  7. Stewards at ail sports gromds should be trained in firefightings,                       .
  8rl>» designated grounde iiib M lfy a \tm m ^ thm&f&g
be provided. -                                                        ' «*■».   *<«3A f/sfl
  9. There should be urgent cunmdmtidh betm m tim Naehk ii               EiitW tve and thefin authorities and
local authorities as to him best to 1
  10. Stewards in all gnm dkithaM i net only bn trained, in*fire precautions.and Are fighting (see
Recommendation 7 above) bol should also be trained in how best to help the poBce in evacuation. {Now see
Appendbs E fperagraptttttfet*. ^ •* ■; >•** ■                 <
   11. Paragraph* k M * afi dm€Huk Qtdda shmiht b» amended to teeM "Altexit gate* should be manned
at all times h km ^m ^m m dm m i^pthe puhhe andbacapabk afbeing tpened tttumiMnniyfrom inside by

I
anyone in an «—^             j  j     | 4J3 emdAppendbt S, paragraph C7Q^
   12. The GreetJS B ff^ m M Se amended to contain a specific provision, in relation to stewards,
  (i) that th ^ tjp fP Q B y ^ il^ f^ W ra c te d to deal withany emergncy relatingtq fire <» evacuation
      \JWVabo
      (set vmm^mi t a g M d i i i o a i m
                                        l .aiuLlQk
 (ii) that they sh o n ith e ^ a ii wiHt— inslrir linns about thwaetio»ta bn tnfae^jncaacnof emergency;
(iii) that they shouttredahtlriK fic^instnK tkw and training jqjproprinirtff their responsibilfty;
(iv) that no one should be ianpioyedaa a steward unless they havn besase instructed and trained; and
 (v) that they slkwild B eadiiqn^^nunibert'physkaay'giJtnei^ri^ciiriB nW ^^eribhningtheir duties
      effectively deployed, efficthc^ supervised' ind'icmlBjr kluitiQSMMr(Nhura^k'jfengflpt^fi^4^29' an£

   13. Building o f new permanent stands o f combustible materials should be prohibited as a general rule. {Nam
see paragraph* 3M tefSM f
    14. Suitable and adequate exits shouldbe provided in all sports grotetds?
  15. No smoking should take place in combustible stands, that this should be a condition of entry to the
ground and that signs to this effect should be prominently displayed.

                                                      62
        16. Fire authorities should identify and visit ail spurts stadia in their areas and should prohibit or restrict
     the use of any stands which, in their view, constitute a. risk to spectators because of the inadequacy of the
     fire precautions.
       17. In order to ensure a complete record o f sports grounds a local registration system should be set up.
     (Now see paragraph 3J4 and Final Report Recommendation 3)

       18. Consideration should be given as how best to deal with temporary stands and marquees. (Now see
     paragraphs 3.94 to 3.96)
       19. The next edition o f the Green Guide should make it clear that it applies to ail sports grounds. (Now see
     Appendix E, paragraph E8)
        20. Urgent consideration should be given to introducing a membership system in England and Wales so as
     to exclude visiting fans. (Now amended. See paragraphs 4.107 to 4J28 and Final Report Recommendation
I    /5)
        !1. Closed circuit television should be introduced at Leaguefootball grounds in England and Wales and in
         Premier Division in Scotland. (Now see paragraphs 432 to 4.101). ■
       22. There should be a specific offence in England and Wales a f throwing a missile at sports grounds. (Now
     see paragraphi 4.45 to 4.47,4J4-4J5, 4J&-4.74 and Final Report Recommendation 12)
       23. Football clubs should review their arrangements for entry and the organisation of their turnstiles. (Now
     see Appendix E, paragraph» E19-20)
      24. Consideration should begiven to the design o f a standarth efficientperimeter fence, with proper exits.
    {Now see paragraphs 4.136 to 4.139 end aba Appendix E, paragraph E29)

    B ProvMo—1 lfrrn— iirirtfaw Sa tim Interim Repatt
        1 .1   am minded to recommend that in England and Wales the police should be given the unfettered right
    o f search before entry to football grounds by statute. (Now sat paragraphs 4J4 to 4JS and Final Report
    Recommendation 11)
                                          •
                                          v'    - •
           * am miwriwi to recommend tlwt Section 10 o f tha Fire Precautions Act 1971 should be amended with
            to giving the Fire Authoritypower in cases other than those which are regarded as wholly exceptional.
            amended. See paragraph 342 m 3M end Final Report RKMm mlmittn 7}

           .inked with (Bit above; I am            to recommend that consideration be given to introducing
           tion giving pemanfim AarFire Authority to apply to the High Courtfa r an injunction (or to the Corn
    o f Session for an internet he Scotland) under Section 10 o f the F in Precautions Act 1971. (Now emended.
    See paragraphs 3j62 tm-3M end Fined Report Recummindetiem 7)
      4 .1 am m ifuM to recommend that Section 10 o f tha Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 should be amended
    in like manner to Section 10 o f the Fire Precautions Act 197! (see Provisional Recommendations 2 and 3)
    and an application to the High Court for an injunction (or the Court of Session for an interdict in Scotland)
    should be an alternative remedy. (Now amended. See paragraph 3JSSand FinalReport Recommendation S)

      5 .1am minAft to recommend that the Secretary o f State should exercise his powers to designate all sports
    grounds, whatever their size, to include indoor as well as outdoor activities. (Now amended. See paragraphs
    3J3 to 3J9 and Final Repart Recommendations 3 and f)
       6 .1am minded to recommend immediate designation o fm y groundcapable o fholding over5,000spectators,
    to cover all sports grounds, not merelyfootball pounds. (Now amended. Sea paragraph 3J3 and Final Report
    Recommendation 2)
      7 .1 am minded to recommend that consideration should be given to providing the police with additional
    powers o farrest under the Public Order Act 1936. (Now see paragraph 4.76 and FinedReport Recommendation
    13)

                                                            63
          8 .1 rotritfN taM aooaunend that consideration should be given to creating a specific offence o f chanting
        obscene or raeU tgabm e as a sports pound. (Now see paragraphs 4.48 to 4J4, 4J6-4.74 Final Report


        C Rrconiwadstln— ia tfca Final Report
           1. The distinction made between sports grounds and sport stadia should be abolished. (Paragraph 3,14)
          2. Further designation under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 o f sports pounds and sports stadia
        with accommodation,for over 10,000 spectators where Association Football, Rugby League, Rugby Union and
        cricket is played in England; Wales and Scotland. (Paragraph 3J3)
          3. A ll sports pounds and sports stadia not already designated under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975
        and having a capacity in a stand o f over 500 spectators should be designated wider the Fire Precautions Act
        1971 as premises requiring a flie certificate. (Paragraph 3J4)
          4. One authority should be given the responsibilityfor securing structural safety at sports potmds and stadia
m       not designated under th e1975 Act. (Paragraph 3 J 2 f


    9      5. In England and Wales indoor sportsfacilities with accommodationfor over 500 spectators should require,
        afire certificate under the Fire Precautions Act 1971. (Paragraph 3J7 )
          6.     An urgent review o f ths existing legislation on indoor sports facilities in Scotland should be undertakeni
        and if they are not currently covered by fire regulations such facilitier should be designated under the Fire
        Precautions A ct 197h (Paragraph 3J9)
          ?. rrovisim sfm iki'b* modstin-the Fbe Pivui'nartwir Act 197I f or authorised officers o f a fire authority-to
        have power to issue d prohibition notice. (Paragraph'fM }'-
      8. Provision should be madefor authorised officers o fthe local authority to have power to issue a prohibition
    notice under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975. (Paragraph?3J& P rJ ,fV'                     ■ ■
       9. Them sh au ld teU ) anmmtrenewai-ofsafety certificateawsaaA undertheSafety of Sports Grounds-.
    Act 1975; (2) a duty on the local authority annually to inspect the premises prior to re-issuing tha certificat*
    and (3) powerfor the heat authority to revoke the certificate. (Paragraph 3 M )
              •v.s*ijPrj •;* • \i''•••», *>"*^ \ VK           *• ' *           •• *;    '•
       10~Th» Htpm H— » igftlIn fiw fiw w r skouldurgeutly amend the Building Regulations Guidance Codes.

I   in iilsiiim m iiim iw l flu in—siilkm ia nniir i f i h i
       I h In
                                                                           T ITT r
                                       Mtfironwd right o f the patke to search.those who are either ottering or

 I  rryiirii^<a-<»ii>pWM|M|J^l^pMiP^^lwsairfAar conferredbystatutei(Paragrap k ij t ) .
          12.      In EngjM B E p i^ ls^riwrtiiiriirtoi should be gjhetUm creating qnofftnca af disorderly conduct at a
    sports grou n d^ ggfg^ k 4L74Jh
          II Thr                           j ^ ^ f r r f a a To f the Publie Order Act 1936 should be widened-(Paragraph 4.76)
       i~4. T                          l         Sporting EventJt<(.Coapql <&Alcohol etc) Act 1985 should be
    reviewed in relation ta executim boxes. (Paragraph 4J1)
                                                                  fftw*
                                                             * 4 J2 8 t    \..a ‘           -VA     M\-.'jmVL..,-


                         '..-V* .'.v1 \ *•. *■.-u*.■.***'.


          «• '•                     ,     ■, * ii'**- * •
          .•'V.i*-iv>«       '. ■       -n >.»*•''     *
                   i

                                                                          64
