                    THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION


                     CHALLENGE CUP COMMITTEE



                       MINUTES OF A MEETING
              held at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2
                    on Monday 16th March, 1987



 Present:-    Messrs. L Smart (In the Chair), W T Annable, K W Bates,
              E A Brown, H E McGee, F A Millichip, A D McMullen,
              F J Peart, P Rushton and A L Smith.

              Messrs. A W Brett and L G Webb represented the Referees'
              Committee.

             Mr J F Wiseman represented the Match & Grounds Committee.

              Messrs. E A Croker, S R Clark, R A Paine and G Kirton.

             Apologies for absence were received from Messrs.
             W S G Needham, Dr. J O'Hara and S Seymour



56.   MINUTES The Minutes of the Meetings held on 2nd, 23rd and
        26th February 1987 were confirmed.


57.   RESULTS A report was received of the Sixth Round Proper
        results.


58.   REFEREES' MARKS A report was received of the marks awarded
        to Referees' in the Third, Fourth and Fifth Rounds Proper.


59.   SEMI-FINAL TIES - 11TH APRIL 1987


        a)   The Draw was made.(broadcast live at 12,30pm)

        b)   The Kick-Off times were confirmed.

        c)   The venues were selected as follows:-

              i) Coventry City v Leeds United at Sheffield Wednesday FC
                 with a possible replay also at Sheffield Wednesday FC
                 on Wednesday 15th April 1987, KO 7,45.

             ii) Watford v Tottenham Hotspur at Aston Villa FC with a
                 possible replay at Chelsea FC on Wednesday 15th April
                 1987, KO 7,45.

        d)   The Members of the Committee were appointed to attend
             the ties.
223
                                                              /V3/P ?


                   RULE 23 (a)(1st para)

                   Present Rule                       Proposed Rule

                   The proceeds of matches (except     The proceeds of matches
                   replayed matches in consequence     (except replayed matches in
                   of a breach of Rule) shall after    consequence of a breach of
                   paying thereout the travelling     Rule) shall after paying
                   expenses of the visiting Clubs,     thereout the travelling
                   the fees and expenses of the       expenses of the visiting
                   match officials, the ground and    Clubs, the fees and
                   other expenses of the match        expenses of the match
                   (gate attendants, advertising,     officials and other
                   printing, posting, police          expenses of the match (gate
                   charges, floodlighting, in         attendants, advertising,
                   accordance with Rule 13,           printing, posting, police
                   contribution to St. John's         charges, floodlighting, in
                   Ambulance Brigade and clearing     accordance with Rule 13,
                   the ground of snow and water       contribution to St. John's
                   provided the visiting Club is      Ambulance Brigade and
                   consulted beforehand on the        clearing the ground of snow
                   approximate cost) be divided as    and water provided the
                   follows:-                          visiting Club is consulted
                                                      beforehand on the
                                                      approximate cost) be
                                                      divided as follows:-

      67.   MINUTE 37 - 2ND FEBRUARY 1987


            a)   The Committee were informed that the Football League at
                 their Extraordinary General Meeting held on 29th January
                 1987 had in fact passed a resolution that for the three
                 Seasons ending 1989-90, no matches in the Littlewoods Cup
                 should be played on artificial surfaces other than those
                 presently installed.

            b)   A report was received that The Council meeting held on
                 10th March 1987 had confirmed Minute 37 (c) and it was
                 decided that the meeting to be held on 20th May 1987 should
                 agree the correct wording for Competition Rule 9 regarding
                 the decision to allow ties to be played only on natural
                 grass pitches.
