             th e   Nottinghamshire Football Association
 7 CLARENDON STREET NOTTINGHAM NG1 SHS TELEPHONE NOTTINGHAM 418954
                                                 2 KAY 1989
H.E.G.Kelly.Ssq., ?.C.1.S.
Chief Sxecutive
The Football Association
16 Lancaster Cate,
London.’.'.2.3. L.V'.

Dear Grahas,

                              F.A.Cut> S.Fi al Liverpool v Nottm.F.
                                        15.4.8Q
               I acknowledge your letter Ref           of 21 April about
which I apologised for the delay in replying thereto after the Staff S.C.
Meeting- on 27 April 1989*

               Ily journey to Sheffield took some 1-J* hrs leaving the K1 at
Junction 34 os advised by The Nottm.Evening Post some t'-'o or three days
previously. Whilst the journey from the Motorway took some 25 minutes it
was extremely well signposted and either a Traffic Warren or Policeman or
Vf.F.C. was stationed at each junction when it was necessary to make a left
or right turn. That I felt was well organised by The Police Authorities,and
indeed was almost identical to the last Semi-Final some 12 months previously.

               After leaving the reception area some 12 minutes prior to kick-off
I expressed surprise at the great numbers of supporters at the rear of the stsr.d
makin." there way to The Leppings Lane area,and felt at that time that the turn­
stiles would be under pressure to house them all within the area/s of the ground
prior to the advertised kic;:-off.

              I understand that The Notts.Forest Supporters were mainly in
their positions within the ground up to 30 minutes prior to the kick-off.Once
again advice vas given in the Press to corr-ence their journeys in good time to
alleviate problems later on.

              One Member of my Council who had tickets supplied by us did notice
that money vns being exchanged at a turnstile when casually glancing to his ri^r.
vhen proceeding towards his seat in ?he Kain Stand.Unfortunately he cannot ei?.b~
rate on details since whilst he felt that it should not occur he appeared to ce
somewhat puzzled that it wars apparently happening.

                    You may remember that together with The V-Chairman and
       [I   was clor.-e to you on the day, and having agreed with your verbal and
written     report presented to the Exec tive Committee on 18 Apr 1989 i h?.ve
nothin;;    to add except to state ho’..' very ploasod i w»s with your performances on
the day     f.r.c thereafter which v?ere conducted in an expert fashion.
                    Ki-fj regards,




                                      P ra td c a t! W.P. HAYWOOD
       Chairman: J . Crompton Vut-Chairman:J.J. Waterall and reprtstntaUvr on the F A . Council.
