                                         20 September1989




 FA/HILLSBOROUGH
I spoke to       Adrian Titcombe's secretary in his absence.
I would speajc ro Adrian tomorrow in connection with the
Popplew^ll point in the draft letter. However as far as the
draft letter was concerned itself I said I would.give her my
comments as promised to Adrian. In paragarph 2 I preferred
to say that the FA have therefore compiled a new document
entitled "Crowd Safety Information" in which we have
extracted the recommendations from the Taylor report (take
out the see attached) which we believe etc. The next line
should."also contained* our extracts from*etc.
I would insert a new sentence prior to the paragraph about
ticket touts reading "it may be that further recommendations
are made when the final report is published at the end of
the year/' That would lead into the bit about touting.
I did not think it was necessary to pass this past John
Dyson as we were merely restating and compiling in a
convenient form the recommendations in tikgreen guide and
Taylor interim report. I had not come to a view as to
whether we could safely disregard the residual provisions
which would still have effect from Popplewell and if we did
we- would need to slightly amend the letter. However the
appendices could be processed.
Engaged 20 minutes including dictation
 I spoke to      again and said that the only reference to
the Popplewell Report in the interim report of Taylor that
we could find was in chapter 4 - the recommendations.
Taylor expressly said that the interim recommendations
complemented the recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell
set out after his inquiry at Bradford. Therefore I thought
that the FA should not ignore the Popplewell Report entirely
in their letter. I agreed that putting in the
recommendations of Popplewell would be likely to confuse the
Football league clubs as matters had moved on quite a bit
since 1985. However I would say at the end of paragraph 2
of the draft letter that "the.recommendations take the form
of guidelines but representwrff'the words of Lord Justice
Taylor" the minimum necessary to ensure that existing
football grounds can for the present be safely used." and go
on to say "in addition they are meant to complement the
recommendations which Mr Justice Popplewell set out after
his inquiry at Bradford^         took those comments on board
and said she would pass them on to Adrian who I would speak
to in the morning.
Engaged 15 minutes including dictation
