                        NOTE FOR FRBSHFIELDS




Semi-Finals


      I first attended a Semi-Final in an official capacity for
The Football Association in 1972, when I was head of the
Competitions Department.  Since then, I have attended a
Semi-Final every year, except 1984, when I was out of the country
on other business.  In 1987, I attended both Semi-Finals.   On
several occasions, I have attended F. A. Cup Semi-Final replays.


       In 1973, Adrian Titcombe joined The Football Association
and took over the Competitions Department.     In the early 1980s,
Steve Clark became Head of the Department, directly responsible
to Adrian Titcombe.    Since 1973, it has been the usual practice
for Adrian Titcombeto go to one Semi-Final and for me to go to
the other.                     |my Press Assistant, goes to the
Semi-Final that I do not go to. During my time at The Football
Association, it has been the practice for the General Secretary
to go to one Semi-Final and for his Deputy to go to the other.
Since Dickie Bird's heart-attack in 1985, Adrian has aimed to go
to the Semi-Final that the General Secretary did not attend.     I
became F. A. Press Officer in 1977. I became Commercial Manager
in 1981.   Until 1977, my duties at the games consisted of:

      1.   Headle Spare tickets
      2.   Deal with V. I. P. arrangements
      3.   Be available to assist Club Secretary with any
           problems relating to game he might need to consult
           on.
      4.   Be available to assist General Secretary of F. A.,
           or his deputy.
      5.   Communicate with Referee on behalf of F.A.  Deliver
           match balls to him.


      Since 1977, I have also dealt with general media problems
and since 1981 with certain commercial considerations.  These
ofter include:


           Press

           Briefing photographers and tv about access to
           dressing rooms; issuing bibs to photographers if
           club unable to do so; handling press conference
           and media interviews after match.


     b.    Commercial

           Resolving differences between club commercial
           manager and photographers over obscured perimeter
           advertising boards.
        It is worth outlining the process by which the 1987 F. A.
Cup Semi-Pinal kick-offs were delayed. I was not involved in the
decision at Villa Park on Saturday 11th April.     I understand that
the decision was conveyed by the Police and that the managers of
both teams were advised.    As to the match at Hillsborough on
Sunday 12th April, I was standing in the tunnel, I believe some
15 minutes before the scheduled kick-off time, with Ted Croker,
when a Senior Police Officer asked if we could have a delay,
because of heavy traffic coming to the ground.    I believe he
requested half-an-hour.    I believe Mr. Croker agreed, then
advised the two clubs.    As a matter of courtesy, I informed
I. T. V. who were due to broadcast the entire match.   I am certain
that no P. A. official would, in any circumstances, refuse a
request for a delay from the police.




Glen Kirton.
24. 4. 89
