                    Hillsborough Disaster - Press Statement




        Following the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday,. The

Football League have sent their heartfelt condolences to the parties

involved, including the Leader of Liverpool City Council, and they have

asked all clubs playing this weekend to observe a minute's silence at

kick-off time in memory of those who died.




        In addition to agreeing to the postponement of mid-week matches

involving Liverpool and Everton, the League have, as a mark of respect to

the bereaved, also sanctioned the postponement of the Liverpool versus

Arsenal fixture which was due to be televised 'live' on Sunday.




        The League announced that they will have an early opportunity to

discuss the implications of the tragedy when clubs meet at Old Trafford

on Thursday morning.   In the meantime, every assistance will be given to

the judicial inquiry announced today by the Government.




Monday, 1 7 th April, I989
24/20306                                                17th April 1989.




Councillor Keva Coombs,
Leader of Liverpool City Council,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale Street,
LIVERPOOL


Dear Councillor C o o m b a r

      On behalf of all League football, I write to express our
feelings of shock and utter dismay at the horrific tragedy
which occurred at Hillsborough on Saturday.  Our deepest
sympathy is extended to the people of Merseyside for the
suffering they must be going through and heartfelt condolences
are sent to those who lost loved ones in this terrible
disaster.

      Liverpool has become football's premier city and we would
hope that this tradition and affinity with the national game
will help to unite the people of Merseyside and give them
the strength and fortitude to overcome this latest
heartbreaking setback.

      We will continue to pray for the families and friends of
those who died so tragically.


                                Yours sincerely,




                                   S ec r e t a r y .
5/5524                                              17th April, 1989

                                                                          '■wrf'i
C.N, Wilson, Esq., F.A.A.I.,
Secretary,
Tranmere Rovers F.C.,
Prenton Park,
Birkenhead,
L42 9PN.

Dear
     On behalf of the Management Committee I am writing to express sincere
condolences to your club and the people of Merseyside following the tragic
events last weekend.
      It will be fully understood if your club should not wish to play matches
in the immediate aftermath and in this respect perhaps you would let me know
if you wish to postpone your match versus Grimsby Town on Saturday.
                                 Yours sincerely,




                                   J.D. Dent,
                                  SECRETARY.
5 /5 5 2 3                                         17th April, 1989


J. Greenwood, Esq.,
Chief Executive/Secretary,
Everton F.C.,
Coodison Park,
Liverpool,
L4 4EL.

Dear
     On behalf of the Management Committee I am writing to express sincere
condolences to your club and the people of Merseyside following the tragic
events last weekend.
      Your wish not to play matches in the immediate aftermath is fully
appreciated and I confirm that your home match versus Derby County tomorrow
evening has been postponed.
     Please let me know your feelings on next Saturday's fixture at Tottenham
Hotspur.
                                Yours sincerely,




                                  J.D. Dent,
                                 SECRETARY.
5/5522                                               17th April, 1989



P.B. Robinson, Esq.,
Chief Executive/General Secretary,
Liverpool F.C.,
Anfield Road,
Anfield,
Liverpool,
L4 GTH.

Dear

      On behalf of the Management Committee I am writing to express sincere
condolences to everyone at Liveipool Football Club and its supporters following
the tragic events last weekend.
     Your wish not to play matches in the immediate aftermath is fully
appreciated and 1 confirm that your home matches versus West Ham United and
Arsenal have been postponed.
                                 Yours sincerely,




                                      J.D. Dent,
                                     SECRETARY-
