           COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER SUBMISSION TO TAYLOR INQUIRY

                           NOTES OP A MEETING
               held at 16 Lancaster Gate, London, W2 3LW,
           on Tuesday 6th June 1989, commencing at 10. 30 a. m.



PRESENT:     Committee

             Messrs-. I. Stott (in the Chair)*, B. W. Bright,
             R. G. Noades, G. Thompson and N. White.

             Messrs. R. H. G. Kelly (Secretary to Committee) and
             G. Kirton and Miss P. Smith.

             Mr.    C. Whalley (The Football League)

             Counsel

             Mr.    John Dyson,   QC

             Freshfields

             Mrs.    J. Rickards and Mr. R. Parker

(* Mr. Stott had been elected Chairman atthe meeting on 1/6/89,
but it had not been recorded in the Notes of that meeting. )

     Prior to the commencement of the meeting,         the following
documents were tabled:-

     Notes of the Meeting held on 1st June 1989;
     Report of Meeting with Marks & Spencer on 2nd June 1989;
     Report of Inspection visit to Nimes F. C. on 30th May 1989;
     Report of a meeting held at Manchester United F.C. on
       1st June to discuss minimum medical requirements at
       Football League Grounds;
     Report from J. Crawford regarding amendments to the
       Green Guide
     Memorandum concerning Walsall F. C.
     Letters from Coventry City F. C. and Watford F. C,

     Mr. Dyson then gave a brief outline on developments of the
Inquiry since the last meeting.  He advised that it was probable
that Messrs.  Kelly and Kirton would be required to give evidence
to the Inquiry during the week beginning 19th June 1989.   It was
noted that a letter had been sent to Lord Justice Taylor
requesting an extension to the deadline for submissions in
connection with Phase 2 of the Inquiry,  It was hoped that a
response would be received by Friday 9th June.
                                    2.

     Mr. Stott advised that he would wish to give a progress
report on the Committee's discussions at meetings of the
Management Committee and League Clubs, to be held on 8th and 9th
June respectively.   Mr. Dyson stressed that it was vital that the
submission put forward one view and that it was reasonably precise
if it was to be taken seriously.

     It was agreed that the Notes of the previous meeting would be
used as an ' agenda' for the meeting.

1.     Introduction

       Not yet available.

2.     Seating and Facilities

2. 1   It was agreed that where seating was referred to it meant
       covered seating.

2. 2   Seats used should be of an agreed specification and the
       design should be such that it could not be used as a weapon.

2. 3   Standing should not be totally eliminated and the reasons why
       should be stated in the submission, i. e. cost, better views,
       past experience had shown that some supporters would not wish
       to change their habits and may be lost to the game unless
       all-seater stadia were introduced gradually.

2. 4   The Green Guide should make clear the basic requirements
       regarding seats, depth of standing areas, access and egress
       to these areas.

2. 5   It was agreed it was necessary to promote increased areas
       in stadia to be converted to seats and the following should
       be the time-table: -

       First Division

       By beginning of Season 1992/3     50% of capacity seated
       By beginning of Season 1995/6     66% of capacity seated
       By beginning of Season 1998/9     75% of capacity seated

       Second Division

       By beginning of Season 1992/3     25% of capacity seated
       By beginning of Season 1995/6     33% of capacity seated
       By beginning of Season 1998/9     37.5% of capacity seated

       Third and Fourth Divisions

       By beginning of Season 1995/6 - 25% of capacity seated
       By beginning of Season 1998/9 - 33% of capacity seated
                                  3.

       The percentages quoted above refer to resultant
       capacities.

       Any Club qualifing for promotion would have to meet the
       criteria for that Division within three Seasons.

2. 6 It would be necessary to include in the submission an
      explanation as to why it was necessary to increase
      seating capacities over a period of time, the necessity
      for it to be grant aided and the percentage the Club would
     have to contribute to obtain grant aid.

2. 7 It was agreed that it would be appropriate to show the
      attendance figures, compared to arrests and Exclusion
      Orders.

2. 8   Mr. Kirton advised that it would be virtually impossible to
       get a worthwhile response from all Football League Clubs
       with regard to their experience on crowd control and whether
       it was improving in the time available.     Most Clubs would
       indicate that the situation was improving, but the Committee
       considered that the Government should be urged to impose
       much stronger punishments on those individuals who are
       intent on creating serious trouble, i. e. ' professional'
       troublemakers as opposed to those who become involved in
       an unplanned incident.

       It was agreed that the submission in this, connection should
       follow the approach in the original draft, but that
       reference should be made to the hard core element of
       trouble makers who are not football fans but attend specific
       matches to cause trouble and the hope that very heavy
       punishments would be imposed on this type of person.

2. 9   Mr. Noades referred to the possibility of legislation being
       passed to force coach operators to take football supporters
       direct to the ground, instead of leaving them at another
       venue, so that they could make their own way to the ground.
       Such a move would reduce the possibility of coach operators
       conveying people who were out to cause trouble.

2.10 With regard to the comments of Mr. Crawford, it was agreed
     that the submission should refer to the fact that it was
     necessary for Lord Justice Taylor to ask the appropriate
     Government Department, in consultation with the Football
     Authorities, to look again at the Green Guide with a view
     to making some of the advisory sections mandatory, giving
     examples and, secondly, to make the Green Guide more
     detailed but to still enable a discretionary decision to
     be made to take account of local variations.    The areas
     that might be mandatory are fencing, barriers between the
     accommodation and pitch, segregation, access and egress.
                                  4.

       It was noted that Mr. Crawford would be attending the next
       meeting of the Committee in the absence of Mr. Whalley.

Section 3 - Membership

3. 1   There was a lengthy discussion concerning the Membership
       Scheme during which Messrs. Noades and Stott outlined the
       Schemes which operated in their Clubs and how they
       differed from that proposed by the current Minister for
       Sport.

3. 2   Mr. Dyson stated that he believed that Lord Justice Taylor
       would be making some reference to ID Cards and would expect
       the joint FA/PL Committee to include in its submission any
       relevant points for or against.

3. 3   In view of the possible pressures that might be met by the
       Football League Clubs, if the submission accepted in
       principal some form of membership scheme, it was agreed that
       the Committee should re-state the reasons why the football
       authorities were opposed to the scheme, but also to state,
       if contrary to their wishes, Lord Justice Taylor believes
       that something along the lines of the Government's scheme
       is required, the Committee would wish him to consider an
       an alternative and then outline a scheme similar to that
       used by Messrs. Noades and Stott.

3. 4   It was agreed that the Members of the Committee should
       familiarise themselves with the paper prepared by Mr. Noades
       prior to the next meeting of the Committee.

3, 5   Included in the reasons why the football authorities were
       opposed to the Government's Membership Scheme could be: -

       Number of casual supporters that would be lost and quote
       statistics from the Peat Marwick report;

       Give a brief synopsis of the other Membership Schemes which
       are in operation and working well, including family
       enclosures;

       Refer to the Luton experiment, which is extremely unpopular
       and has no advocates outside Luton;

       It is still believed it would create safety problems;

       It would have a detrimental affect on income;

       It would not solve problems, but would create additional
       problems for administration, policing, residents.

       Some voluntary schemes were proving successful and showing
       an increase in attendance, whereas an enforced scheme would
       produce the opposite reaction.
                                  5.

Section 4 - Ticket Touts

4. 1    It should be stated that it is impossible to achieve proper
       segregation as long as ticket touts are permitted to
       operate.

4. 2   In the submission there should be a positive recommendation
       that the sale of tickets outside grounds by ticket touts
       should be illegal.

Section 5 - Pre-Match Entertainment

       There were no additional comments.

Section 6 - Policy on Kick-Off Times

6. 1   Reference was made to the practice introduced by the Police
       in the London area for one season, that matches on Bank
       Holidays should kick-off at 11. 30 a. m.  The London Clubs
       made a united approach to the Metropolitan Police after
       one season and it was agreed that the practice should be
       dropped apart from Boxing Day.    Among the reasons why it
       was not successful were: -

       Loss of business at local Public Houses;

       Fans travelling to the venue the night before;

       Fans staying on after the match and creating disturbances;

       Considerable increase in number of overnight stays for Clubs
       with resultant expense;

       Lower attendances.

6. 2   Mr. White made the point that it would take a Club like
       Liverpool 90 minutes to fill the ground.

Section 7 - Fences

7.1    It was agreed that in the appropriate document, possibly the
       Green Guide, it should be stated that the decision on whether
       fencing was required or not should be made at local level,
       but that if it was required it must meet an agreed national
       specification.

Section 8 - Supporter Relations

       No additional comments.
                                   6.

Section 9 - Medical Provision

9. 1   It was agreed that some of the points made in the report of
       the meeting held at Manchester United F. C. on 1st June should
       be amplified and included in the Committee's Submission.

Section 10 - Stewards

10. 1 It was agreed to recommend greter use of ' away'   stewards for
      high profile/risk matQhes.


Additional points    made by Committee

1.     The value of CCTV covering the area outside turnstiles.
       It was apparent that whilst some Clubs had this facility
       it was not available at all grounds.

2.     PA systems to be wired in order to address crowds   outside
        grounds.

3.     Various points were made regarding Semi-Finals, i. e, whether
        they should be played home and away, whether they should be
        televised live, whether they should only be staged at venues
        used to large crowds.   It was agreed it would not be
        necessary to make reference to these points in the Submission
        but Mr. Kelly advised that the various factors involved in
        staging Semi-Finals would be considered in detail well in
        advance of next season's Semi-Finals.

Next Meeting

     It was agreed that the next meeting would be held on Friday,
16th June, at 10.30 a.m. at The Football Association and, in the
meantime, Mr. Kirton would prepare a further draft of the
Submission and supporting papers for consideration by the
Committee.


       The Meeting closed at 4.45 p.m.




PFS/121
8th June 1989
