tJ^SL \°(g\




        FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND FOOTBALL LEAGUE SUBMISSION
               TO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY
                      PHASE 2 - WIDER ISSUES




1.   INTRODUCTION


1. 1.  Football is the world's most popular team sport, being
played in practically every country.   There are 166 national
football associations in membership of the Federation
Internationale de Football Association (FIFA), the game's world
governing body.   There are four separate national football
associations in Great Britain - in England, Wales, Scotland and
Northern Ireland.   In England, the association is named “The
Football Association." (The FA).

1. 2.  The professional game in England attracts millions of
supporters from all walks of life.    The total attendance at
matches involving Football League clubs in season 1987-88 was
in excess of 20, 000, 000.  Attendances in 1988-89 show an
increase of some 2.5%, or an additional half-million
attendances, which represents the third consecutive seasonal
increase in attendances.    Attendance figures are appended.
(Annex A - Source:    Digest of Football Statistics, 1988)



2.    THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE


2. 1. The FA is the governing body of the game of Association
Football in England.  It is responsible for the promotion,
development, regulation and control of the game within its
territory.  Among its activities are the running of the England
international teams and the organisation of a national
knock-out competition for senior clubs, called The FA Challenge
Cup Competition (The FA Cup).




                                 1
2.2.  The FA is also responsible for the sanctioning, either
directly or indirectly through its constituent County Football
Associations, of more than 2,000 leagues and competitions.   The
best known of these leagues is The Football League.  The
Football League is an organisation consisting of 92
professional football clubs, who compete in four separate
divisions, with promotion and relegation between the divisions.
Three of the clubs competing in The Football League are
affiliated to The Football Association of Wales and not to the
FA.  These three Welsh clubs, together with eleven others from
the Principality, also compete in the FA Cup.

2. 3. The FA is governed by a Council, made up of nominees and
elected representatives of various bodies involved in the game,
including those clubs in full membership of The FA and County
Football Associations.  The Football League is managed by a
Committee, consisting of four representatives elected by the
clubs in the First Division, three elected by the Second
Division and one elected by the clubs of the Third and Fourth
Divisions (The Management Committee).  The Management Committee
in its entirety also sits on The FA Council and its members sit
on the various FA Committees.

2. 4.   The only specific powers that The FA can exercise in
relation to crowd control are contained in Rules 24 and 2 6 of
The Association.   Rule 2 4 (i) of the Rules of The Association
provides that every Association and Club shall be responsible
for ensuring:

         " (a) that its directors, players, officials, employees,
spectators and all persons purporting to be its supporters or
followers conduct themselves in an orderly fashion and refrain
from violent, threatening, abusive, obscene or provocative
behaviour, conduct or language whilst attending at a match in
which it is involved, whether on its own ground or elsewhere;

          (b) that no spectator or unauthorised persons are
permitted to encroach on to the pitch area or to throw
missiles, bottles or other potentially harmful or dangerous
objects at or onto the pitch..."

Rule 2 4 (ii) provides that any Association or Club which fails
effectively to discharge its said responsibility in any respect
whatsoever shall be guilty of "misconduct and liable to be




                               -2-
dealt with therefor, save that it shall be a defence if it can
show that all events, incidents or occurrences complained of
were the result of circumstances over which it had no control
and that its responsible officers or agents had used all due
diligence to ensure that its said responsibility was
discharged."

Rule 26(a) contains a definition of misconduct.

2.5.  From time to time, The FA issues to Football League Clubs
a Memorandum on Crowd Management.   The current Memorandum was
issued on 18th November, 1985.   (Annex B) The emphasis in
this document is on measures designed to control the supporters
and prevent disorder.  This is consistent with the powers
contained in Rules 24 and 2 6. Of course, both The PA and The
Football League are concerned to ensure that crowd safety
standards are the highest reasonably practicable.   It is felt,
however, that neither of these authorities should be charged
with the responsibility of setting detailed safety standards or
enforcing them. (See further paragraph 3, below. )

2. 6. Let us cite two examples of cases of crowd disturbance
that came to the attention of the FA.   The decisions that were
reached by the Commissions set up. to examine these incidents
illustrate that the FA is.obliged by its rules to deal
differently with, on the one hand, cases that do not involve
misconduct by spectators and, on the other hand, cases where
spectators are adjudged to have committed misconduct.

      (i)   On 28th May 1988, Chelsea played Middlesbrough in the
"Play Off" Competition for a place in the Barclays League First
Di vision.

    As a result of the encroachment of large numbers of
spectators on to the playing area at the end of the match and
the throwing of various missiles, both Chelsea F. C. and
Middlesbrough F. C. were charged under F. A. Rule 24 (i).

    The commission decided:

    "a) Middlesbrough F. C.

        The Members were satisfied that the Middlesbrough F. C.
        was not guilty of a breach of F. A. Rule 24 (i) (a)
        and (b ).




                              -3-
              Chelsea F. C.

              The Members were not satisfied that the Chelsea F.C.
              had effectively discharged its responsibilities in
              respect of the control of spectators on the occasion
              of the match and, this being so, the Club was guilty of
              a breach of F. A. Rule 24 (i) (a) and (b).

     Therefore,

          i.    the standing areas at Stamford Bridge must be
                 closed for the first 6 Barclays League/Littlewoods
                 Cup matches in Season 1988/89

      ii.       entry into the seated accommodation in the Stadium
                 to be by ticket only, with no tickets to be sold on
                 the day of the match

     HI-        no tickets must be allocated to visiting clubs for
                 the matches concerned

      iv.       the Chelsea F. C. be fined the sum of £75, 000 and,
                 having requested a Personal Hearing, the Club be
                 ordered to pay the adjusted costs of the Commission.

It was recommended by the Members of the Commission: -

     1.        that closer liaison between the Local Authority,   the
               Police Authority and the Club be pursued at the
               earliest opportunity, and,

     2.        that the Club inserts suitable Warning Notices in the
               first 6 editions of the official club programme in the
               new Season reminding spectators of the need for
               responsible behaviour at all matches. "


   (ii)     On the 26th March, 1988, York City      played Sunderland in
the Barclays League.   Supporters climbed over      the perimeter
fencing and play was held up.   The matter was      reported to The
FA Disciplinary Committee.   It was decided as      follows:
          \




                                    -4-
    "As far as the ... incident is concerned, it would appear
that this was caused by serious congestion in one of the areas
allocated to the Sunderland supporters but that the spectators
who climbed over the fencing onto the perimeter of the pitch
did so only to escape the crush and were not intent on
interfering with play.

    "No disciplinary action will be taken against either of the
clubs as far as Football Association Rule 24 is concerned, but
the Members are concerned at the breakdown of control and the
resultant inadequacy of the monitoring of visiting supporters
into the Ground.  The Members recommend that more attention be
given to pre-match planning and to the smooth entry of
spectators into the Ground on the occasion of future matches
played at Bootham Crescent. n

These incidents well illustrate the role assumed by The PA in
relation to crowd control problems.    If the incident is
caused by disorder then    (subject to the defence contained in
Rule 2 4 (ii)) the club or clubs would have been liable to be
punished for misconduct.    If the incident is caused by a
failure of crowd control not resulting from disorder, then it
is not a case of club misconduct.    The FA does, however,
express its concern in such cases and make such recommendations
to clubs as it feels able to make.

2. '7. The Football league Regulations stipulate th&t all clubs
shall implement certain crowd control measures as laid down in
the Regulations.   Failure to carry out the measures renders the
club liable to a fine or other penalty as the Management
Committee shall think fit.   The measures currently included in
the Regulations a.re as follows:

        1. All clubs shall submit a copy of their Safety
Certificate together with their plans for crowd control (local
plans) to the League office before the start of each season.

        2. All clubs shall have a closed circuit television
surveillance system approved by the Management Committee.

        3.  No club shall charge higher admission prices for
visiting supporters for comparable accommodation to that used
by the home club.  This requirement does not appertain to
special local arrangements for members, family enclosures,
senior citizens and children.
3.   CROWD CONTROL!   DISORDER AND CROWD SAFETY


3. 1 For a valuable summary of the respective responsibilities
of police and club, see The Popplewell Reports, especially
paragraphs 3. 4 to 3. 8 (Interim) and 4. 13 to 4. 19 (Final). To
some extent, the classification of crowd control functions into
(i) public order (police) and (ii) safety (club and local
authority) is artificial: if there is disorder, the safety of
the crowd may be threatened.    Hence the need for co-operation
between club, police and local authority.     In this Submission,
recommendations are made for a number of specific changes
which it is believed will reduce the dangers of disorder and
improve crowd safety.    Before these are discussed, however, it
is necessary to provide some data as to the extent and trend of
the problem of hooliganism.


4.   TREND AND EXTENT OF THE PROBLEM OF HOOLIGANISM IN FOOTBALL


4, 1.   It has become fashionable to point the finger at football
and to blame the game, or those who are responsible for its
administration, for the behaviour of the tiny minority of those
■attending matches who create trouble out of all proportion to
their numbers.    Government figures show that, in season
 1987-88, 6147 people were arrested in connection with matches
involving Football League clubs.    According to the information
the football authorities have to hand, only about a third of
these were arrested inside grounds.    The courts are entitled to
make exclusion orders under section 30 of the Public Order Act,
 1986, against persons guilty of offences connected with
football within the meaning of section 31.    In the period
August 1987 to May 1989, only 1,760 such orders were issued.
The arrest figures mean that only three arrests were made in
season 1987-88 for every 10,000 people attending a football
game.

4. 2.  The problem of hooliganism is, however, complex.  There
are no easy answers.   There are considerations of safety as
well as of behaviour.   We need to find long-term educational
solutions as well as adopting immediate, effective crowd
control measures.




                                -6-
4. 3.  Every Football League club is required to lodge with The
League a "local plan", detailing the measures it takes in
ensuring the orderly conduct of matches at its ground.
Appended, {Annex C), as an example, is the local plan for
Sheffield Wednesday.    Before every game in the Barclays League,
FA Cup or one of the other senior competitions, the police from
the areas of both competing clubs (and from the area of the
staging club if the game is to be played on .a neutral ground),
the clubs themselves and the transport authorities decide the
arrangements that will apply.    The police decide the number of
officers that will be deployed both inside and outside the
ground.   The clubs pay an agreed fee for the police services
within the stadium.   The clubs accept the decision of the
police on the number of officers who should be deployed for
each game.   In 1987-88, the total police charges paid by
Football League clubs for the policing of League games was
£3,355, 000 - an average charge per match of £1, 650.  A club
such as Liverpool could expect to pay anything between £8,000
and £10,000 per match.    This burden is lightened somewhat by
the payment by The Football Trust of 35% of the charges,
excluding VAT.   The balance borne by clubs represented 4. 2% of
gate and season-ticket receipts.    An explanation of the role of
The Football Trust appears below,    (Paragraph 5. 24)

4. 4.  The single most effective contribution to the fight
against hooliganism in the last decade has been close-circuit
television.   It was a recommendation of the Popplewell Report
(Final) that followed the fire at Bradford City Football Club,
that such systems be introduced at Football League grounds in
England and Wales (paragraphs 4.92 to 4.101).   The process had
already begun prior to Popplewell.   It has now been completed.
The large majority of Football League clubs have permanent
systems.   Those that do not have access to a mobile one.

4. 5.  All Football League grounds and Wembley Stadium are
"designated" under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.
This legislation was introduced following the Ibrox disaster in
1971.   The FA and The Football League co-operated to the full
with the Inquiry of Lord Wheatley following that disaster.
They concurred with the introduction of standard safety
procedures.   They welcomed the extension of the designation of
clubs to those in the Third and Fourth Divisions after the
Bradford fire.




                               -7-
4. 6.  The installation of close-circuit television and the
ground alterations made necessary by the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act have, of course, absorbed significant amounts of
money.   From 1978, much of this expenditure has been met by The
Football Trust and by The Football Grounds Improvement Trust.
£2,775, 000 has been spent on the installation of close-circuit
television crowd surveillance systems.   £27,000,000 has been
allocated for safety and improvement work on English Football
League grounds to which must be added a figure at least equal
to this amount expended by the clubs themselves, bringing the
total spend to more than £50,000,000 in the last ten years.

4. 7.  The net result has been a dramatic decrease in the
number of incidents within grounds reported to The Football
Association by referees, by its own officials or by the police
as the table below shows.   Referees are obliged by FA Rule 25
to report any misconduct that comes to their attention.   The
figures cited will, therefore, contain some cases that might be
considered relatively minor.


      table 1   Cases of misconduct involving Football
                League clubs reported to The FA


                1981-82             42
                1982-83             42
                1983-84             41
                1984-85             41
                1985-86             20
                1986-87             19
                1987-88             19
                1988-89              9


                (Total matches approx 2,300 per season)

4. 8.  These figures are entirely consistent with the almost
universal view of the clubs that there has been a marked
decline in football hooliganism over the last four seasons.
The view of most club secretaries is that this encouraging
trend is the result of the growing sophistication of clubs and
police in coping with the problems of crowd control within




                              -8-
stadia.   The segregation of rival supporters has played a vital
role in this, as has the selective use of barriers to pitch
invasion.   We believe that evidence from the police authorities
will substantiate our view as to the trend and the reasons for
it.   It is true that there has been a slight upward move in
arrest figures.   (See Annex D - Source: Digest of Football
Statistics) In our view, this can be ascribed to

      a) the effectiveness of close-circuit television
         systems within and in the area of grounds,

      b) police response to the encouragement of clubs to
         effect more arrests,

      c) the creation of new offences under recent legislation.

4. 9.  Yet the public perception is still of a game beset by
the twin problems of hooliganism and outdated facilities.    As
the attendance figures cited in Annex A indicate, the game
enjoys a vast and growing support.   Increasing numbers are also
playing the game.   The figures overleaf indicate the steady
rise in participation since the Second World War.

        table 2   Number of clubs in England registered
                  with The Football Association


                  1948           17, 890
                  1961           22,680
                  1972           36, 904
                  1975           37, 641
                  1980           39, 730
                  1985           41, 173


NB The dramatic rise between 1961 and 1972 is partly accounted
for by the legiti.misation of Sunday Football in 1960 and by the
upsurge of interest following England's World Cup victory in
1966.

4. 10. Following Hillsborough, The FA and The Football League
perceive their task as being to reconstruct general public
confidence in the game on the foundations already provided.   In




                               -9-
the following pages, we discuss the lead that we shall be
taking and the recommendations that we have to make in order to
reduce yet further football hooliganism and to improve crowd
safety.



5.   SEATING


5. 1. It has been suggested in some quarters that the
conversion of stadia capacity to all-seating will automatically
solve all problems of crowd safety and. hooliganism.  Below, we
examine the experiences of several clubs that have gone either
to all-seater, or who have more seating than standing.

5. 2.   There arethree clubs in Scotland, with all-seater
stadia.    The first is Aberdeen. Aberdeen FC converted their
Pittodrie Stadium to all-seater as long ago as 1978.   The
capacity is a respectable 23,000 and, while the club does not
enjoy the massive support of its Glasgow rivals, it still
achieves a healthy average of around the 14,000 mark.   More
significantly, perhaps, the statistics for arrests in
connection with Aberdeen's home matches are remarkably low, as
the table overleaf illustrates.

           table   3   Comparative arrest statistics
                       at Aberdeen matches (per season)


                       1983-84          36
                       1984-85          25
                       1985-86          36
                       1986-87          30
                       1987-88          34
                       1988-89          16



5. 3.  The second is St Johnstone, a club situated in the town
of Perth.   They have the first purpose built stadium in
Scotland' . The new ground is all-seater, with a capacity of
10,000, adjacent to a Motorway.   The Scottish police believe




                                 -10-
there is a significant improvement in behaviour since the club
moved to the new stadium.

5. 4. This is to be contrasted with the third all-seater ground
in Scotland at Clydebank FC.   This is unofficially described by
one Scottish police officer as "an old stadium, revamped by the
addition of bench-type seating. " He goes on to say that the
fans simply stand on the benches anyway.

5. 5. One of the biggest clubs in Scotland, Glasgow Rangers,
converted its Ibrox Park Stadium, between 1978 and 1981, from a
65.000 capacity, of which 20,000 were seats, to 44, 000, of
which 35,000 were seated.  At more or less the same time, the
Criminal Justice Act was introduced in Scotland.   These
factors, together with the success that coincided with the
arrival of new manager Graeme Souness in 1985, have led to a
dramatic increase in average attendances, as the table overleaf
indicates. (See paragraph 5. 26, below). The club has some
20.000 season-ticket holders, all of them seated.   The standing
accommodation consists of two paddocks, in front of the Main
Stand seating and separated by the players' tunnel.   No
standing accommodation is provided for visiting supporters,
except in the case of Rangers v Celtic matches.

            table 4 Comparative average attendances
                    at Glasgow Rangers matches


                    1980-81          19, 000
                    1981-82          17, 000
                    1982-83          18, 000
                    1983-84          22,000
                    1984-85          2 1, 000
                    1985-86          25, 000
                    1986-87          37,000
                    1987-88          38, 000
                    1988-89          39, 000


The Strathclyde police report that most of the arrests made at
the ground nowadays are in the standing sections.  It is
difficult to assess whether the trend in total arrests is up or
down, as the police and the relevant Government bodies seem




                              -11-
reluctant to divulge comparative statistics.  In 1987-88
season, 407 people were arrested in connection with matches at
Rangers.  There is no doubt in the mind of the police, however,
that Rangers has become a much easier stadium to police since
the advent of the new seating arrangements.

5. 6.  The only club in England to have gone all-seater is
Coventry City.   This work was carried out during the summer of
1981.   The capacity was set at 20,500.  The club received
enormous criticism from its supporters and has felt obliged,
over a number of seasons to revert to a stadium offering mixed
accommodation.   The present balance is 18, 496 seats and 11,304
standing places.   A letter from Coventry City is appended.
(Annex E) It will be noted that one of the major problems
encountered by the club was the unwillingness of spectators to
sit in uncovered seating.   Another factor in the decision to
revert to a certain amount of standing has been the action of
some visiting supporters in ripping out seats to use as
weapons.

5. 7. The experience of two clubs in Holland, a country that
has suffered as much as England in recent years from
hooliganism, is worthy of note.    Utrecht Football Club has
recently moved into a new purpose-built stadium on. the
outskirts of the city.    Interestingly, it has chosen not to
make the stadium all-seater.    The old ground had 13,000
standing places and 7, 000 seats.   The new has a ratio of 14,000
seats to 6, 000 standing.   The standing accommodation is in the
corners of the ground.

5. 8.  Feyenoord, a big club in Rotterdam, continues to use an
established ground that has 51,000 seats.   It has chosen to
keep, however, two small standing sections of 1,500 places
each.   Here, the standing terraces are immediately behind the
goals.

5. 9. It is the view of Robert de Bakker, the Security
Officer of the Dutch FA, that all-seater stadia do not
necessarily bring better behaviour.  He sees the provision of a
preponderance of seats as desirable, but he points out that
those who are likely to cause trouble are not reformed
overnight simply through their being put into a seat.  He
believes that a small section of standing is desirable and will
remain so for the time being.




                              -12-
5. 10.  West Germany is a country that has enjoyed much football
success, both at club and representative level.   It is also a
nation that has been forced to rebuild many of its stadia since
their destruction during the Second World War.   There is no
First Division soccer ground in West Germany that has all
seats,   Many, but by no means all/ grounds have a preponderance
of seating.   According to Mr Wilfried Gerhardt, the General
Secretary of the West German FA, "we are encouraging our clubs
to increase the proportion of seating on their grounds.
Eventually, we would like our stadia to be all-seater, but that
is a long way into the future. "

5. 11.  It may be worth noting what Mr Justice Popplewell said
at paragraph 6. 16 of his Interim Report. He said: "One of the
ideas for controlling violence was to introduce "all seating."
That appeared on the face of it to be a sensible idea.   It
failed however to take account of the idiosyncrasies of
football fans.   A lot of them it seems do not wish to sit down;
they wish to stand.   They wish to stand, apparently, because
there is for them a special atmosphere in being on the
terraces.   If seating is provided for them, they may well tip
back the seats and stand in front of them; then stand on the
seats; and finally rip up the seats and use them as weapons.
Coventry City, between 1981 and 1984, tried an all-seater
football ground.   It was not a success for a variety of reasons
and it may be that the experiment should be pursued.   Certainly
at Aberdeen and Ibrox Park it has proved a success.   But all
the evidence from the football authorities is that it is by no
means a complete answer to the problem. "

5. 12.  The point about people in seats not necessarily wanting
to sit in them has been illustrated once more in season
1988-89, when Millwall supporters travelling away to watch
their team, which was playing in the First Division for the
first time in the club's history, regularly stood on seats
throughout games.

5. 13. These varied experiences together with the remarks of Mr
Justice Popplewell indicate to us that, while there is certainly
benefit to be gained by a move to more seating, all-seater
stadia are not the panacea many believe them to be.   Neither
would th'ey be acceptable to a large proportion of the present
football public.   As Popplewell stated, many people believe




                             -13-
that stadia without significant standing sections are bereft of
atmosphere.  We believe that it is possible for spectators to
stand and watch football safely.   It is the general view of the
police, however, that seated spectators are more easily
controlled.  The tendency to taunt and gesture is less
prevalent amongst seated spectators.   What we have to do is
find an acceptable balance between seating and standing
accommodation that delivers the requirement of safe stadia
while satisfying the wishes of the public.

5. 14. The present ratio of seating to standing within The
Football League is appended.   (Annex F) We recommend that it
be made a condition of the issue of a Safety Certificate under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, or any legislation replacing
it or amending it, that the proportion of seating to ground
capacity listed overleaf be achieved within the stated
time-scale.

The reasons for our suggesting this legislative approach are

        i) that it is as convenient a way as any of making the
proposals mandatory and

       ii) there are beneficial financial implications.    (See
paragraph 5.24., below).



       table 5   Minimum Percentage of Seating Capacity
                      to Ground Capacity


        Season              92/3       95/6        98/9
        Division 1           50        66. 6        75

        Division 2           25        37. 5        50

        Divisions 3 & 4     12. 5       25         33. 3




                             -14-
NB   These percentages are of the total resultant ground
capacity.  Any promoted club would be       given two years from
the season of   promotion to meet the requirements of
the division concerned at the time of promotion.      It is not
considered necessary to apply the same criteria throughout the
four divisions in view of the smaller attendances in the lower
divisions and also the relative inability of the clubs in the
Third and Fourth divisions to finance large-scale changes to
their grounds.  The percentages and time-scale have been
calculated on   the basis that the work     involved would be
required as a   condition of issue of a     Safety Certificate and
would therefore be grant-aided.   Naturally, the time-scale
could be accelerated if, in addition, assistance were available
from elsewhere.  We discuss these financial considerations at
more length in paragraphs 5. 21. to 5. 2 6.

5. 15.  The operation will be costly.  It has been estimated, at
a cost of approximately £35 per seat including structural
alterations, that it would require £30,000,000 to seat the
entire Football League.   However, in view of the abuses ofsome
new seated areas, when seats have been stood upon, or
deliberately broken, it will almost certainly be necessary to
agree on a more robust specification.   This, combined with the
Coventry experience which indicates that people will not sit in
uncovered areas, may bring the estimate of £3 5 per seat into
question.   To cover the new seating would take an estimated
further £100,000,000.   A letter on this subject from the
Chartered Quantity Surveyors, George Corderoy & Co.   is
appended.   (Annex G)

5. 16 It should not be assumed that the prices that can be
charged for the new seated accommodation will automatically
compensate for the reduction in total capacity.   Liverpool FC,
for example, the most successful English club in the last 25
years, does not believe that it would be able to charge for the
new seating it is contemplating installing substantially more
than the present standing admission price.

5. 17.  As we are proposing that standing accommodation should
be allowed to remain, although at reducing levels,
we consider it essential for the criteria applied to the safety
of standing spectators to be re-assessed.   The FA and The
Football League will be proposing, (Section 6., below), that
crucial areas of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds be made
mandatory.




                              -15-
Nucleus of all-seater stadia

5. 18. It is now 23 years since England staged a major
international football tournament.   (The 1966 World Cup).   It
is 11 years since we were asked to find a venue for the final
of a European club competition.   (The European Cup Final of
1978 played at Wembley between Liverpool and Bruges).   FIFA,
the world governing body of Association Football, has made it
clear that they will, in future, only award World Cups to
countries that can provide up to 12 stadia capable of
accommodating the following number of spectators, all seated:


            First Round matches       30,000 - 40,000

            Opening match,
            Semi-Finals and
            Final                     minimum 50, 000.


5. 19. At present, only Wembley Stadium is capable of meeting
the criteria for the second category of matches.   It is
expected that the ground will be all-seater, with a capacity of
80,000 within the next year or so.   No other ground can meet
FIFA requirements, even for the First Round matches.   There
are, however, at least 9 grounds capable of conversion that
could provide the required capacities.   The table overleaf
shows these grounds, converted on the basis of one seat being
gained for every two standing places lost:


       table 6     Potential capacity of stadia
                   converted to 100% seating


                   Manchester United        42', 570
                   Sheffield Wednesday      40,374
                   Manchester City          40, 22 3
                   Everton                  39, 561
                   Arsenal                  38,925
                   Liverpool                35,233
                   Aston Villa              33, 657
                   Chelsea                  33, 415
                   Sheffield United         30, 324




                               -16-
5. 20,  This nucleus of all-seater stadia would also provide a
pool from which The FA could draw the venues for FA Cup
Semi-Finals.

Finance

5. 21.  The Football Association has already made a direct
investment in the installation of seating and the general
improvement of facilities at Wembley Stadium.   It has made a
direct payment of 61, 100,000.  The Football Association and The
Football League have made further contributions to the increase
in the proportion of seating at the stadium by foregoing
revenue from the new seating in respect of matches under the
control of both bodies played at the stadium.   The provision of
a nucleus of all-seater stadia; the requirement by law for all
grounds to have a minimum percentage of seats; the need to
encourage clubs to build new grounds (see paragraph 9. 6. #
below), all will require a massive further injection of cash.
We understand that it will be expected of us that we make every
attempt to find this revenue from our own resources.

Sponsorship                ,

5. 22.  Sponsorship is one obvious area in which we can seek
extra revenue.   'She game as a whole depends for its survival on
the £17,500,000 per year it currently receives from sponsors.
The FA's aim will be to supplement this with an acceptable
sponsorship of its most valuable commodity, the FA Cup
competition.   The Football Association has already set in
motion a search for a sponsor, with a proposal that offers the
prospective company a unique opportunity to be identified not
only with a competition of world standing, but also with an
initiative that can result in the World Cup's coming to England
in the not-too-distant future.    The sponsor will be invited to
pay an annual sum as is usual in such agreements.    He will also
be asked to provide a lump-sum figure of substantial
proportions in the form of an interest-free loan.    This sum
would form the basis of a fund to assist clubs with the
installation of seating and the improvement of facilities.

The Football Trust and The Football Grounds Improvements Trust

5. 23. The Football Trust is funded by a donation by the three
major pools companies (Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters) from




                               -17-
the Spotting-The-Ball Competition, at the rate of 21% of
turnover, i.e. over £9, 000, 000 a year. The Trustees are
empowered to use their funds to promote measures for the
control or suppression of hooliganism; to assist clubs to meet
obligations under the 1975 Act; to improve ground facilities;
and for any other purpose beneficial to football.   The Football
trust allocates just over half its income to The Football
Grounds Improvement Trust for the purpose of assisting
expenditure by Football League clubs on ground safety and
improvements.   An explanation of the role of these bodies is
appended.   (Annex H)

5. 24.  As we have indicated above, (paragraph 5. 14. ) there are
benefits to be gained by the clubs if the recommended levels of
seating are made mandatory by making them a condition of the
issue of a Safety Certificate.   Under its Trust Deed, The
Football Grounds Improvement Trust is able to make grants of up
to 75% of the total cost available to clubs carrying out work
as a necessary condition of their being given a Safety
Certificate under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

Reduction in Pool Betting Tax

5, 25. Given our willingness to seek from our own and other
existing resources a substantial part of the finances necessary
to implement the changes and improvements we have identified,
we believe that there is a strong case for the Government to
make a contribution by reducing the tax on football pool
betting from its current level o£42.5%.   At present, the tax
yields around £280,000,000 per year.   There is an agreement
between the Pool Promoters Association and The Football League
by which 2/5ths of any money saved by them as a result of a
reduction in the pool betting tax would go to The Football
League for ground improvements.   Another 2/5ths would go to
help other sports and the remaining l/5th would be devoted to
the campaign to bring the 1996 Olympic Games to Britain.   The
Government would assist football greatly by making a relatively
small proportion of the the tax levied on pool betting
available to the game to assist in effecting the improvements
we have discussed.  A 2. 5% reduction would, for example, yield




                                -18-
some £16,000,000.  This could be passed on to football in one
of two ways.  The Government could continue to tax pool betting
at the current level, but make a donation to football
equivalent to 2.5% of taxable turnover, or it could reduce the
tax rate to 40% on the strict understanding that the agreement
referred to above were amended to allow football to derive the
maximum benefit from the money thus saved by the pools
companies.

At present, football derives no benefit whatsoever from the
£280,000,000 or so each year that the Government takes in pool
betting tax.   The contrast with the Horse Racing is stark.
Football pools are taxed at 42.5%.    There is no tax on
on-course horse race betting.    The tax on off-course gambling
is 8%.   There is, however, by statutory instrument, a levy on
off-course betting separate from the tax.    The Home Secretary
laid down the present Horserace Betting Levy Scheme on the 1st
April, 1989.   Under the scheme, the levy is set at 0.86% of
turnover.   At today's betting levels, this levy will yield
approximately £34, 500, 000 per year.  The football industry is,
therefore, at a disadvantage to horse racing on two counts.
First, the tax on football pool betting is so high that the
pool promoters are limited in the amount they can realistically
make available to football in the form of the payment of
royalties for the use of football fixtures.    The percentage
paid at the moment is just over 2%, which yields around
£4,000,000 per year.    A lower level of tax would undoubtedly
enable football and the pools to agree upon a higher royalty
percentage.   Second, a levy is made on horse race betting, over
and above the tax, specifically for the purpose of promoting
the industry that creates the public interest that, in turn,
produces the betting tax revenue for the Government.     Football
receives nothing, despite the fact that it fulfils precisely
the same function.

The Chester Report of 1968 recommended the establishment of a
Football levy at the rate of 1% of the pools' companies taxable
turnover.  A minority report recommended 2%.  The Rothschild
Commission on gambling recommended in 1977 a reduction in the
pool betting tax from the then level of 40% to 37%, also -for
the purpose of establishing a Levy Board.  We, however, are not




                              -19-
 proposing the creation of a Football Levy Board.  We believe
 that The Football Trust/Football Grounds Improvement Trust
 already act as a suitable vehicle with proven track record and
 would be the ideal recipient of any money given to the game
 from a reduction in the Pool Betting Tax or from any other
 source prepared to provide grants or interest-free loans.

. Capital Allowances

 5. 26.   Much criticism is levelled at football for what is seen
 by many as wasteful spending on transfer fees.    This criticism
 ignores the basic fact that transfers fees are a "circulating
 fund" that enables smaller clubs to derive much needed income
 by investing in young players and realising the investment by
 selling on the asset to one of the bigger clubs.    For example,
 in the summer of 1988, Tottenham Hotspur bought Paul Stewart
 from Manchester City for £1,700,000.    Manchester City then
 purchased Brian Gayle from Wimbledon for £325,000, Andy Dibble
 from Luton Town for £250,000 and David Oldfield from the same
 club for £650,000.    Luton and Wimbledon then went on to buy
 other players for smaller sums, and so on.    All of the transfer
 fees added together might make ten times the original figure of
 £1. 7 million.

 The success of a club on the field of play is the major
 consideration for most supporters.    A team that is winning
 attracts more spectators than when it is not performing’so
 well.  The attendance figures quoted above for Glasgow Rangers
 matches (paragraph 5. 5. ) indicate what can be achieved when a
 club is playing well and at the same time gives its public good
 facilities.   Glasgow Rangers have invested as heavily as any
 club in the transfer market in recent times.    Clubs must,
 therefore, look to their playing strength as well as to the
 comfort and safety of their grounds.    No club shies away from
 expenditure on essential safety work.    Bach club does, however,
 have to decide for itself the appropriate balance between its
 spending on players and on the improvement of facilities.    The
 present system gives strong fiscal inducements to clubs to
 spend on players rather than on improvements.    Capital
 allowances are usually unavailable to clubs for ground
 improvements.   The case of Brown (Inspector of Taxes) v Burnley
 FC (19781
         -) established that expenditure on a new stand to
 replace an old one did not qualify as a repair, nor did it




                               -20-
qualify for plant and machinery allowances.  Safety work is
only allowable if it is carried out as a condition of the issue
of a Safety Certificate.  Transfer fees, on the other hand, are
treated as revenue expenditure.  The Government would
automatically stimulate greater expenditure on improved
facilities if it were to give capital allowances for all such
projects.




6.   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975


6. 1. The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds is not a statutory
code.  At paragraph 3. 84 of his final report, Mr Justice
Popplewell said:  "I am satisfied that the Guide should
continue to be voluntary and not form a statutory code; but it
is important that all those concerned with sports grounds
should read and understand the contents, and apply the lessons
relevant to their own sports ground. " It is the recommendation
of The FA and The Football League that certain parts of the
Guide should be made mandatory.   (See paragraph 6.5, below).

6. 2. At paragraph 3. 81, Mr Justice Popplewell said: "I have
seen a number of Safety Certificates.   They vary enormously as
to their detail.  It would be useful if the local authorities
could draw up a document which contains the conditions which
most generally need to be included.   They will have to avoid
the danger of their model being treated as containing only
minimal conditions or of a local authority treating the model
as of universal application; each ground has different problems
and a flexible approach is necessary.   But guidance is needed,
and I hope that the Association of Metropolitan Authorities,
Association of County Councils and the Convention of Scottish
Local Authorities will be able to draw up a suitable model. "
So far as The Football Association and Football League are
aware, no such model has been drawn up.

The need for flexibility to take account of local variations is
clearly recognised by us as it is by the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds itself: see, for example, paragraphs 6, 12, 37,
46, 214, etc.  There does seem to be a wide variation of view




                              -21-
in relation to important matters affecting safety which cannot
always be accounted for by variations in local conditions.
This has been borne out by the widely varying attitudes to
perimeter fencing expressed following Hillsborough.   The
problem is aggravated by the fact that/ depending on the local
authority in question, the person responsible for the issue of
a Safety Certificate may be a Building Inspector, a Fire
Officer or a Planning Officer: these are persons with differing
experience and expertise.  Further, even officers from the same
discipline have differing views.   For example, it is not
unknown for a Planning Officer to make perimeter fencing a
condition of the grant of a Safety Certificate, and for his
successor to require the fencing to be removed or altered.

6. 3.   We recommend that:

            (i)            a degree of standardisation be introduced by-
making■ it a condition of the issue of a Safety Certificate that
certain specific requirements of the Guide that are objectively
ascertainable are met; and

           (ii)           consideration should be given as to whether
it should also be be a condition of the issue of a Safety
Certificate that a suitable professional person shall have
certified that in his opinion certain other specific
requirements of the Guide, are met,, these being requirements
that involve questions of expert opinion and.judgement.

Examples of (i) are to be found in paragraphs 92 and 93.

          "92. A terrace step should not be less than 280mm or
more than 380mm wide. The preferred dimension is between 355mm
and 380mm,

          93.  The height of risers should be between 75mm and
180mm, 75mm is related to the minimum width of 280mm,  If the
riser height is greater than 180mm, a crush barrier should be
provided at the top of the riser. "

An example of (ii) is to be found in paragraph 31, which
provides:

         "31.  When walls, including perimeter walls, and
fences are to withstand crowd pressures, they should be
designed to withstand such pressures safely and allowance
should be made for forces simultaneously and independently
induced by other factors, e.g. wind forces or attached
installations. 11

6. 4.  We do not consider that a central authority needs to be
established to lay down the standards and issue safety
certificates.    Local knowledge of local conditions is
important.    Thus, certificates should continue to be issued by
local authorities.     But local authorities need to have certain
minimum standards laid down for them, and need to be assisted
by technically qualified persons.      The Guide is, in our view, a
valuable document and is clearly the right vehicle for laying
down common standards.     The events of Hillsborough have
demonstrated the    need for changes in it, as did the events of
Bradford before.      We make some proposals in paragraphs 6. 6. to
6. 11. below.   The Home Office/Scottish Office who publish the
Guide should be encouraged constantly to keep the Guide under
review.

6. 5.  We do not think it is appropriate for The FA and The
Football League to provide a comprehensive list of those
requirements of the Guide that fall into the two categories
identified in paragraph 6. 3. , above. We do not have the
technical expertise to consider such matters, nor have we had
sufficient time to take independent advice on the point.    [We
recommend that aWorking Party be set up    to draw up a list of
those requirements of the Guide (amended as may be in the light
of the Inquiry) which must be satisfied as a condition of the
issue of a Safety Certificate in the way that we have
suggested.   This Working Party should have amongst its members
representatives of the Fire Services, the Police, Local
Authorities, the clubs as well as professional persons such as
Chartered Surveyors.   This Working Party should also consider
what kind of professional person, if considered advisable,
should issue the certificate of satisfaction and by whom he
should be employed.   (See paragraph 6.3(ii) above).

Amendments and Additions to the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds

6. 6.   Increased Seating

We have already discussed this.   (See paragraph 5.14.   above).




                               -23-
6. 7.   Sections 5&6t Ingress and Egress

Each turnstile/group of turnstiles should give access to one
designated area of the stadium only.  When such areas are
sub-divided each sub-division should be capable of being and be
closed when its capacity has been reached.  Entrance and exit
routes should b© marked in colours distinctly different from
the home club colours.


6. 8.   Section lit Fire Safety

Paragraph 189 should be amended to make it clear that there
should be access to the pitch as well as to the buildings.


6. 9.   Section 12: Communications

The requirement to provide an effective system of
communications should include the provision and effective use
of an adequate public address system.  There should be a
separate PA system capable of being heard by supporters outside
the ground.  All grounds should be equipped with close-circuit
cameras covering the outside of and approaches to grounds.

6. 10, Section 15: Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall

Paragraphs 214 and 215 of the Guide refer to varying
specifications and the need for fencing at "most major stadia".
The need to prevent spectator encroachment onto the pitch at
all stadia must be spelt out.   The Cup Final on the 20th May
this year has shown that supporters cannot be trusted 100% to
respect calls not to come onto the playing area.   In the light
of the Hillsborough tragedy, it may be tempting to conclude
that perimeter fences/walls should be banned.   In our view,
this temptation should be resisted.   Pitch invasions were rife
in football some ten years ago but have become less of a
problem since the selective use of perimeter fencing became
more commonplace.   Pitch invasions can cause a danger to life
and limb.   The need to take steps to prevent such incidents is
recognised internationally as well as in the United Kingdom.
Thus, iri 1986, UEFA issued “Binding Instructions and
Recommendations to avoid crowd disturbances" which included the
following:
       "Measures at the Ground

         6.   Protection of the playing field by means of

        a) a fence of at least 2. 20m in height or a moat or
           else

        b) a barrier with adequate policing so as to make it
           impossible for spectators to enter the field of
           play.

        Fences must have sufficient security gates opening
        towards the playing field and in the case of moats or
        a combination of moats and fences adequate other
        security passages should be provided. "

The same passage appears in the publication issued by UEFA in
July 1988.

We do not advocate a mandatory requirement that measures along
the lines of the U. E. F. A. document should be applied at all
grounds.  Experience has shown that the need differs from club
to club.  Some will require 100% fencing all round the ground.
Others will only need partial fencing.     Some will find other
effective means of preventing invasions.     It should be left to
the clubs, in the light of their experience, as to how they
should fulfil the obligation to take steps to prevent invasions
that we are proposing should be included in the Guide.

The task, therefore, is to find a system that affords ready
access to the pitch in an emergency, while protecting it from
invasion in all other circumstances.  The FA and The Football
League have already inspected a self-opening system in Nimes,
France (Report appended - Annex I)

6. li. New Section:   Medical Provision

To make adequate provision for a large-scale disaster a club
would need to have a fully-equipped casualty ward at its
disposal.  This is clearly not feasible.  It is also not
reasonable to expect clubs to have at their disposal large
numbers of trained people capable of using resuscitative
equipment.  Such equipment in untrained hands can be lethal.




                                -25-
However, a reasonable level of preparedness should be
required and the need for this should be included in the Guide.
The following is our recommendation.

a) Each club should have a designated First-Aid room, in
addition to the club's medical room.  The First-Aid room should
contain at least two beds, a sink, a work-top and a curtain to
give the necessary privacy.  The room should be supplied with
power, light, water and a direct line telephone.  There must be
ready access for emergency vehicles.

b) The First-Aid room should have a well-stocked cabinet
containing antiseptics, analgesic, bandages, etc.  Management
should designate one person as being responsible for the
up=keep of both room and cabinet.

c) Stretchers,   a carrying chair and oxygen should be available.

d) A doctor should be present at all games.

e) At least one fully-equipped ambulance should be in
attendance at all matches with an expected attendance of
5,000+,  The ambulance should be equipped with defibrillators
and resuscitative equipment and be manned by personnel trained
in their use.  An ambulance can be hired for around £90 per
match.  Hiring in the equipment would further relieve the club
of the problem of keeping the expensive equipment referred to
secure and in good working order.

f) All first-aiders serving at grounds should be fully trained
and experienced.   Clubs should be furnished with a complete
list of trained staff by the organisation providing their
first-aid service.   The minimum number of first-aiders present
at a match should be 1 per 1,000 spectators.   It should be the
responsibility of the clubs to ensure that the required number
of trained personnel is in attendance.   The clubs might need,
in order to achieve this, to arrange for the training of
members of their own staff.




                               -26-
7.   MEMBERSHIP


Compulsory National Membership- Scheme

7. 1.  The Government is convinced that a national, compulsory,
membership scheme is the prime need in the quest for a solution
to the hooligan problem.   In 1985, the Prime Minister asked The
Football Association and The Football League to tell her what
football was going to do about implementing a 100% membership
scheme.   We append the reports of The FA and The Football
League to the Prime Minister.   (Annex J) It will be noted
that, among the other concerns expressed, was the worry that
the verification .of membership cards at turnstiles might add to
congestion and thereby produce danger for the public.   Further
incidents of crowd misconduct have persuaded the Government
that it is necessary to legislate for the introduction of a
compulsory national membership scheme for football.   Football
remains opposed to the concept.

1.2.  The principal grounds on which The FA and The Football
League oppose the idea of a compulsory national membership
scheme are:

        (i)         it is probable, if not certain, that additional
congestion will occur outside turnstiles with the attendant
dangers illustrated by Hillsborough;

       (ii) the loss of "occasional" supporters;

      (iii)        the complexity and cost of manning,   managing and
policing the scheme;

       (iv) the scheme does not address what is now the real
problem of football hooliganism, the behaviour of supporters
away from grounds.

Each of (i), (ii) and (iii) above is a significant
disadvantage as far as the clubs and their supporters are
concerned.  The proposed scheme should, therefore, be
introduced only if it is certain, or at least likely, that
these disadvantages are outweighed by its benefits.   In our
view, they are not.   It is proposed to examine each
disadvantage in turn.




                              -27-
Danger of congestion

7. 3.   The FA and The Football League have appointed the
Management Consultancy, Arthur Young, to advise on all aspects
of the establishment of a national membership scheme.      Their
initial report is appended.     (Annex K) The Minister for
Sport has stated that the Government will not sanction the
introduction of a scheme until such time as it is clear that
the necessary technology exists to ensure its successful
implementation.    In our view, a successful implementation must
entail an assurance that the public can be admitted to grounds
without undue additional delays.     It is the view of the
Government that there should be a central computerised registry
of members and that membership cards should be computer read at
the point of entry to the ground.     Our concern, which must be
deepened following Hillsborough, is that the time taken to read
each card and to deal with invalid or defective cards will add
intolerable waiting times to those already experienced.
Appended to this submission, (Annex L), is a study conducted
by Arthur Young at the Littlewoods Cup replay between Arsenal
and Liverpool on 9th November, 1988, when between 3,000 and
5, 000 people were locked out of a full Highbury Stadium and the
kick-off was delayed for 30 minutes.     The conclusion that
Arthur Young have drawn from the queuing model forming part of
their study is that the absolute maximum additional admission
time that can be coped with for the processing of each
membership card, if the fans are to be -admitted on time, is two
seconds.   Arthur Young are currently evaluating the proposals
that they have received from a short-list of companies asked to
bid for the provision of the technology required for the
implementation of the national membership scheme.     While it is
too early to judge whether the companies will be able to meet
this two second requirement, it is certain that no system has
been tried and tested to these standards in the real
environment of a football match.     A further concern is the very
real possibility of malfunctions in the computer system itself.

Loss of the "occasional" supporter

7.4.  The game's objection to the proposed 100% compulsory
scheme is that it makes no provision for those who do not wish,
for one'reason or other, to join a club scheme.  An independent
survey conducted by Target Group Index in 1985, showed that




                              -28-
5, 700, 000 people attended at least one football match during
the course of a season.    This survey appears as part of the FA
submission to the Prime Minister, appended as Annex J to this
document.    A Mori poll, quoted in the Peat Marwick McLintock
report referred to below (paragraph 7. 6. ) indicated that 25% of
football spectators attend four or fewer matches per season.
(Annex M) It is our contention that these "occasional"
supporters will be largely lost to the game, because they will
not be prepared to go to the trouble of joining a compulsory
scheme that will almost certainly require them to complete a
form, identify themselves and provide photographs together with
a membership fee.    The loss of these spectators will have
serious financial implications for the game.

Problems of manning and policing the scheme

7. 5.  There are very worrying practical implications inherent
in the premise that all persons entering football grounds
should hold valid membership cards, that must be read by a
computer to confirm validity.   What does one do when there is
reason to believe that, a card is invalid? The technology
available may well prove capable of differentiating between the
person who is illegally trying to gain entry to the ground and
the one whose card is merely damaged or defective.   In
practice, the difficulty of dealing with the two cases is very
similar.   The main concern is how to remove the person from the
turnstile without causing danger or inconvenience to other
spectators.   If a person attempts to gain entry illegally, he
is committing an offence and presumably must be arrested by the
police and taken somewhere to be charged.   If there is reason
to believe that the person concerned is entitled to enter the
ground, but that his card is defective, then he must also be
taken to a place where his credentials can be checked out.   In
both cases, therefore, we have the logistical problem of
removing the person from the vicinity of the turnstile and the
manpower problem of providing a police officer or a club
official to accompany him.   In the former case, with the
imminent creation of the new offence under the Football
Spectators Bill of illegal entry to a football ground, there is
clearly going to be a need for more police to be present at the
stadium.   The police will henceforth be dealing not only with
hooliganism, but with persons committing an offence prior to




                              -29-
any act of hooliganism.  In the latter case, the club will need
a number of people who will not be able to perform other
functions, as they will be waiting to escort law-abiding fans,
who have no intention of causing any trouble, to the club
office, where their card malfunction will be assessed by
further club employees on whom time and money will have been
spent training them in the use of the club's computer system.

There could well be a conflict between the requirements of the
membership scheme and those of basic safety.  We have already
detailed our concerns about congestion in paragraph 7. 3. ,
above.  On many grounds - perhaps most - it will not be prudent
to attempt to take fans with invalid or defective cards back
through the fans queuing outside the ground.  It will also not
be advisable to spend more than a few seconds at the turnstile
making inquiries of the person holding the card that, for one
reason or another, fails to register.  The only remaining
alternative is to let him through the turnstile and deal with
him inside.

This raises a whole host of practical considerations. ' First,
how do you stop him, once he is through the turnstile, from
escaping into the crowd? How many people do you need to
provide security against this eventuality? If there is reason
to believe that the person is attempting to gain fraudulent
entry, then you need a police officer to arrest him.   How many
such officers do you require? As these officers will be inside
the ground, will the club, as is usually the case, have to pay
for them? Do you take money from the person coming through the
turnstile in these circumstances? If he is arrested, or
subsequently refused entry, does he get his money back? If
there is an automatic counting system on the turnstile, will
the person entering be counted as in the ground, perhaps
thereby contributing to a section of the ground being declared
full before it is necessary?

There is no doubt in our minds that the proposed scheme will
produce exasperation among and possibly danger for the
supporters, together with additional and unnecessary
bureaucracy and expense for the clubs and the police.




                             -30-
Hooliganism in grounds not the main problem

7. 6.  We have already shown that hooliganism within grounds is
on the decrease.   The Government's scheme could only act to
prevent known hooligans from gaining entry to stadia.   It could
not prevent trouble away from grounds.   It could not, for
example, prevent 250 English and Scottish youths from engaging
in rowdyism in the streets of Glasgow on the occasion of the
recent England v Scotland match.   It could not prevent trouble
on motorway service stations.   It could not prevent clashes
between supporters on ferries going to the continent.   To
exclude the tiny minority of trouble-makers from grounds, where
they are already well contained, 99. 97% of the total support
who according to the arrest figures quoted in paragraph 4. 9.
above, are blameless, will be forced to join a scheme they do
not want to join and put to inconvenience and possibly, as
suggested, into danger.

Other arrangements for restriction of accommodation to club
members

7. 7. A further reason for football's reluctance to embrace
Government plans for a compulsory scheme is the steady growth
of voluntary membership of Football League clubs.   Between the
extremes exhibited by, on the one hand, Barnsley FC, who have
resisted the idea of any type of membership programme, and, on
the other, a few clubs such as Luton Town, where membership is
100% and excludes away supporters, is a broad middle ground of
partial membership schemes.  The schemes currently operating
can be divided into the following general categories:

            (i) No membership programme at all: only Barnsley
FC subscribes to this view.

          (ii)             Part or all of that section of the ground whic
is restricted to home supporters is available only to members
of the home club, otherwise no restrictions. (89 of the 92
clubs operated schemes of this kind. )

         (iii)            In addition, two of these 89' clubs,   Birmingham
City and Northampton Town, restrict part of the section
allocated to away supporters on their grounds to members of
the away club.




                              -31-
Leeds United FC voluntarily, with the backing of The FA and The
Football League, operate a members only scheme for their away
games, which are all all-ticket.

Many clubs across all four divisions operate ad hoc reciprocal
arrangements with visiting club members being invited into the
home family or junior supporters' areas to view the match
together.  These   reciprocal visits often entail the two setsof
supporters getting together some time before the game to play a
friendly football match and enjoy a meal together.    For a
valuable discussion on reciprocal membership possibilities see
the feasibility study commissioned by The Football League and
submitted by Peat Marwick McLintock in 1987.    (Annex N)

          (iv)           The whole ground is restricted to members of the
home club: three   clubs have introduced such a system: Luton
Town, Colchester   United and Torquay United.

Clubs with 100% home only membership schemes

7. 8.  Luton Town FC has undoubtedly achieved a significant
decrease in crowd problems at its ground.   Since the
introduction of a home members only in 1986, the number of
arrests reported within the stadium has fallen from 55 to 1 per
season.   The scheme is, however, deeply unpopular with other
clubs and particularly with their supporters.   The geographical
situation of the Luton Town ground makes it relatively easy for
the police to deny access to the vicinity to away supporters.
This could not be achieved at most of the Football League
grounds.   The club is also able to identify reasonably well its
catchment area and exclude from membership people applying from
outside the district.   This could not be made to work in parts
of the country where clubs are close together - such as in the
big cities - nor does it take into account the phenomenon of
clubs such as Manchester United and Liverpool, that draw their
support from all over the country.

7. 9.  It was widely publicised by the originators of the
Luton Town plan that they expected to attract back to the game
many lapsed supporters who no longer attended because of the
fear of hooliganism.   Since the members only system was
introduced, gates- at the club's matches have fallen by 14%
(average 11,062 in 1985-86 to average 9,504 in 1988-89).    This




                              -32-
is during a period in which the club has enjoyed unparalleled
success, winning the Littlewoods Cup, making three other
Wembley appearances and reaching the FA Cup semi-final.

7. 10.  Colchester United followed Luton Town's example at the
start of the 1987-88 season, but found that their gates also
dropped dramatically, falling from an average 2,700 in season
1986-87 to an average 1,800 in season 1987-88.   There were,
however, no arrests on the club's ground in season 1987-88.
The club has subsequently reduced its membership and allowed in
away supporters.

7. 11. Torquay United have had a 100% membership scheme thrust
upon them because of the small capacity of the ground.   The
area set aside for visiting supporters can only take 300 and,
with well-supported clubs such as Wolverhampton Wanderers and
Cardiff City sharing the Fourth Division with them, they were
unable to cope with an away contingent.   In season 1989-90,
there are few clubs in the Fourth Division with very large
travelling support.   The club is seriously considering the
readmission of visiting fans.

General trend

7. 12.  The general trend is clear.  Club membership is rising.
By the end of season 1987-88 , the number of persons in
membership' with Football League clubs was 604, 600.   There is a
growing trend towards restricting parts of grounds to all
members.   A we have seen, (paragraph 7. 7. , above) 89 of the 92
League clubs have partial home membership schemes.     As seen
above, only Luton Town and Torquay United exclude away
supporters.   Only two clubs restrict visiting supporters to
members only.   In principle, we welcome the growth in voluntary
membership schemes.   We do not, however, support any national
scheme that excludes the away supporter or the occasional
supporter.

7. 13.  Membership, to be attractive to the public, must entail
benefit as well as restriction.   We strongly believe that it is
in the interests both of the clubs and the supporters for a
closer relationship to be developed between the parties and for
the role the club plays in its community to be enhanced.   The
examples of clubs such as Barcelona and Real Madrid, each with




                              -33-
some 100,000 members (none of whom, it should be added, are
forced to join or need to be -a member to get into the grounds),
illustrate what can be achieved through a close identification
of club with community.    The Football Trust has instituted a
Community Relations Award Competition for clubs, with cash
prizes for the more enterprising schemes.    In its first year,
Millwall and Preston North End shared the main prize.    These*
submissions, together with that of Arsenal FC are appended to
this document.   (Annex 0).   Almost half of the League clubs are
members of the Football in the Community Scheme, the aim of
which is to foster closer relations between club and community
and to create employment.    We expect, as this develops, that
the number of clubs participating will increase and that its
will stimulate further individual membership of clubs on the
part of supporters.

7. 14. We believe that clubs will use the option of taking
supporters into membership more and more as an instrument for
developing community relations, as a
means of securing better crowd control and also for very
sound commercial reasons. We are convinced
that the progress, already made towards the establishment of
individual club schemes that can in due course be integrated
into an effective reciprocal system, together with the other
initiatives detailed in this submission, are infinitely
preferable to the proposed Government legislation.   It is
recommended that Part I of the Football Spectators Bill, which
makes provision for the establishment of a compulsory national
membership scheme for football spectators, be withdrawn.



8.   TICKET TOUTS


8. 1.  The only certain answer to an activity that angers
supporters more than anything else is to make the sale of
tickets at more than face value illegal.   That would require
legislation.   It appears unlikely that such legislation will be
forthcoming.   The FA and Football League will, meanwhile,
continue their policy of sanctioning those who have
deliberately or negligently allowed tickets issued to them to
have found their way onto the black market.    These sanctions




                              -34-
normally take the form of a reduction in the number of tickets
allocated to the person or organisation concerned, or of a
total prohibition.

8. 2.  The PA will examine the system of allocation of Cup Pinal
tickets, with a view to making more tickets available to the
two clubs competing in the match.   At present the clubs receive
just over 50% of the available tickets.

8. 3.  The PA and The Football League recommend that the
Government legislate to make the sale of tickets illegal on
match days other than at official club box office locations.
The activities of touts can be considered a danger to the
public in that they cause obstruction, create a potential for
disorder and, by selling tickets indiscriminately, threaten to
disrupt the planned segregation of supporters.   This
recommendation, if implemented, would also deter supporters
from coming to stadia without tickets.   Many of these
considerations, of course, also apply to other events in the
field of sport and entertainment.




9.   GETTING THE PUBLIC INTO GROUNDS EARLIER


9.1.   It has become a tendency since Hillsborough for the
police to insist upon the delay of kick-offs when there has
been a build-up of supporters outside grounds close to the
scheduled start of a match.   This is understandable, but is
clearly unacceptable in the long-term.   If it becomes the rule
rather than the exception for matches to be delayed, the effect
will simply be to encourage people to come later rather than
earlier.   The fears expressed in paragraph 7. 3. about further '
delays caused by the need to verify membership cards make it
even more imperative for a means to be found of persuading the
public to come to grounds earlier.

9. 2. The FA and The Football League are looking closely at the
questioh of encouraging supporters into grounds earlier through
the provision of improved pre-match entertainment.  It has to




                              -35-
be stated, however, that experience in this area indicates that
fans are rarely impressed by the type of entertainment that has
traditionally been provided.  Watford FC, regarded within
football as one of the most progressive clubs in its attempts
to create a family atmosphere at its     matches,is a regular
provider of pre-match entertainment.   A letter from Mr Plumley,
the club's Chief Executive, is appended.   (Annex P) The club
would normally expect to provide entertainment before every
match,  This year, however, it was decided, following
Hillsborough, to suspend the programme for the rest of the
season as a mark of respect.  Prior to that, a variety of
entertainments had been provided before thirteen matches.    A
brief quote from Mr Plumley's letter is sufficient.    "I have
never been under the impression that pre-match entertainment
has encouraged supporters to come any earlier or that it
attracts additional support.  Nevertheless, whilst the
entertainment is in progress it is fair to say that it adds to
the spectators' pre-occupation prior to the game commencing. "

9. 3.  The possible exception to this    rule may be the
curtain-raiser football match.  The FA and The Football League
will discuss with the supporters organisations the concept of
developing the contacts that already take place between
supporters (see paragraph 7.7.  above) into a "Supporters'
League" of matches acting as curtain-raisers to the main match.
Of course, the problems posed by the British winter cannot be
ignored in this context.  At certain times of the year, pitches
are simply not capable of taking extra wear prior to games.   It
is usually acceptable, however, even in adverse weather
conditions, to stage some form of football related event - for
example, a penalty competition - in a corner of the pitch where
there is more grass.

9. 4.  Big screen entertainment at grounds, with, for example,
re-runs of the clubs previous matches, may be thought to be an
attractive proposition.   Arsenal FC are the only club to our
knowledge to have tried such an experiment.   The screen itself
cost about £1, 000, 000. Arsenal found that their fans were
interested in little else other than re-runs of matches in
which he club had been involved.   The cost of obtaining footage
from these games from the TV companies proved prohibitively
expensive.   The screen was removed after less than a season.




                             -36“
9. 5.  It is the view of The FA and The Football League that the
provision of adequate refreshment facilities is the single most
important factor for the public in deciding at what time they
arrive at a ground.   The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol,
etc) Act, 1985, introduced with the very best of intentions,
has, unfortunately, had the opposite effect from that intended.
A football ground has never been the place for someone with
serious intentions of getting himself drunk.   There is simply
not enough time to queue at the bar, obtain and consume
sufficient alcohol.

However, because of the undoubted fact that football
hooliganism was drink related, the conclusion was drawn that,
if you stopped people from drinking at football matches, you
would eradicate drunkenness among football supporters.  This
view was widely held and was supported by The FA.

In fact, events have proved that this view was ill-conceived.
The standard practice now, among those who take moderate
amounts, as well as those who consume too much, is either to
buy alcohol in supermarkets or off-licences and drink it in the
street, or to stay in the pub until the last minute.    The net
effect is potentially lethal.   Large numbers of people, some
the worse for drink, arrive late and in a hurry to get into
games.  The police prefer to get supporters into grounds early,
where they can be properly policed.   They will only go
voluntarily into grounds at a reasonable time if they can have
something palatable to eat - and drink.   The prohibition on the
consumption of alcohol on trains and in coaches going- to
football matches has resulted in more and more people
travelling to matches in private vehicles.   The hired mini-bus
has become particularly popular.   The number of special trains
bringing Liverpool supporters to the last three semi-finals at
Hillsborough in which the club has featured has been, in
chronological order, 13, 3 and 1. A greater load is thus
thrown onto the road system and the police have greater
difficulty in obtaining intelligence about the movement of
supporters.  The FA and The Football League recommend,
therefore, that the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc)
Act, 1985 be amended as follows:


      Sections 3. - 5. Delete, so that licenced premises on a
football ground can operate without the need for exemption
orders.




                             -37-
     It is proposed that sections 6 and 7 should remain, in
order to give the police powers to deal with the rare occasions
when excessive consumption of alcohol actually within a ground
might give rise to crowd control or safety problems.

A significant number of clubs has already obtained exemption
orders from magistrates under the terms of Sections 3 to 5 of
the Act.

It is further recommended that Section 1 (4) be strictly
enforced.  Coach operators/ carrying football supporters to
matches/ should be required not only to register with the
police their schedules and projected routes, as they are
already required to do, but also to carry supporters direct to
grounds and to prevent the consumption of alcohol both in the
coach and en route.  We add this last recommendation/ because
it is apparent that, while it is illegal to consume alcohol on
coaches going to games or coming from games, there is nothing
at present to stop drivers from taking their passengers to
public houses on the way, other than the said clause, which
makes it an offence for someone to be drunk in a vehicle, but
places no onus on the driver to ensure that this is observed.
The Act is appended.   (Annex Q)

Shared grounds

9. 6.  Of course, all clubs aim to provide the best possible
general facilities for their supporters, within the club's
financial capabilities.   This means comfortable accommodation,
easy access, adequate car-parking, clean and efficient toilets
for both sexes and much more, in addition to the ability to buy
reasonably priced, wholesome food and drink.   Many clubs,
however, find themselves in geographical locations where it is
practically impossible for meaningful improvements to be made.
Others share catchment areas in which two costly to maintain
stadia on prime development sites make no commercial sense
whatsoever.

Many of these clubs would undoubtedly benefit from a move to an
area providing better communications, better parking and,
perhaps, shared use of facilities.   There would be resistance.
Supporters do not like leaving their traditional home ground,
as the experience of Charlton Athletic - playing on Crystal




                             -38-
Palace's ground, but anxious to return to their former ground -
has shown.  There is also the resistance of many local
authorities to the granting of the necessary planning
permission for new grounds.  We recommend that local
authorities rethink this negative attitude.

In contrast, we have the experience of countries such as Italy
where big clubs such as AC Milan and Internazionale Milano
share a stadium with no perceiveable problems.  In our own
country, Scunthorpe United have provided the only recent
example of a Football League club moving to a purpose built
stadium.  Walsall are currently building a new stadium.  Such
new grounds can be custom built to provide all of the
incentives for the customer to come early that we have
mentioned above.  Central and local government should be
encouraged to assist in the construction of these new grounds.
There might also be interest from commerce and from the
European Community in providing help.



10.   SUPPORTER RELATIONS


 10. 1.   The FA and The Football League have been actively
 promoting a rapid growth in the provision of family sections
'within football grounds.   The FA employs an officer whose
 specific function this is.   The Football League has recently
 held a seminar on Family Initiatives that was well attended by
 the professional clubs.   A report of the seminar is appended.
 (Annex R) It shows that 84 of the 92 Football League clubs
 operate family areas.   The FA has a family enclosure at all of
 its international matches at Wembley and at the FA Charity
 Shield match.   Children are admitted, accompanied by adults, at
 reduced prices and special entertainment and incentives are
 provided.


10. 2,   The FA and The Football League will build on this
foundation by ensuring better communication with supporters in
general.    They already hold regular meetings with the existing
supporters' organisations.    They are already consulting
organisations with relevant experience in the area of customer
relations, with a view to establishing an effective system of
supporter liaison.




                              -39-
11.   EDUCATION


11. 1. The FA spends a large amount each year on its educational
programme.    In the financial year 1988, the amount was
£1, 181/ 440, made up of the cost of running courses and The
National Football- School, and of supporting the FA Youth Trust
and the FA National Sports Centre Trust.    Since 1982, when Mr
Bobby Robson was appointed as National Coach, The FA has
stepped up the marketing of its coaching and other educational
activities, with the result that the numbers attending courses
have risen from 18, 524 in 1982 to 210, 809 in 1988.

11. 2.  Much of this increase is accounted for by the
introduction of teaching and leisure programmes for young
people.   All of these activities contain a strong emphasis on
behaviour, discipline and personal responsibility.    A code of
conduct produced for young people attending FA course is
appended.    (Annex S) The FA has initiated an inner-city
coaching programme for youths who are either criminal offenders
or "at risk".    A pilot scheme in Birmingham has already been
tested and the project will be extended to other areas with
inner-city problems.

11.3.  We have already referred, in paragraph 7. 13., above, to
the Football in the Community Scheme.




                             -40-
12.   SUMMARY OP RECOMMENDATIONS


12. 1. It is recommended that the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
be amended to make the achievement at English Football League
grounds of a stated ratio of seating to ground capacity
compulsory within a stated time-scale.  (5. 14)

12. 2. It is recommended that The FA seek sponsorship of the FA
Cup competition in order to raise revenue that can contribute
to the provision of a nucleus of all-seater stadia to enable
England to stage major international events and from which
semi-final venues would be chosen; to assist other clubs in the
achievement of targets for the installation of seating set as a
condition of issue of Safety Certificates; to encourage clubs
to invest in new stadia; to improve facilities.  (5.22. )

12. 3. It is recommended that the Government give financial
assistance to football by effectively reducing the rate of pool
betting tax from its present 42.5%.  (5.25. )

12. 4. It is recommended that the Government make capital
allowances available for ground improvements.  (5.26)

12. 5. It is recommended that a degree of standardisation be
introduced by making it a.condition of the issue of a Safety
Certificate that certain specific requirements of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds are met.  (6.3)

12. 6. It is recommended that amendments and additions   to the
Guide be made.  (6. 6. to 6. 11.)

12. 7. It is recommended   thatthe Government withdraw Part I of
the Football Spectators Bill. (7. 13. )

12. 8.  It is recommended that the sale of tickets on match
days other than at official club selling points be made
illegal. (8.2)

12. 9. It is recommended thatThe FA review the system of
allocating tickets for the FA Cup Final, with a view to making
more available to the two competing clubs.   (8. 3. )




                              -41-
12.10.  It is recommended that the sections of the Sporting
Events (Control of Alcohol, etc. ) Act, 1985 dealing with the
consumption of alcohol at grounds be repealed.
(9.5.)

12.11.  it is recommended that the Sporting Events (Control of
Alcohol, etc. ) Act, 1985 be amended to require coach operators
carrying football supporters to matches to carry supporters
direct to grounds and to prevent the consumption of alcohol
both in the coach' and en route.  (9. 5. )

12.12.   it is recommended that Local Authorities should look
favourably on planning applications for new football grounds.
(9. 6. )

12. 13.  It is recommended that central and local government
should be encouraged to assist in the construction of new
grounds.   (9. 6. )




FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

Barry Bright   (Kent County FA)
Geoff Thompson   (Sheffield and Hallamshire County FA)
Noel White   (Division 3)

FOOTBALL LEAGUE   '

Ron Noades    (Crystal Palace FC)
Ian Stott    (Oldham Athletic FC)




June 1989
