To All Clubs


I am writing to let you know of the initiatives which the
Management Committee have taken following the publication of
Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster.      The Management Committee have decided to disband
the Football Membership Authority and ACCASS Sub-Committees
and to appoint a Taylor Implementation Committee    (the name may
be changed) in their stead.     They have appointed Ian Stott
(Chairman), Douglas Ellis and Michael Sinclair to the Taylor
Implementation Committee which is charged with facilitating
the implementation of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations. -
The Management Committee have accepted in principle Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendtions for the establishment,    jointly
with the Football Association, of an Advisory Design Council
and further discussions are now taking place with the F.A.
over the establishment of this body.


Messrs. Corderoys, the Football League's consulting structural
engineers, have been commissioned in order to assist each club
in considering what action they will need to take in order to
implement the Taylor recommendations and in particular this
includes those relating to 1st and 2nd division grounds losing
20% of their standing capacity over each of the next five
years and 3rd and 4th division clubs losing 10% of their
standing capacity over each of the next 10 years, in both
cases the first tranche of terracing capacity being reduced in
August next.      It should be noted that these measures will be
implemented through the Football Licensing Authority.
Legislation to establish the Football Licensing Authority
already exists in the Football Spectators Act 1989 but
regrettably it is understood that the Football Licensing
Authority, a government quango, may not be set up for another
two months or so.     The best advice which can be given to
clubs therefore at the present time is that each club should
now consider the preparation of a five/ten year ground
development plan which should detail the steps which
incrementally would need to be taken in order to implement the
Taylor recommendations.    in addition however to Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations, it should be noted that in July last
FIFA passed a resolution that "as from 1993 it will be the
duty of the Confederations and National Associations to hold
high risk matches in their zones only in all seater stadia".
High risk matches are defined under UEFA regulations as
follows:


1.   All UEFA final and semi-final ties of UEFA club
     competitions as well as final tournament matches of the
     European Football Championship.


2.   When declared as such by UEFA on the basis of previous
     incidents of supporters of one or both teams or of other
     exceptional circumstances.


3.   When it is expected that visiting team supporters will
     exceed 10% of stadium capacity or will exceed 3,000
     persons.


4.   When full capacity stadia is expected or more than 50,000
     spectators present.


5.   When the match is likely to attract a large number of
     immigrants/foreign workers originating from the country of
     the visiting team, who live either in the country where
     the match is being played or in neighbouring countries.


Particular attention is drawn to the fact that a high profile
match is one where visiting team supporters will exceed 10% of
stadium capacity.   This could well of course, embrace matches
in the 3rd and 4th divisions as well as the 1st and 2nd
divisions.


The purpose of commissioning Messrs. Corderoys to assist clubs
in consideration of their proposals is so that we can
establish a firm basis for the likely cost of implementing the
Taylor recommendations.     Many clubs will have their own
consulting engineers and in those cases it will only be
necessary to pass the appropriate information through to
Messrs. Corduroys so that they can assist in the build-up of
the national picture.     Messrs. Corduroys have however, been
involved with us in the preparation of the attached
questionnaire and we would be grateful if you would offer them
every assistance in having the questionnaire completed as
thoroughly as you can.


Messrs. Corderoys fees for this work will be paid by the
Football League.    If however, any clubs wish to engate them,
to work up their proposals further then the cost of that work
will need to be met by the clubs themselves and the basis for
that should be negotiated directly with Messrs. Corderoys.


Once we know what the total cost is likely to be then a case
can be made to government for financial assistance.      Lord
Justice Taylor in his report identifies three areas where
financial assistance from government might be sought.


           a.   In respect of VAT on the Spot the Ball
                competition.


           b.   By a reduction ,which would be diverted to the
                League,   in Pool Betting Tax.


           c.   Through capital allowances whereby tax relief
                could be claimed in respect of ground
                improvements.



Each of these issues will be considered further by the Taylor
Implementation Committee once the returns from clubs on the
likely cost of carrying out the Taylor recommendations are to
hand.




                                0
Representations are also being made to the Secretary of State
for the Environment proposing that there should be a
presumption in favour of planning permissions in respect of


           i.    Clubs wishing to carry out major alterations to
                 existing grounds.


          ii.    Clubs seeking planning permission for the
                 establishment of grounds on new sites.


         iii.    Clubs seeking planning permission for
                 alternative uses for existing sites to enable
                 them to realise the development potential, the
                 value of which could then be used to assist in
                 the provision of a ground on a new site.


Arrangements are also being made to meet with Local Authority
Associations    (the Association of County Council's, the
Association of District Councils and the Association of
Metropolitan Authorities).     We would hope to make a common
cause with these authorities on the issue of planning
permissions.     We would hope to persuade the Associations to
recommend to their members that planning applications in these
areas should be considered sympathetically.      We will be
making the case that a Football League club is a positive
asset to any local community and that therefore assistance,
both practical and financial should be afforded to clubs in
implementing the Taylor recommendations.       There is
considerable expertise in Local Authorities regarding the
obtaining of grants, particularly from Europe, and we will be
seeking to take advantage of this expertise.      We will also be
seeking to persuade the Local Authority Associations that they
should commend to their member authorities the principles of
joint use and dual provision of sporting facilities which
ought to be considered whenever improvements to existing
grounds or new stadia are being developed.
We will be also arranging further meetings with the Pool
Promoters Association, the Football Trust and the Football
Ground Improvement Trust to see if we can develop a common
strategy for the assistance of clubs.


The Taylor Implementation Committee will also be seeking to
monitor the implementation of the Taylor Report by other
bodies e.g. the Home Office, Police, Local Licensing
Authorities and we hope soon to provide clubs with a check
list of matters requiring attention by them.      We would ask
you to co-operate with us in letting us know when particular
items have been attended to so that we have the fullest
possible knowledge of what is happening on the ground when
carrying out negotiations at national level.


It would also be most helpful if you could keep us advised of
any requirements which are placed upon you either by the
Football Licensing Authority of your Local Authority where the
Taylor Report is quoted as the authority for that provision.
This will enable us to build up a picture of how the FLA and
local authorities are seeking to implement the recommendations
in the Report.      Would you specifically draw to our attention
any issue where you feel that what is being asked of you is
unreasonable or not in accordance with the letter or spirit of
the Report.      Equally, we will be happy to advise clubs on
such issues.


Miles Gibson has been appointed as the League's medical
adviser.       One of his first tasks will be to draw up a list
of what he would expect to find in a well equipped first aid
room.      This will be done on a realistic basis and you may
feel that you would not wish to embark on new initiatives in
this direction pending Mr. Gibson's advice which we hope will
be with you shortly.


If there are any areas which I have not mentioned where you
feel that the League can be of assistance, I shall be pleased
to hear from you so that we can taking them on board.   It has
already been suggested that a seminar be held for all clubs
once the likely cost of implementing the Taylor
recommendations is known.   That suggestion has been taken on
board but the best advice from Messrs. Corduroys is that it
may well take some three months to assemble all the necessary
information.




ARTHUR SANDFORD
Chief Executive
