REPORT OF A MEETING AT THE DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT, MARSHAM STREET,
LONDON ON WEDNESDAY, 24TH MAY, 1989.


       The football authorities represented by J.J. Dunnett and J.D. Dent
(Football League) and F,A, Millichip and R.H.G. Kelly (Football
Association) had been called to a meeting with the Environment Minister,
R t . Hon. N. Ridley and the Minister for Sport, C. Moynihan M.P. Also
present were Messrs. Owen, Kinghan and Watts and two members of the
secretariat.

     At the outset it was agreed that this meeting and any subsequent
meetings, would be regarded as private with no subsequent press statements.

     Mr. Ridley indicated that in the light of recent events the meeting
had been called primarily to discuss all seated stadia. He said that a
decision had now been taken to proceed immediately with the Bill. He re­
iterated that it was being treated entirely as an enabling measure which
would give the Government power to implement the Football Spectators' Bill
and also to introduce any required safety measures following Lord Justice
Taylor's Report.  He confirmed that nothing in the Bill would be binding
and that Parliament would have the opportunity to make amendments after
publication of the Taylor Report. To enable some provision to be made in
the Bill, Mr. Ridley asked for the views of the football authorities on all
seated stadia.

     Mr. Dunnett said that this was not a panacea for existing problems.
Other than Liverpool who had already indicated, in the light of
Hillsborough, their intention to convert to seats only, there was no strong
support for such a move within football.

     Using Arsenal and Liverpool as examples Mr. Dunnett indicated how the
reduced capacities would be incapable of accommodating the existing level
of support.  Supporters travelling without tickets would continue to create
problems. The reduction in numbers would not be compensated by the higher
overall take. In Liverpool's case he estimated a cost to the club of £1.9
million per annum with no extra income. It would also be necessary to
provide cover over any new seating. Whilst spectators may be prepared to
stand in the rain they would not sit.

     Reference was made to a report commissioned by Mr. Dunnett, in
anticipation of the present position, which indicated that the likely cost
of converting all grounds to all seats would be not less than £30 million.
The estimate for covering these seats was £100 million.  By comparison the
total annual income of League Clubs, including commercial revenue,
currently approximates £125 million.

     Mr. Dunnett explained how Queen's Park Rangers, having developed their
ground with cover on all sides and a high number of seats, had been forced
by public demand to remove the seats to create more standing accommodation.
Mr. Dent outlined the Coventry experience with the League's first all
seated stadium. Attendances dropped alarmingly - some spectators who did
not want to sit ceased to support the club even though seats were available
at no increase in cost.  Behaviour in the ground did not improve and
considerable damage was done to seats which were used as weapons. After




                                    „ 1 _
two seasons a standing area was re-introduced because of the force of
public opinion.

     Mr. Dunnett felt that there should be an experiment with one club -
possibly Liverpool as they had already volunteered.

     Mr. Millichip said that he had obtained the views of clubs and
Supporters' Associations and there was an overwhelming desire to stand. He
indicated that F.I.F.A. and U.E.F.A. are recommending that grounds should
work towards all seats for high risk matches.

     Mr. Ridley accepted that some supporters wish to stand. He believed,
however, that standing encouraged the tribal atmosphere. He acknowledged
that a way must be found to prevent supporters from attending the ground
without a ticket. He noted the present position where sometimes police
find it easier to allow entry to non-ticket holders. He indicated his
intention to put together an effective package to change the face of
spectating.

     Mr. Kelly re-iterated that the football authorities do not accept the
proposed membership scheme as an answer.  It will not have the effect of
bringing supporters back to the game - rather the reverse.

     Mr, Moynihan referred to the recent press release from the Football
Association which advocated an increase in the number of seats at our major
grounds.  Did the League want to increase seats generally in addition to
the suggested pilot scheme?

     Mr. Dunnett felt that the best way forward was for the Liverpool offer
to be accepted.  Mr. Moynihan questioned whether, as a successful club,
Liverpool would be the best example.  It was reported that attendances were
showing an upward trend over the past few years.

     Mr. Ridley said that if the football authorities had no other
suggestions then this package of measures would bring about improvements.
He felt that the major grounds (possibly the biggest 20) should be taken
one by one - some would need 100% conversion, other only partial. He
confirmed that this proposal would be regarded as a crowd safety measure.

     Mr. Moynihan asked Mr. Millichip how he would proceed to achieve the
objectives outlined in the Football Association document. Mr. Millichip
confirmed that the document had his full support. To obviate his F.I.F.A.
and U.E.F.A. concern he would like to see six all seated stadia. He
questioned where the finance would come from. He would also like to see
three national stadia - London, Midlands and North.

     Mr. Dunnett pointed out that most stadia are very old and no matter
how much work was spent on them they would still have fundamental problems
e.g. access. He outlined the problems of Bristol Rovers who cannot find a
site. Mr. Ridley referred to a club’s right of appeal.

     In conclusion Mr. Dunnett made himself available for further
discussion at any time. Mr. Millichip said he wanted to see the problems
cleaned up and stated that if the I.D. Scheme goes through it will have
'our every support.'




                                   -   2   -
Mr. Ridley re-iterated the Government's resolve to proceed.




                              -   3   -
