                                                    o'
                                                      £ ^ bai>
                                                        °tfW DBD ^


                          THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
       Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 IJG. Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.




24/20305                                                                                          17th April 1989




TO ALL CLUBS


Dear Secretary,

                                     Hillsborough Disaster

      Following the tragic events at Hillsborough on Saturday,
the Management Committee have asked me to advise clubs of the
steps they feel are appropriate in the circumstances

a)   on behalf of all League Clubs, our heartfelt condolences
     have been passed on to the parties involved including the
      leader of Liverpool City. Council.

b)   as a mark of respect to the bereaved, clubs directly
      involved have been given leave to postpone matches,
      immediately.

c)   all other clubs playing this weekend are asked to observe
     a minute's silence at kick-off time, and players are
     requested to wear black armbands„

d)   the Management Committee will discuss the repercussions
     of the tragedy at their meeting on Wednesday.

e)   clubs views will be counselled at the meetings on
     Thursday, with particular emphasis on any immediate
     action which needs to be taken to ensure that public
     confidence is restored.




           All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered In England 80612
f)    every co-operation will be given to the judicial enquiry
      launched by the Government as well as the investigations
      instituted by the Football Association and the police.


      Naturally, everyone involved in football is deeply
shocked by this disaster which has occurred at a time when
prospects for the game continued to improve. Whilst
professional football will certainly be under a great deal of
scrutiny in the immediate future we must obviously continue to
work closely with the police and the local authorities to
reassure football supporters that they are in no danger.

      If you require any assistance from the League in any
respect, particularly on matters of safety and crowd control do
not hesitate to contact me.


                       Yours sincerely,
