                                                                               K
                                                                ??BM >

                                  THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
    Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 l)G. T elep ho ne 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                         Secretary J. D. Dent




    24/15088                                                                                                   5th March,               1990




    A. Sandford, Esq.,
>   Chief Executive,                                                                                                                    '
    The Football League Limited.
                                                                                                                           ft7**1"'„




    Dear Arthur,

                                                        TODAY NEWSPAPER

              I enclose a copy of Counsel's Advice.

         Perhaps we can discuss the matter on Thursday and,                                                                            in the
    meantime, I am passing a copy to the President.

                                                       Yours sincerely,




                                                         ^ Secretary,



     Enclosure.



     Dictated by Mr. Dent and signed in his absence.




                    All correspondence to b e addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED AND WILLIAM FOX

                     V.

             NEWS (UK) LIMITED




                 A D V I C E




               Herbert Smith
               Watling House
             35 Cannon Street
             London EC4M 5SD

          Ref:   167/Ll6/30179106
                           A D V I C E




1-        It is important not to lose sight of the context in

which the Taylor Report and the Today articles were published,

namely following a very serious tragedy at the ground of a

major club affiliated to the Football League.    This will in my.

view make a jury reluctant to award libel damages unless it is

confident that the allegations made against my clients were

way off the mark.



Meaning

2-        In my view the Today articles mean that the Football

League and Mr Fox in   particular have in the Taylor Report been

allocated a share of   the blame for:



(1)       neglect of   safety both before and after the

          Hillsborough disaster, and hence for the

          Hillsborough disaster itself;



(2)       treating fans "like dirt", and subjecting them to a

          "living and dying hell" and to "gross indignities";
(3)    ,   violence, seediness and death at football grounds;



(4 )       insanitary and dangerous conditions on the terraces;



(5)        complacency and mismanagement   encouraging

           hooliganism and the cult for excessive drinking;



(6)        turning a blind eye to dilapidation and decay; and



(7)        overall neglect of a criminal nature.



Furthermore the article must in my view imply that the

criticism in the Report is justified - ie. that my clients are

indeed partly to blame for the matters set out above.      That

the article carries this further implication is however sure

to be disputed strenuously by the Defendants.



3.         In fact no mention is made in   the Taylor report of

Mr Fox, who did not become President of the Football League

until four months after the Hillsborough disaster.       (I am not

instructed what if any role he played in relation to the

League before that appointment, or in relation to its

submission to the Taylor inquiry: these questions will

inevitably assume great importance if proceedings are

commenced.)   As to criticism levelled at the Football League:




                                2
(1)       in paragraph 51 "Poor Leadership" the Report

          describes the Football League's position in the

         hierarchy of the game.       It then goes on to say,



                  "One would have hoped that the upper echelons

                  in this hierarchy would have taken a lead in

                  securing reasonable safety and comfort for the

                  spectators and in enforcing good behaviour by

                  precept and example.   Unfortunately these hopes

                  have not generally been realised and indeed at

                  times poor examples have been set."



(2)       In paragraph 52    the Football League is then taken to

          task,    in reliance upon its written submission to the

          inquiry, for failing to see it as a duty to offer

          guidance to clubs on safety matter; and in

          particular for failing to give advice on such

          matters as turnstile layouts, the division of

          viewing areas and the ratios of seats to stands.



It is critically important, but unfortunately not altogether

clear, whether paragraph 52 is intended by Lord Justice Taylor

merely as an example of the Football League's failure to give

a lead in securing safety, comfort and good behaviour, or

whether it represents the totality of his criticism of the

Football League (so that the criticisms in relation to comfort

and behaviour would not in fact bite on the Football League at

all, but rather on the other members of the hierarchy, such as


                                  3
the Football Association and the clubs).     I suspect that the

latter interpretation is the correct way to read the report;

but I believe it susceptible of both interpretations.     In my

view there would be something to be said, before commencing

any proceedings,   for the Football League writing to Lord

Justice Taylor and asking him to clarify this point.



4•        The articles are obviously very seriously defamatory

of Mr Fox, and I believe them also to be very seriously

defamatory of the Football League as a limited company,

provided the Football League can establish that it has either

a trading or a governing reputation.     (I would have thought

that it certainly had the latter.)     It is also arguable that

the articles defame other identifiable persons in senior

executive positions in the Football League.



5.        Thus prima facie causes of action are in my view

made out undoubtedly in the case of Mr Fox, very probably in

the caye of the Football League and quite possibly in the case

of other senior executives of the Football League who are

identifiable from though not identified in the articles; and

it is thus necessary to decide whether the newspaper could

successfully defend proceedings for libel by advancing

defences of justification and/or qualified privilege and/or

fair comment.




                                4
Justification

          In order to establish this defence the Defendant

must plead and prove that the "sting" of the libel is true;

and this of course reintroduces the question of what the

'’sting" in fact is.   My clients would of course argue with

some confidence that the articles accuse them of actual guilt;

whereas Today will contend that all they need to justify is

the "sting" of condemnation in the Taylor Report.



7.        It is important to bear in mind the effect    of

section 5 of the Defamation Act 1952, which provides    that

where more than one distinct charge is made and not all are

proved at trial, the Defendant is entitled to a complete

defence if the unproven ones do not materially damage the

Plaintiff's reputation in the light of the ones that are

proven.



8.        In considering whether Today could justify    their

article as against the Football League, the following

considerations are important:



(1)       The Taylor Report does criticise the Football League

          for failure to give guidance on safety matters       (by

          implication either before or after the Hillsborough

          tragedy), and thus does apportion to the Football

          League a share of the blame for the Hillsborough

          disaster.




                                5
It would appear to me that this criticism might well

be substantiated by Today , having regard to the

position taken in the Football League's written

submission as set out in paragraph 52.



As discussed above, the Report appears in paragraph

51 to be criticising the Football League in addition

for failure to take a lead in securing comfort or

good behaviour (headings which in my view are

capable of encompassing most of the criticisms made

in the articles otherwise than in relation to

safety).



I would envisage a danger of the newspaper seeking

to substantiate such criticisms (whether or not they

are contained in the Taylor Report itself), by

arguing that the "proof of the pudding" lies in the

poor spectator conditions and behaviour at many

clubs permitted to compete in the Football League.

This in turn would lead to an investigation into the

adequacy of the steps taken by the Football League

in an attempt to improve such matters    (as to which I

do not of course have instructions).




                    6
(5)   ,   The Report dos not criticise the Football League for

          encouraging hooliganism or excessive drinking,      and

          these criticisms would in my view be much harder to

          substantiate? however the newspaper will no doubt

          seek to initiate an investigation into what

          initiative has been taken by the Football League in

          attempting to deal with these problems.



9-        In the light of these considerations,   and especially

since the most serious charge of failure to give a lead as to

safety appears arguably well-founded,   I would by no means be

confident that a defence of justification would fail.     Even i f

it failed as a complete defence, there would in my view be a

very real danger that it would succeed in part and

sufficiently to make serious inroads into any damages awarded.



10.       So far as Mr Fox's position is concerned,   it is

obviously tempting to say that the considerations set out in

paragraph 8 above would not bite on him, since he was neither

mentioned in the report nor President of the Football League

at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy.   However this

argument could be seriously undermined:



(1)       if Mr Fox held a senior executive position in the

          Football league before becoming President; and or




                               7
(2)   (    if he had any responsibility, whether as President

           or otherwise,   for the League's submission to the

           Taylor Report which disowned a duty to give guidance

           on safety.   (It may be argued for example that he

           has ratified or failed to object to that submission,

           even if it was composed before he became President.)



These matters should in my view be checked before any

proceedings are commenced by Mr Fox.



Fair Comment

11.        This defence protects comment (as opposed to

assertions of fact) such that an honest man could make on

facts sufficiently stated or indicated in the article

complained of.   Unlike a defence of justification it can be

defeated if the Plaintiff    can plead and prove on the balance

of probabilities that the Defendant was malicious,    in the

sense of knowing his allegations to be false, being recklessly

indifferent as to whether they were true or false, or being

motivated by a dominant intention of injuring the Plaintiff:

see Horrocks -v- Lowe [1975] AC 135, at page 149f per Lord

Diplock.    Section 6 of the Defamation Act 1952 provides that

it is not necessary for the Defendant to prove all the facts

upon which a defamatory comment was purportedly based,

provided that he proves sufficient facts upon which an honest

man could base the comment-.




                                 8
12.        I would expect the newspaper to run this defence

arguing:



(1)        that the references to guilt and blame for soccer's

            malaises in general and for Hillsborough in

            particular are in the nature of a comment; and



(2)         that sufficient facts to ground such a comment at

            least in part can be found in such criticism as was

           made in the Taylor Report,   in the Football League's •

            acknowledged reluctance to give a lead on safety

           matters, and on what Today may seek to argue (as

            envisaged in relation to justification) was a

            failure to give a lead in relation to matters

            falling under the heads of comfort and behaviour in

            the widest sense).



13.        Once again I do not feel altogether confident that

this approach would not provide a means of defence to the most

serious charges made in the articles (at least as against the

Football League), even though the articles are to a greater or

lesser degree a misrepresentation of what was said in the

Report.    I would wish to have detailed instructions as to the

Football League's past and present record in giving leadership

as to all the matters canvassed in the articles before

encouraging any proceedings; and the same requirement applies


                                 9
to Mr >Foxf although on the face of it his position is less

vulnerable to such a defence than that of the Football League.



Malice

14•       Whilst it undoubtedly appears that Today have

produced a sensational story about the Football League and Mr

Fox which distorts the findings of the Taylor Report,   I am by

no means confident that a jury would conclude from this that

the newspaper was dishonest or reckless in making remarks to

the effect that blame and guilt for Hillsborough and for

soccer's other malaises lay partly with the Football League

and Mr Fox.



Qualified Privilege

15.      If the articles were a fair and accurate report of

the Taylor Report, I would expect qualified privilege to

attach thereto, either pursuant to paragraph 10(c) or possibly

12 of the Schedule to the Defamation Act 1952.    I would doubt

however whether a jury could properly consider the articles to

be a fair and accurate report of what Lord Justice Taylor said

in his report; and I would not therefore expect this defence

to succeed.



16.      In summary, there would in my view be a real risk

that proceedings brought on this article could run into

difficulties as regards liability,   in particular because

no lead was given in relation to safety and because of the

terms of the submission referred to in paragraph 52 of the


                              10
Report.     Mr Fox however may be in a much better position in

this regard than the Football League, depending upon the

extent of his role as considered above.



Damages

17 •        Assuming success on liability, my clients would fall

to be compensated for what on its face is a very serious

libel.     However the following considerations need to be borne

in mind:



(1)         My clients would obviously not fall to be

             compensated for any aspect of the articles which the'

             jury found to be fair comment.



(2)         If the jury found the charges partially justified,

            this would obviously work substantially to reduce

             any damages awarded.



(3)         The Football League as a limited company could not

            be compensated for hurt feelings, but only for

            actual or likely damage sounding in money.   If the

            Football League is a non-trading organisation (as to

            which I am not instructed) damages could well be

             insignificant even before taking into account the

             factors referred to in (1) and (2) above; however it

            might be possible to persuade a jury that a sizeable

            sum was nonetheless required in order to vindicate

             its governing reputation, notwithstanding that it


                                    11
           was unlikely to have suffered financial damage.



Exemplary Damages

              entitlement to exemplary damages arises when the

Defendant has knowingly or recklessly published false and

defamatory material after calculating that the pecuniary

advantage in doing so outweighs the pecuniary risks

(especially those that would arise from any libel

proceedings).    I do not believe that this would be an

appropriate case to claim exemplary damages,   since there is no

real evidence of any such calculation, and since I am by no

means sure that we could establish that the newspaper was

dishonest or reckless in advancing the proposition that the

Football League and/or Mr Fox should bear a share of the blame

for the Hillsborough tragedy and for soccer's other malaises.



Strategy

19-        My overall view is that the Football League would be

wise to steer clear if it can of proceedings which would

result in its record on safety, comfort and behaviour being

litigated in a libel action to which the media would give

enormous prominence; and that Mr Fox should likewise be chary

of embroiling himself in such litigation unless he can

successfully portray himself as a "new broom" who is well-

distanced from any blame that might be laid at the Football

League's door.




                                12
20.       I believe that the correct approach to these

articles would be to complain of them as an unfair summary of

the criticisms made in the Taylor Report and to ask the

newspaper to put the matter right by way of an apology and a

Statement in Open Court, to undertake not to make such

allegations again and to pay my clients costs.   Such an

apology and statement would probably have to recognise that

the Football League had come under criticism in paragraph 52

of the Report for failure to give advice on safety matters;

but would emphasise that this was the extent of the criticism

made, and that the report did not on its true construction

accuse the Football League under the "comfort" or "behaviour"

headings, and   certainly not of mismanagement or complacency

encouraging alcoholism or hooliganism.   Correspondingly it

would be made qlear that Mr Fox was not the target of any

criticism in the Report.   The chances of securing such an

apology would in my view be enhanced if it were possible to

obtain from Lord Justice Taylor the clarification referred to

earlier in this Advice (provided of course that it were

favourable).



21.       I would suggest that my clients reserve their rights

to damages against Today, but make it clear that their

principal concern is to set the record straight by ensuring

that Today give a fair and accurate report of what was said

about them in the Taylor Report.




                               13
22   .    If my clients thus confine their complaint to

misrepresentation of the Taylor Report, I believe that there

would be a much better chance of persuading Today that it had

done them an injustice requiring prompt correction; and that,

were the matter to come to Court, a jury would be that much

more sympathetic to my clients if such   a correction had not

been forthcoming.



23.       I regret having to give such cautious advice on a

matter of such importance to my clients, but it will be

evident that I find the matter rather more difficult than it

appears on the surface.   If it would help my Instructing

Solicitors to discuss any of these points over the telephone,

I will of course be very pleased to do so.




1 Brick Court                            STEPHEN SUTTLE

Temple EC4                                           1990




                               14
