INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370

J Dent
Secretary
The Football League Ltd
319 Clifton Drive South
Lytham St A n n e 's
Lancashire
FY8 IJG                                      pe        >
                                              2 October 1989




Dear Mr Dent

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

As part of his Inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor is now looking more
widely at issues of crowd control and safety at sports events.
An aspect of particular interest is that of identity cards, and
more especially the type of membership scheme envisaged in the
current Football Spectators Bill.

Lord Justice Taylor is aware, from formal submissions already
received, of the reservations felt both by yourselves and the
Football Association as to the merits of such a scheme.  He
recognises that striking a balance between catering for the needs
of the responsible majority and dealing with the problem of an
unruly minority is not easy, and is anxious to hear in more
detail of alternative ideas for tackling these problems.  It
would be helpful to know whether you could let Lord Justice
Taylor have written comments about this in advance of any meeting
with you which he might want to arrange.

I am writing in siiailar berms to the Football Association and the
Football Supporters' Association.

                                         Yours sincerely




                                    tr
                                    Vt  R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
5/6410                                                      10th October, 1989


R.M. Whalley, Esq.,
Room 662,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London,
SE1H 9AT.


Dear Mr. Whalley,

     I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 2nd October, 1989.

     This is receiving attention and I will forward a full reply as soon as
possible.

                               Yours sincerely,




                                  J.D. Dent,
                                  SECRETARY.
