                            FIRST AID FACILITIES

NOTE OF A MEETING WITH ST. JOHN AMBULANCE HELD ON TUESDAY, 2 6TH
SEPTEMBER, 1989 AT THE ST. JOHN AMBULANCE HEADQUARTERS, 1 GROSVENOR
CRESCENT, LONDON, S W l .


Present:             J.D. Dent (Secretary)
                     C.J. Whalley (Football League)
                     A .R . Titcombe (Football Association)

                        A .J . Sunderland (Commissioner-in-Chief, St. John
                                           Ambulance)
                        Dr. E.B. Lewis (Surgeon-in-Chief)
                        L. Walls {Chief Staff Officer)
                        J. Hammond (Secretary Medical)
                        Mrs. Y. Troman (Assistant Secretary Medical)




INTRODUCTION

     The meeting, again informal, had been arranged as a      follow-up to
the meeting held on 15th August, 1989.


CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER

     Mr. Dent reported that this matter was to be further considered
by the Management Committee at its meeting on 2nd October, 1989.  It
was agreed that Mr. Whalley should contact the S.J.A. after the
Management Committee meeting, by which time Dr. Lewis hoped to be able
to suggest a few names.


SECOND DOCTOR

     Mr. Sunderland thanked The Football League for supplying the list
of club doctors and the details of clubs' average attendances.      Dr.
Lewis confirmed that the S.J.A. would be able to arrange for a second
doctor to attend every League ground, but they could not cover all 9 2
grounds with S.J.A. Brigade doctors charging expenses only - they
would also have to bring in outside doctors at the normal B.M.A. rates
(£60 per 3 h o u r s ). Mr. Dent pointed out the difficulties this could
cause, if the second doctor actually received more than the club
doctor.

     It was decided that The Football League should ascertain which
clubs would like the S.J.A. to provide the second doctor and inform
the S.J.A. accordingly.  The S.J.A. could then discuss with the League
the best way forward.




                                    - 1 -
FIRST A I D E Q U I P M E N T

     Dr. Lewis confirmed that he would provide the League with three
sets of costings for First Aid Equipment at a club - i) a b a s i c
minimum, i i ) a medium level of equipment, i i i ) a top range.

     Dr. Lewis suggested that The Football League, in issuing the
£125,000 received from F.G.I.T., should aim to bring all grounds up to
the basic minimum.

     The meeting discussed whose responsibility it was to keep the
first aid room stocked; and it was felt that generally there should be
greater liaison between clubs and S.J.A. personnel.    Mr. Dent felt
that the senior S.J.A. officer at each ground should be well-known to
the club.  Mr. Dent suggested that this might be an item which could
be raised at Football League regional meetings.


PI    "T AID PERSONNEL

       Mr. Whalley reported that Manchester United had experienced a
p.r   am in reaching the 1 per 1, 000 recommendation laid down by Lord
J:    ce Taylor for their first match of the season.   The S.J.A.
us    ^ook to look into this, but felt that this may just have been a
on    off.


DO     'IONS

       The meeting received further information from the S.J.A. on the
le1
  ' :?1 of donations made by clubs.  Mr. Dent confirmed that this was a
source of some embarrassment to The Football League.    He confirmed
that the League were looking at the possibility of making a central
donation.

     The S.J.A. said that they would welcome a central donation based
on clubs' average gates.  They raised the possibility of a sliding
scale of donation levels and pointed out that there may have to be a
minimum figure for each match, even if there were only 1,000 people in
the ground.  The S.J.A. said that they would welcome the chance to sit
down and discuss this matter with The Football League.  In the
meantime, they would prepare a paper showing the costs involved in
providing a S.J.A. ambulance and S.J.A. personnel to matches.

     The S.J.A. representatives were not exactly aware of how many
League clubs they covered, but felt that it was approximately 81.

     The S.J.A. wondered if clubs could be asked by the League to
print a small acknowledgement in their match programmes to say:-
"First aid facilities provided by the St.. John Ambulance".

        Mr. Dent thanked the S.J.A.   for their hospitality.

                                                              C.J. Whalley,
                                                      30th September, 1989.




                                      - 2 -
