                                                                                    o'vy-f-

                                                                         <2 L b l & 0 3 & i j -   ^ w \ :sp




                                                                                                   M
                                                                                                   Qe
                                                                                                    ou
                                                                                                     re
                                                                                                      op
                                                                                                       ue
                                                                                                        gM
                                                                                                         haon
    Cheshire         livebfool                     Lancashire                                               <Wfrrel
    County Council   Cu^Qe<*t*eU                   County jg
                                   MtwvwwBWug                             ^ C O U N C IL
                                   KNOWSLEY
                                            ghMo   Council^

c/o 26 HATTON GARDEN
    LIVERPOOL
    L3 2AW                                                           Telephone: 051        225 3800


Your ref:                          Our ref:             d m /j b .            Date:      4th May, 1989.


    The Football League Ltd.,                                                    % -‘i
    Lytham St. Annes,                                                          % V''
    Lancs.
    FY8 1JG.
                                                                              q


    Dear Sir,


                                   Hillsborough Tragedy

         Since the tragic events of 15th April the local authorities in the areas
    most affected have been working together to mobilize resources to assist
    individuals and families.   There has been excellent co-operation between
    Liverpool F.C. and ourselves and a new partnership developed.

         Many people from around the country will require help over the coming months
    and years.   The nine local authorities considered the attached report and approved
    in principle the establishment of a Regional Unit to co-ordinate work and provide
    core services.   It also recognised that there will be a need to strengthen existing
    services and develop new services for victims at a local level.

         Given the scale and impact of the disaster which crosses existing administrative
    boundaries and requires financial support immediately to establish on a substantive
    basis our temporary service arrangement, it was decided to explore every possible
    source of funding.   The total annual cost of the Regional Unit is £350,000 and direct
    services are unlikely to be less than £1 million per year.

         It was felt that football organisations would wish to participate in the
    service development to victims most of whom are regular supporters. Approaches have
    also been made to Government and contact established with the E.E.C. as well as
    discussions proceeding with private company sponsors.

         Would the Football League be prepared to raise with the members clubs financial
    support as either a payment_or_ar]L annual payment each year for this and the next two
    years.   Given the number of clubs and their very different financial position it may
    be that you would consider contributions according to League position, or perhaps an
    approach to individual club commercial sponsors on our behalf.


                                                                           /continued



When calling or telephoning please ask for:
                           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

The Football League Ltd.                                         4th May, 1989.


/continued




     I realise that it. is unusual to receive such a request and there are many
calls on your resources.    However, we believe that these are exceptional
circumstances and services cannot be maintained without a very considerable amount
of additional money.

     I would, of course, be willing to attend any meeting to discuss this request
and answer questions.

     I look forward to hearing from you.


                                  Yours faithfully,




                                  Director of Social Services.
T




                A F T E R    H I L L S B O R O U G H




         A Report and Recommendations for Co-ordinating and

                  Delivering Helping Services of the

                    Directors of Social Services

                        of the areas affected




      Prepared by Officers from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire
      Liverpool, Sefton, St. Helens and Wirral in consultation
      with Merseyside Probation Service, the Voluntary Agencies,
      Mersey Regional Health Authority and Merseyside Emergency
      Planning Unit, under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard
      Parker.


                              APRIL 1989




    HLAAAG
     To consider the feasibility including costings of
establishing a regional unit in order to marshall and
organise the allocation of a variety of resources so that
help can be made available in the right place at the right
time to people affected by the "Hillsborough"* disaster.   In
this context "Region" is .the seven local authorities.

METHOD AND FORMAT

     A working party of senior staff/ drawn from statutory
and voluntary agencies in the region was established to
report on the potential for an Assistance Unit built upon
the service structure created after "Hillsborough".  The
group was chaired by Howard Parker, Professor in Social Work
at the University of Manchester.

        The report uses the experience gained from the disaster
at "Hillsborough" and other recent tragedies, and sets out
recommendations for dealing with the organisational,
information and co-ordination issues which have arisen.
Specifically, this consists off a synopsis of the key
elements required to operate a service which is responsive
to need and has an outreach capability, including the
provision of a helpline, counselling, specialised work,
database, staff training/support and public relations.     All
of these elements are included within the broad aim as
stated above, and the role of the unit as perceived by the
gr o u p .

INTRODUCTION

     The events at "Hillsborough", Sheffield, on 15th April
1989, are a graphic illustration of the extensive damage to
personal well-being which can be precipitated by the trauma
of a major disaster.  This applies to those directly
involved, through injury or bereavement, their helpers,
onlookers, and people suffering shock due to publicity or
association with similar events.  The effects are often
long-term and can have a profound impact upon family life
and on individual ability to cope with everyday living.

     "Hillsborough" is the latest in a tragic line of
disasters.  Manchester Airport, Bradford, Piper Alpha,
Zeebrugge, Kegworth, Clapham and Lockerbie have all
illustrated how a major unexpected disaster affects the
lives of ordinary people and the agencies which must provide
them with assistance.  We have learnt a great deal from
these earlier tragedies, particularly how large scale
disasters produce trauma and grief much further and deeper
than common sense would expect.

*   Football Stadium in Sheffield - Hillsborough


HLAAAG
     Following the disaster, there was a rapid mobilisation
of resources from a variety of authorities, and
non-statutory agencies.  It became apparent from the outset,
that a mechanism was necessary to ensure that these
resources were properly co-ordinated to reach people and
families in need in the most effective and speedy manner.
Drawing from the experience of those involved in the
response to earlier disasters, and from the current
situation, it is considered essential that an infrastructure
is established which can consolidate the effort currently
under way, and develop and adapt it to meet the changing
needs of the region for a minimum period of two years.

BACKGROUND

     The services and resources available for assistance
are, in the main, already in place though not always on the
scale required.  These services are provided by a
multiplicity of organisations.  They must respond to those
who have asked for help, but also reach out to those who
have not come forward spontaneously.  It is important that
services are available quickly, are easily accessible,
approachable and able to deal with a whole range of
emotional and practical needs.  Some of these needs will be
immediate, some short-term, some of a more permanent nature
and in many cases needs will remain hidden for months, or
even years.

     Localised services, well publicised, are of course,
most important b u t .these should be seen in the context of a
regional network of centrally co-ordinated resources.     In
addition, regional co-ordination can mobilise resources in
particular areas which would perhaps be overwhelmed by
demand, if left to cope alone.

KEY CO-ORDINATION FUNCTIONS REQUIRED ARE;-

(i)      Receipt and analysis of all requests for help both
         locally and nationally to ensure a co-ordinated
         response is made;

(ii)     provision of an outreach service to track those who
         need help, but who have not yet come forward;

(iii)    promote quality assurance of services, through
         monitoring and review;

(iv)     establishment of criteria for staff training and
          support patterns which are common across the region;

(v)      advise on the public relations function;




HLAAAG
         (vi)      guidance and assistance in the establishment of
                   appropriate local databases which are compatible with
                   the central system, to ensure speedy, reliable and
                   accurate information;

         (vii)     promotion of liaison and co-operation between all
                   relevant agencies in the region.

         (viii) review action already taken in other regions (e.g.
                Sheffield, Nottinghamshire).

         COUNSELLING SERVICES - CONTINUING REQUIREMENTS

10 .          It is clear from the information from previous
         disasters that continued access to practical and counselling
         services is required by some victims for a considerable time
         after the event.  It cannot be assumed that individuals
         needing help will be requesting or needing it now and
         arrangements must be made to ensure that help is accessible
         and readily available in the medium and long-term.

11.           The extent of future service requirements is difficult
         to predict though some indications of the range of problems
         presented, the location of people needing help and the form
         of help they require should be available when data collected
         so far, has been analysed.  Some patterns of service
         requirements will be discernible and inform the detailed
         planning of provision.

12   .        Meanwhile it is possible to identify in broad terms the
         kinds of services that will be needed and the ways in which
         they may be provided.  A co-ordinated mix of centralised and
         local services from the statutory and voluntary sector is
         likely to provide the greatest flexibility in the use of
         resources;  such flexibility will be necessary given the
         difficulty of identifying the extent and type of need, and
         ensuring that deployment of resources is appropriate and
         adequately monitored.

         Philosophy

13.           I t i s important to ensure that the service response
         meets with an overall philosophy agreed by the participating
         agencies.

                 For the consumer this will mean that:

         (i)       There are clear avenues for seeking help (locally and
                   regionally).

         <ii)      The response to their requests will be quick and
                   appropriate.




         HLAAAG
           (iii)      Help is easily accessible (i.e.   help is not
                       dependent upon where people live).

           (iv)       Help should be non-labelling and non-stigmatising.

               For the participating agencies this will mean that
          services:

           (i)        Should be well co-ordinated and consistent.

           (ii)       Should be quality assured.

           (iii)      Cost effective.

           (i v )     Keep the consumer as the primary                              consideration.

.4.            In addition, the agencies will need to contribute to
          the wider body of knowledge that can be drawn upon in the
          event of further disasters.  Funds to mount an evaluation of
          the response to this disaster are being sought
          independently.  The feedback from such research could be
          invaluable regionally and nationally in emergency planning.


          Specific Service Requirements

15.            The provision of services as a response to disaster can
          be considered along a continuum with practical help at one
          end and long-term counselling at the other.  Figure 1
          attempts to show this continuum in more detail.

          Figure 1 - A Service Continuum
 P ra c tic a l                           Advice/ __                                Counselling                                      Long-term
 Help                                     Guidance
                                                                                                                                     Support
                                         I        I     I       I 1      I      I                     I     I        I               I
            Transport ]   Llegal | Inform ation |      A      |Physical | Sharing                 Mourning [ Bereave-              PTSD*
                                                i llis te n - |          | feelin g s                      I ment
                                                I ing ear |              |                                  I
                                                  1         1     1
                    Finance   Medical          R eferral Support      Medical       R elation-            S tre ss       S ta f f Support
                                                 on       Group                     ghips
                                                                                             G rief

16             It can be seen that the services along the continuum
          reflect particular post disaster time phases, the possible
          different modes or models of service provision and the
          possible locations where services are received.  Many of the
          services are best left at the local level where resources
          are familiar and can easily be adjusted in response to
          changes in need.


          *       Post Trauma Stress Disorder.


          HLAAAG
     However, some can be provided more effectively at a
Regional level, e.g.  Helpline, central information.  In
addition, some services can best be monitored, evaluated and
co-ordinated at a regional level.  A 'network' of specialist
skills can be developed by a regional unit.

     The Inter-Agency Planning Group recommends that a
co-ordinating body, known as the "Hillsborough Support Unit"
be established for a minimum period of two years.  The Unit
should have an executive officer, and support staff;
operate the central Helpline; set up an efficient database:
oversee the pattern of services to enable resources to be
used effectively;  see that districts provide systematic
support and training for all staff;  develop clear channels
of communication and form partnerships with all relevant
authorities and non-statutory agencies in the region;  set
up monitoring, evaluation and performance review systems.

     The lead authorities responsible for the Unit could be
represented through a Committee comprising local authority
members and officers1 representatives of Mersey Regional
Health Authority, Merseyside Probation Service, Voluntary
Organisations, and the National Disaster Appeal Fund.

Suggested ’Regional Services1

     The services outlined below will need to be linked to
each other through the proposed Regional Unit.

HELPLINE

     This service currently operates on a 24 hour day, 7 day
week basis and is staffed by officers of the Social Services
Departments and a variety of other organisations.  Given the
nationwide 'catchment' of potential users of the service it
will be cost-efficient to retain this centralised service at
its current level for a period of weeks to come and will
ensure a ready access point for assistance while medium to
longer term arrangements are effected.  It is envisaged that
the Helpline will become a national 'one number' service run
by the regional unit with calls then referred to local
services as appropriate.

Co-ordination of Counselling Services

     Whilst counselling will usually be offered very
'locally' it will be necessary to ensure that individuals
are referred to the most appropriate agency; that their
needs are met, and the services are monitored.   In addition
there will be people needing help from outside the 'region'
whose needs must be assessed and referrals made.   This will
require a team of 4 headed by a team leader.




HLAAAG
      11


■V




     22.        It is important that referrals to and from statutory
           agencies across the country are properly co-ordinated.'
           There are a number of voluntary agencies on Merseyside and
           in the region for whom counselling is already the major, or
           a significant part of their work; these should be used
           wherever possible.   These include COMPASS*, Personal Social
           Services, C. of E. Board of Social Responsibility {through
           the clergy and national organisations with local bases, such
           as Cruse*).   The regional unit would aim to co-ordinate ■
           referrals to and from these agencies where appropriate.

           Drop-in Centre

     23.        The Anfield** Advice Centre has already allowed a large
           number of ’survivors' to describe and share their experience
           of oeing at Hillsborough.   It has offered other services as
           well.   It is likely that this Centre will continue via
           funding from other sources.   However, because of the
           symbolic importance of Anfield we recommend that it is used
           as a referral point for Helpline on Match Days.   We believe
           that many new referrals will be obtained on Match Days.

           OUTREACH AND CO-ORDINATION

     24.        Whilst the majority of people affected by Hillsborough
           reside within or just outside the Merseyside region it is
           known that a significant number reside elsewhere.  This
           problem was found by Kent following the Herald of Free
           Enterprise disaster at Zeebrugge where survivors and others
           lived long distances from the centre of help.  An "away"
           Team was established to initiate and provide assistance
           outside the Dover area.  Zeebrugge also demonstrated that
           many people required specialist help from Counsellors,
           Psychologists and Psychiatrists etc., and that a mechanism
           was needed to co-ordinate their services.  Thus problems
           were both identified and met by the Kent "away" Team.

     25.        Unlike Zeebrugge, however, the identity and location of
           people affected by "Hillsborough11 are largely unknown.
           Whilst this is a handicap, there is sufficient justification
           to reach out to those in potential need.   There is a need,
           therefore, to establish the equivalent of the Kent "away"
           Team but with the limited role of referring those from
           outside the region to appropriate services across the
           country.  Basic tasks will be to:-

                 COMPASS:   Counselling on Merseyside, Pastoral and
                             Supporting Services

                 C. of E . : Church of England

                 Cruse:     National Organisation for the Widowed and their
                             Children
           * *
                  Football Stadium of Liverpool Football Club, Anfield

           HLAAAG
      1.   Provide a central telephone line, e.g. an 0800
            (freephone) number;

      2.   Provide an assessment and referral service, whereby
            people are re-referred to Local Advice Services;

      3.   Co-ordinate referrals both from within and without the
            region;

      4.   Provide oversight of the different elements of
            specialist services, e.g. psychologists etc.

      5.   Identify key events and anniversaries which may effect
            individuals and consequently service provision (e.g.
            Inquests, future football games).

           Thus the differing needs of people will be identified
      and the appropriate resources matched up to meet those
      needs:  this will avoid duplication of effort and create a
      more efficient use of resources.

      DATABASE REQUIREMENTS

26.        The unit will require a database capable of recording
      information fed through to the 'helpline', 'drop.in' centres
      and other source points.  The majority of contacts will be
      within two broad categories, i.e. either requesting
      assistance or offering help.  Currently the 'Hillsborough
      Helpline' has separate systems dealing with these two
      elements.  At present, nearly 3,600 offers of help have been
      received from a variety of sources, including over 600
      through the ’Hillsborough Helpline'.  About 1,650 requests
      for help had been received nationally after one week, the
      majority of these being through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'.
      With this level of activity occuring, it is clear that an
      effective database is essential to matching needs for
      assistance with the wide range of resources available.

27.        In respect of referrals for help, a manual database was
      established as a record of callers, pending the setting up
      of the computerised system.  It is suggested that this be
      retained and maintained as a back up in case of problems
      with the system.

28.         Information which is useful for the database, includes
      basic details such as names, addresses, local authority of
      origin, r e f e r r a l t o district and agency, general
      practitioners, significant dates, (birthdays, anniversaries
      etc).   Each person has an individual reference number, and
      there is a facility for a group reference for people linked
      together.




      HLAAAG
     Staffing levels, which are currently based upon staff
seconded from other duties should be formalised as soon as
possible.  Minimum staffing is expected to require a systems
manager, two operators, and full-time clerical support.
Once the system is up to date close links should be
maintained with the 'Helpline1, and other agencies involved
in collating or investigating data.

Staff Training and Support

     The need for on-going and carefully targetted training
has been demonstrated via earlier disasters.  Clearly such
training can and has already been 'bought in' from external
sources.  So far this specialist training has been
provided for local authority workers.  The regional unit
would hope to adopt a policy of 'training the trainers' and
thus by using expertise within the region attempt to reduce
training costs.

     It is absolutely clear that those managing and working
in post-disaster situations found the work very stressful.
They need access to regular de-briefing and 'talking out'
sessions.  Whilst for some workers this will in part be
provided in their own agencies there is a need for an
independent service which all helpers, whether paid or
voluntary staff, can use.  The regional unit would aim to
ensure these support systems were in place and make
arrangements to co-ordinate offers of this 'care for the
carers' (e.g. by BASW* and the Psychology Service).   The
unit could also respond, in confidence, to direct requests
from staff anywhere in the region.

PUBLIC RELATIONS

      "Public relations" is an important and basic element in
the success or failure of any venture.   This is complex and
requires skilled and sensitive handling if its potential is
to be realised.   It needs to be regarded as an explicit
task, and as part of the management and objectives of the
unit.   It can best be organised within the framework of a
public relations strategy.

        Such a strategy will acknowledge that:-

(i)      Interest in the disaster will be subject to
         fluctuation.  For example:  funerals, inquests,
         litigation, football matches, anniversary of the
         disaster etc.  Forward planning for the impact of
         these events is required.

*     BASW:   British Association of Social Workers




HLAAAG
(ii)   Public Relations is heavily dependent on hard, factual
       and accurate information about the work of the unit.
       There will, therefore, need to be direct links between
       the management and the public relations functions of
       the unit.

(iii) Media interest can sometimes be aggressive and
      time-consuming.  This can be wasteful at best and
      damaging at worst.  Thus contact with the media needs
      to be carefully channelled and regulated separating
      local and regional issues.

     It is suggested that public relations can best be
undertaken by the Head of the Unit along with substantial
support from the Management Committee.

COSTINGS

     Since "Hillsborough" is a national disaster, it is
recommended that strenuous efforts are made to obtain the
funding of the Unit from central government, the EEC and
other sources.  Costs are estimated at around £350,000 per
year for two years.  This may be generous or alternatively
additional resources may need to be added on.

CONCLUSION

     The advantages of co-ordinating all helping responses
seem clear.  It is believed that a Regional Unit would, in
the long run, be cost effective and more importantly would
introduce a whole series of supports and checks which would
mean a better service for those who need it, including the
carers.




29th April, 1989




HLAAAG
            ESTIMATED COSTS "HILLSBOROUGH " SUPPORT UNIT


                                1989/90   1990/91    1991/

                                From      Full       To

                                1.7.89    Year       30.6

RUNNING COSTS                   £000      £000       £000

Salaries                         140        185           46

Volunteer Expenses                33         44           11

Office Accommodation, etc.        26         34            9

Supplies and Services             12         14            4

Transport                             6       8            2

Telephone                         11         15            4

Printing, Stationery etc.             8      10            2

Central Support                       8      10            3

Contingency                       30         30           15

                                 274        350           96



EQUIPMENT ETC

Typewriter, Wordprocessor
Computer Hardware
Software                         40
Phone System              1
Office Furniture



                                  314       350           96




HLAAAG
                                           u
                                           p>

                  >
                  CQ
                          h-*
                          •                to
                  (A      Ln               fa .
                  H*                       co
                  (0      o                0)
                  rt      I-1
                  P>      0)
                   0
                   rt
                          H
                          H-
                                           P
                                          pBQ
                          r>
                          P»
                          i-1                 n>
                                              H

                                                               PS
                                                               0)
                                                               h-* ^0
                                                               P> C
                                                               rr o '
                                        ffl                    H- I-1
                                        0)                     9
                                                               P OH‘
                                       CK)
                                        H*
                ■£*                     O
             po                         P
             (5 X                       P>
             Hi                         I- 1
             (5    W                           H
             h o                        o      0)
             H     r>                   o      P>
             P> H*                       L     B
             I- 1 P> ,                  o
             CD    t- *                 H      f
                                        &      0)
             si«
             o o
                                        S'
                                        a
                                               p>
                                               o*
             H H                        &>     0)
             ?5*5*
             (5 »
                                        rf
                                        H*
                                               H

             h  h
             to cn
                                        O
                                        P
                                         H
                                         0)
ttEflTONAL




                                         P>
                                         e




                                                                    n
ASSISTANCE




                                                                    o
                                                                    )
                                                                    §
                                                                    o
                                                                           i
                                                                    I
                                                                    O
                                                                    S*>
DNIT




                                H
                                H
                                (u
                                H*
                                P
                                0)                  H*
                                P*                  P
                                                    fl>
                                <                   0
                                o
                                I- 1                h
                                                   cm
                                §                   (u
                                 rr                 P             H*
                                 0)                 H"
                                 0)                 01            0
                                 H                  0)            P>
                                cn                   H            0
                                                                  r>
                                                                  0) 1
                                                                  (U
                                                                  P w
                                                                  fr 0)
                                                                      r>
                                                                  > H
                                                                  O- 0)
                                                                   0 rr
                                                                   H (»
                                                                   0 H
                                                                   •
                                                                   C
                                                                   Hi
                                                                   Hi
                                                      H            H•
                                                      i
                                                      -t           r>
                                                      (u           0)
                                                      H-           H
                                                      0
                                                      H-
                                                      P


                                                          Hi
                                                          H"
                                                          r>
                                                          0)
                                                          H
  r
 t




                                                                                          12   t h   May   .1989.




D i r e c t o r of S o c i a l S e r v i c e s ,
Hillsborough D i s a s t e r ,
c/o 26 H a t t o n G a r d e n ,
LIVERPOOL
L3 2 A W




Dear    Sir,

      T h a n k y o u fo r y o u r l e t t e r d a t e d 4th M a y w h i c h     I will    place       before
the M a n a g e m e n t C o m m i t t e e at t h e i r n e x t m e e t i n g .

        J.   will   write      to y o u    further    in d u e   course.




                                              Yours   faithfully,




                                                   Secretary.
