                                                                                                                                           sp.




                                        T H E FOO TBALL LEAGUE LIM ITED
L y t h a m St, A n n e s , L a n c a s h i r e , FY8 IJG. T e l e p h o n e 02 53 72 9421 . T e l e x 6 7 675. Fax 025 i 7 2 4 7 8 b   S e c r e t a r y \. D. D e n t




5/7957                                                                                                                 17th October, 1989.




TO ALL CLUBS



Dear Secretary,

                                  Interim Report by Lord Justice Taylor
                                Recommendation 41 - Medical Practitioner


             The above recommendation states

     "The club should employ a medical practitioner to be
present at each match and available to deal with any medical
exigency at the ground.  He should be trained and competent in
advanced first aid.  He should be present at the ground at least
an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour
after the end of the match.  His whereabouts should be known to
those in the police control room and he should be immediately
contactable."

     If clubs take the view that the club doctor attends matches
primarily to take care of injuries to players, they should
consider employing a second doctor to cover the above
recommendation.

     The Football League has recently met with Chief Officers of
the St. John Ambulance and discussed this matter.  The St. John
Ambulance has offered to supply a second doctor at matches if
required by the club.  The St. John Ambulance would endeavour to
supply a St. John Ambulance doctor (charging expenses only), but
they have pointed out that there would only be a limited number
of these doctors available and the probability is that they
would have to bring in outside doctors, who would have to be
paid the normal B.M.A. rates (approximately £20.00 per hour).



                                                                                    1




                      All correspondence lo be addressed to Thu1 Secretary Registered Office as above. Registered in f-lngland tfQb! z
TO: The Secretary,
    The Football League Limited,
    319 Clifton Drive South,
    Lytham St. Annes,
    LANCASHIRE,
    FY8 1JG.


(Name of Club)



           YES, my club would like the St. John Ambulance to
           supply a second doctor at matches.



           NO, my club would not wish the St. John Ambulance to
           supply a second doctor at matches



                    Signed

          Position at club

                      Date


    Please tick the appropriate box.
