                            GJW

                              MEMORANDUM

TO:         Jack Dunnett
cc          David Dent
            Ian Stott

FROM:        Tony Hutt


RE:          Discussion Document for FA Council


DATE:        23 May 1989



                  Discussion Document for FA Council


You asked me to make comments on the discussion document
published by Graham Kelly at his press conference on 18 May.

Before I deal with the detailed proposal contained in Graham's
paper, I should first comment on Bert Millichip's suggestions
that the FA should take powers to ban away supporters generally.
This was the cause of the early publication of Graham’s
document.  1 gather that the Government have no plans to go down
this road. They regard it as far more draconian than a
membership scheme.  It is, however, strongly supported by the
Police Federation and may have certain superficial attractions to
those members of the public who do not follow football. Although
it could only work where a club is situated in a free standing
town some distance from any other club (eg Luton), and would not
work in major conurbations, I expect that some Conservative MPs
may pick up the idea; the League now need to be ready to deal
with this argument.

Turning to Graham's paper, I have commented only on certain
paragraphs and these are clearly indicated.


1.2     "the game has been beset by the twin problems of hooliganism
         and outdated facilities. It has attempted to tackle both.

I don't think that this statement is widely believed.  I will
comment in more detail later on the up-dating of facilities. The
widespread perception of football among the majority of people
who do not follow the game is that it totters on the verge of
bankruptcy and yet spends large sums o£ money mostly on buying
players rather than improving spectators, facilities.  This may
                               -   2   -




not be a fair or accurate perception but it is difficult to
argue that football has done much to correct it.

1.3   "Hooliganism has been contained by the deployment of huge
       resources, both in terms of manpower and finances. Better
       intelligence....have drastically reduced the number of
       incidents inside grounds".

This is not believed. Nobody believes that hooliganism has been
contained. The incidents at Selhurst Park, like those at
Stamford Bridge last year have done untold damage, and whether or
not the number of incidents has been reduced the fact of
continuing incidents is what people remember. This paragraph
seems terribly complacent.

1.5   "the impression given to the outside world is...of a slum
       sport".

This impression is also given to many football supporters.
Although there are honourable exceptions, the conditions for
ordinary supporters on the terraces, especially lavatories, are
squalid. It is not only the fences and cages that do not make an
inviting environment. Although I have not visited football
stadia abroad, I cannot believe that their facilities are as
ancient and primitive as some o£ the grounds occupied by our
league clubs.

1.6   "The game enjoys a vast fund of goodwill”

No it doesn’t. A growing number of people who do not follow the
game find it an embarrassment and a nuisance. People are
genuinely frightened of "football supporters".

2.1   "We need to get more seats into our major grounds".

Yes. The FA and The League need to look at the feasibility of
replacing terraces altogether at some large first and second
division grounds. They should be trying to anticipate the likely
recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry and making
preparations for immediate implementation of these measures. In
the meantime consideration needs to be given to an immediate
voluntary reduction in crowd density on the terraces at clubs
where there are large attendances.
                                -   3   -




"The first division is 38% seated".

This is an average figure and could be misleading.   What is the
range?


"Seated customers are more safely controlled".

This is not borne out by the incidents at Selhurst Park.


2.2   "There is little incentive for the fan....to forego the pub
       unless the ground can offer reasonably priced, wholesome
       refreshment".

Yes to wholesome refreshment, but it would be unfortunate if this
proposal gave the impression that the FA were advocating a
resumption of the widespread sale of alcohol within grounds.    It
seems to me that alcohol abuse is probably the major cause of
hooliganism and Football should be advocating the restriction of
the availability of alcohol. While it may not be practicable to
close pubs and off-licences near to grounds on match days, it
could be worth giving more support to the proposal that it is
made an offence to carry and consume alcohol in the street.   I
think Government would welcome fresh initiatives to provide pre­
match entertainment for crowds, e.g. American-style cheerleaders
to encourage fans to turn up earlier to matches.


2.5   "better communications"

I think that it would be helpful to state more explicitly here
the benefits of improving rail links to major stadia. The new
station at Watford is a good example, and there are a number of
other clubs where this kind of improvement is already possible.
Access to railway lines and/or motorways should be the prime
consideration where clubs are considering relocation.


2.6   "The finance would not necessarily be out of the
       question...public money might be made available....both UK
       and EEC".

I am not sure about EEC money, because I think the criteria for
social fund money is often the creation of new jobs, but 1 am
sure that the UK Government would not be willing to give any
substantial funding for the building of new grounds and would
probably look askance at attempts by local authorities to do the
same.
                                    -   4   -




2.7     "There is a strong case for the reduction in the pool
         betting tax from 42.5% to 40%".

As long as Nigel Lawson is Chancellor there is no chance of this
happening. Neil Kinghan told me last week that if the Government
wanted to give football a £16 million subsidy it would do so
direct, not by reducing Pool Betting Duty.


3.1     "the National Membership Scheme...threatens the very
         existence of the game by deterring the casual supporter".

This runs the risk of becoming a self-fulfilling prophesy.  There
is some sense in the criticism which asks "when are the football
authorities, who want to run the FMA, going to stop telling
people that the scheme will deter supporters and start
encouraging supporters to join the scheme?".

The membership scheme does not threaten the game to anything like
the same extent as the ban on away supporters advocated by David
Evans, the Police Federation and Bert Millichip.


"A different road whereby the away fan must belong to the away
 club's membership scheme".

I may have misunderstood the rationale of this scheme, but if
home supporters do not have to have a membership card to enter
the ground, what is to stop disruptive away supporters who may
have been banned from their away membership scheme entering the
parts of the ground reserved for home supporters? I suspect I am
not alone in believing that this scheme is nonsensical window-
dressing.


"the tribal aspects of football support would be eliminated".

 How?     This is a non sequitur.


3.3     "There is a need for the football authorities to establish a
         common policy on delaying kick-offs".

I think Government would welcome an initiative from football that
would indicate a willingness to delay matches when there are
still substantial crowds waiting outside, in order to achieve
more orderly entry into the ground. This would have to be
underpinned by better communications between the police outside
grounds and the referee.
                               -   5   -




3.4   "Fencing will continue to be required for the foreseeable
       future”

This is an accurate reflection of the messages I get from people
at Marsham Street. They think it is unlikely that Lord Justice
Taylor will dispense with fences.


3.5   "The Police should be given the unfettered right to search
       those entering football grounds".

Government regard this as far more draconian and Intrusive of
civil liberties than the membership scheme.


3.6   "breach of the peace".

I am not sure I understand what Graham is getting at here.


5.1   "There is undoubtedly a need for better communications with
       those who support our game".

I am sure this is true, but Football clubs have generally in the
past preferred an arms length relationship with their supporter's
clubs; it is ironic that this proposal is made at a time when
some supporter's organisations are at their most militant.


6.1   "A major national survey of the leisure needs of our town
       and cities".

This may be a good idea. Are the FA suggesting that clubs should
diversify into other areas of recreational provision (like
leisure ice, ten-pin bowling, leisure pools, gyms, squash
courts)?
