                                                               \ i |e

                                                         0    0 t/JVDED



                                T H E FO O TB A LL LEA G U E L IM IT E D
  Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 IJG. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T eiex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.                Secretary J. D. D e nt




MF/10280                                                                                                   8th February 1990




TO ALL CLUBS



Dear Secretary,

     One of the recommendations put forward by Lord Justice Taylor
in his Interim Report was for the provision of ambulance services
at Football League grounds throughout the country.  Several League
clubs have already been approached by their ambulance authorities
with a view to forming an agreement governing the provision of
these ambulance services.  One of the stipulations put forward by
some of the ambulance authorities as a pre-condition of entering
into such an agreement is that each football club provides them
with a very wide indemnity against all liabilities they may incur
to third parties whilst providing the service, including liability
arising from their own negligence.

     Whilst, to our knowledge, only a handful of clubs have been
approached to date by their ambulance authorities, it is considered
to be important that all clubs should present a uniform response to
such requests for an indemnity.  We have consulted our legal
advisers and Insurers and have been informed that the clubs will be
unable to obtain insurance to cover all of the liabilities they
would incur under the kind of indemnity requested by the ambulance
authorit ies.

     Our Insurance Advisers have confirmed that the Public
Liability Policy does provide indemnity to The League and to each
club in connection with any accidental injury or property damage
arising out of the use of the Ambulance Services, subject, of
course, to the terms and conditions of the Policy.

     All Football League clubs approached by their local ambulance
authorities requesting an indemnity of this kind are therefore
requested to inform The Football League if they have not already
done so and to respond to the relevant authority by stating that
they are not prepared to give this indemnity because this request
is considered to be unreasonable in view of the fact that they are
being paid for the provision of their services and that their own
insurance should cover their activities.


                                                                   1.
                All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Regfstered in England 80612
                                2.


     We should be obliged to receive copies of all correspondence
received from local ambulance authorities.  If your club is
approached and you need further advice, please do not hesitate to
contact us.

                         Yours sincerely,




                                  Dent
                             Secretary
