                    PA SUBMISSION TO TAYLOR INQUIRY


DRAFT/7/26 May 1989




1.   INTRODUCTION


     1.      1 Football is Britain' s national winter sport.  Every
year, the professional game in England attracts millions of
people from all walks of life, transcending barriers of class,
race, religion, politics and sex.    The total attendance at
matches involving Football League clubs in season 1987-88 was in
excess of 20, 000, 000.  Attendances in 1989-90 show an increase of
some 2 . 5%.  It is little wonder, therefore, that the people who
go to football matches should mirror what is best and worst in
our society.

    1.     2 It has become fashionable to point the finger at
football and to blame the game, or those who are responsible for
its administration, for the behaviour of the tiny minority of
those attending matches who create trouble out of all proportion
to their numbers.   Government figures show that, in season
1987-88, 6147 people were arrested in connection with matches
involving Football League clubs, [insert comparatives].   Many of
these were arrested away from stadia.   That constitutes some 3
arrests per 10,000 people attending.   The Football Association
accepts that one arrest is one too many and unequivocally
condemns the conduct of this section of so-called football
supporters.   Football is saddled with a problem not of its
making.   Blaming football for the situation is akin to
criticizing the householder for being burgled, to apportioning
guilt to the victim instead of the mugger.   Nevertheless, The
Football Association recognizes that it has a duty to protect the
game and that the world at large will expect it to take the lead
in dealing with hooliganism.   Football has accepted this
responsibility.   It has tackled the problem - successfully, we
contend - it is continuing to do so.

      1.     3 The problem is, however, complex. There are no easy
answers.   There are considerations of safety as well as of
behaviour.   We need to find educational solutions in the
long-term, just as much as effective short-term answers in the
area of crowd control.                  h     ^

      1.     4 Football, in partnership with the police, has developed
an intelligence network that allows matches to be planned in as
thorough a manner as is possible, taking into account the
unpredictability of human behaviour.  Every Football League club
is required to lodge with The League a "local plan",[expand and
explain, Sheffield Wednesday plan as example) detailing the
manner in which it deals with matches on its ground.  Before
every game, the police - from the areas both of the home club
and the visitors, - the visiting club itself and the transport
authorities decide the arrangements that will apply. The police
fule on the number of officers that will be deployed both inside
and outside the ground. The clubs pay an agreed fee for each
policeman operating within the stadium. The club has no right of
veto over the number selected by the police.   [By what regulation
or law?] In 1987-88, the total police charges paid by Football
League clubs for the policing of League games was £3,355,000 - an
average charge per match of £1,650.   This burden is lightened
somewhat by the payment by The Football Trust of 35% of the
charges, excluding VAT.  The balance borne by clubs represented
4.2% of gate and season-ticket receipts,

      1.     5 The single most effective contribution to the fight
against hooliganism in the last decade has been close-circuit
television. ^ It was a recommendation of the Home Office Committee
of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds of
January 1986 (the Popplewell Report), that followed the fire at
Bradford City football club, that such systems be introduced at
Football League grounds in England and Wales (paragraphs 4, 92
to 4.101), The process had already begun prior to Popplewell.
It has now been completed and all Football League grounds
either have permanent systems or access to a mobile one.

     1.6 All Football League grounds and Wembley Stadium are
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975. The
legislation was introduced following the Ibrox disaster in 1971.
The Football Association co-operated to the full with the Inquiry
of Lord Wheatley following that disaster. It concurred with the
introduction of standard safety procedures. It welcomed the
extension of the designation of clubs to the Third and Fourth
Divisions after the Bradford fire and will assist in any way
possible should it be considered, in the light of Lord Justice
Taylor's findings, desirable to establish a central licencing
authority for sports grounds. [Explain why]

      1.      7 The installation of close-circuit television and the
ground alterations made necessary by the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act have, of course, absorbed significant amounts of money. From
1978, much of this expenditure has been met by The Football Trust
and by The Football Grounds Improvement Trust, funded by
contributions from Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters from their
" Spotting-the-Ball" competition. To date, a total of £68, 000,000
has been provided, £2,775,000 has been spent on the installation
of close-circuit systems in England and Scotland. £43,500,000 has
been allocated for safety and improvement work, also in England
and Scotland. The total amount spent on ground safety at Football
League clubs, including the clubs' own contributions, amounts to
£36, 000,000 in the last ten years.

     1,      8 Government has, in addition to the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act, produced legislation covering fire safety, the
control of alcohol consumption and public order.

      1.     9 The net result has been a dramatic reduction in the
number of incidents in grounds reported to The Football
Association, as the following table shows. [Reported by whom?]
       table 1   Cases of spectator misconduct involving
                 Football League clubs reported to The
                 Football Association

                  [Insert previous years 3

                  1981-82              42
                  1982-83              42
                  1983-84              41
                  1984-85              41
                  1985-86              20
                  1986-87              19
                  1987-88              19
                  1988-89               9

            (Total matches approx 2, 300 per season)

[This is not concrete enough. Firm evidence required from clubs
and from ACPO that hooliganism is in decline. Minister of Sport
prefers to rely on arrest figures. Compare. State that increase
due to close-circuit and undercover operations. Any evidence on
hooliganism from Leicester University. ]

     1.      10 Yet the public perception is still of a game beset by
the twin problems of hooliganism and outdated facilities. As the
attendance figures quoted in the opening paragraph indicate,
the game enjoys a vast fund of goodwill.  Increasing numbers are
also playing the game. The figures below indicate the steady
rise in participation fostered by The Football Association since
the Second World War.

       table 2   Number of clubs in England registered
                 with The Football Association

                  1948                 17,890
                  1961                 22,680     [Sunday Football
                                                             leg a l ]
                         [world cup]
                  1972                 36, 904
                  1975                 3 7, 641
                  1980                 39, 730
                  1985                 41,173     [decline in Schools
                                                             football]

     1.11 Following Hillsborough, The Football Association
perceives its task as being to reconstruct general public
confidence in the game on the foundations already provided by
healthy levels of participation and attendance.   In the following
pages we discuss the lead that we shall be taking in fitting
football for the requirements of today and tomorrow.



2.   SEATING AND FACILITIES


    2, 1 First, we need to get more seats into our major grounds.
The First Division is 39% seated.  Experience at Aberdeen has
shown that, if supporters are treated well, they behave well.
Seated customers are more safely controlled and the tendency to
taunt and gesture is gradually lessened.   Grounds become better
places to visit.  Spectators can stand and watch in safety, but
the ratio of seats to standing accommodation must be altered so
that there is a preponderance of seats.
      2, 2 Between 1978.and 1981, Glasgow Rangers converted their
stadium from a 65,000 capacity, of which 20,000 were seats, to
44,000, of which 35,000 were seated.    At more or less the same
time, the Criminal Justice Act was introduced in Scotland.    These
factors, together with the success that coincided with the
arrival of new manager Graeme Souness in 1985, have led to a
dramatic increase in average attendances', as the table below
indicates, The club has some 20,000 season-ticket holders, all
of them seated.

           table 3    Comparative average attendances at
                      Glasgow Rangers matches

                       1980-81    19, 000
                       1981-82    17, 000
                       1982-83    18, 000
                       1983-84    22, 000
                       1984-85    21, 000
                       1985-86    25, 000
                       1986-87    37, 000
                       1987-88    38, 000
                       1988-89    39, 000

 [Rangers arrest figures. Comment from Scottish FA that most
arrests come from standing section. Letter from Rangers on their
impression of seating, ]

        2. 3 Aberdeen FC went one step further than Rangers,
coverting their Pittodrie Stadium to all-seater as long ago as
1978. The capacity is a respectable 23,000 and, while the club
does not enjoy the massive support of its Glasgow rivals, it
still achieves a healthy average of around the 14,000 mark.
More significantly, perhaps, the statistics for arrests in
connection with Aberdeen's home matches are remarkably low, as
the table below illustrates.

           table 4    Comparative arrest statistics at
                      Aberdeen matches

                       1983-84    36
                       1984-85    25
                       1985-86    36
                       1986-87    30
                       1987-88    34
                       1988-89    16

 Letter from Aberdeen, Letter from
What about fans standing on seats?]

      2. 4 Second, we need to improve our facilities at
grounds,    [eg urinals].  There is little incentive for thefan,
particularly the travelling supporter, to forego the pub unless
the ground can offer reasonably-priced, wholesome refreshment.
The Football Association intends to concentrate a great part of
its resources on a drive for better facilities.    [refer to
2. 11 - 2.13]

     2. 5 Action is needed to allow our existing major stadia to
become safer, more wholesome arenas.  They enjoy permanent bases
of support and ancillary activities and do not, in general, need
to consider moving or sharing.  Many will, however, wish to
become all-seater.  [reconcile with 2,9 - 2. 10]
      2,     6 It is now 23 years since England staged a major
international football tournament.   (The 1966 World Cup).   It is
l'l years since we were asked to find a venue for the final of a
European club competition.   (The European Cup Final of 1978
played at Wembley between Liverpool and Bruges).    FIFA, the world
governing body of Association Football has made it clear that
they will, in future, only award World Cups to countries that can
provide all-seater stadia,   Their exact criteria' are: -

         "A maximum of 12 stadia with the following
          capacities (all seats):

          First Round matches     30,000 - 40,000

          Opening match,
          Semi-Finals and
          Final                   minimum   5 0, 000. "

      2.     7 At present, only Wembley Stadium is capable of meeting
the criteria for the second category of matches. It is expected
that the ground will be all-seat, with a capacity of 80,000
within the next year or so.  No other ground can meet the
requirements, even of the First Round matches.   There are,
however, at least 8 grounds capable of conversion that
could provide the required capacities.  The following table
shows these grounds, converted on the basis of one seat
being gained for every two standing places lost:


                Potential capacity of stadi a
                converted to 100% seating

                Manchester United            41,   000
                Sheffield Wednesday          39,   000
                Manchester City              39,   000
                Everton                      38,   000
                Ars enal                     37,   000
                Liverpool                    34,   000
                Aston Villa                  32,   000
                Chels ea                     32,   000


     2.     8 This nucleus of all-seater stadia would also provide
the pool from which The Football Association would draw the
venues for FA Cup Semi-Finals.

     2.      9 Many clubs, however, find themselves in geographical
locations where it is practically impossible for meaningful
improvements to be made. Others share catchment areas in
which two costly to maintain stadia on prime development
sites make no commercial sense whatsoever. Many of these
clubs would undoubtedly benefit from a move to an area
providing better communications, better parking and, perhaps,
shared use of facilities. Many clubs spring immediately to mind
as candidates:  The Bristol clubs, one of whom has no current
home, Fulham and Brentford, Blackburn and Preston, Bolton and
Bury, Rochdale and Oldham, Leeds and Bradford, Chester and
Wrexham, Stoke City and Port Vale, Huddersfield Town and
Halifax, Watford and Luton Town, Enfield and Barnet.
There is resistance.   Supporters do not like leaving their
traditional home ground, as the experience of Charlton
Athletic - playing on .Crystal Palace's ground, but anxious to
return to thsir former ground - has shown, However, to set
against this we have the experience of countries such as Italy
where big clubs such as AC Milan and Internationale Milano
share a stadium with no perceivable problems.     In our own
country, Scunthorpe United have provided the only recent example
of a Football League club moving to a putpose built stadium.
[Scunthorpe brochure.    Experience from Utrecht and other overseas
clubs].   Their experience is of interest.    Their new ground was
"given" to them by the local authority in exchange for the old,
The club estimates the cost of the new stadium to have been
£2,500,000,   The capacity of the new ground is 11, 226, compared
to 27, 000 at the old one, although this' is perfectly adequate for
the club' s attendance.   The new stadium is 60% seated.   The old
had only 10% seats.    The new ground is easier to police and to
access.   The entire spectator accomodation is covered.

      2.     10 The Football Association believes there is a need for
a clear lead in this area.     As a first step, it will look again
at a study made in 1983, [append]      based on a ground-sharing
proposal,   The brief was to provide a model multi-purpose
two-club stadium on a green-field site.      The cost of the exercise
would not necessarily be prohibitive, with willing partners from
construction, property development, local authorities and
finance.   Public money might be made available to the consortium,
both U. K. and E. E. C. , to support this private invitiative.

     2.      11 The Football Association will itself look creatively
at new ways of raising revenue.   Sponsorship is one obvious area.
The game as a whole already benefits from sponsorship to the tune
of some £17,500,000 per year.   The Football Association's aim
will be to supplement that with an acceptable sponsorship of its
most valuable commodity, the FA Cup competition.   The Football
Association has already set in motion a search for a sponsor,
with a proposal that offers the prospective company a unique
opportunity to be identified not only with a competition of world
standing, but also with an initiative that can result in the
World Cup' s coming to England in the not-too-distant future. The
sponsor will be invited to pay an annual sum as is usual in such
agreements.   He will also be asked to provide a lump-sum figure
of substantial proportions in the form of an interest-free loan,
This sum would form the basis of a fund to assist clubs with the
installation of seating and/or to help with the construction of
new stadia.   The Football Association will propose to other
bodies, such as The Football Trust, that further capital sums be
set aside to augment this fund.

      2.     12 Given The Football Association's willingness to find
the necessary finances, there is a strong case for the government
to reciprocate with a reduction in the pool betting tax from
42.5% to 40%.  This would release £16, 000,000 per annum which the
Pool Promoters might be persuaded to allocate for ground
improvements, thereby putting the game in receipt of over
£30,000,000 per year from pools sources. There is no need to
create a Football Levy Board, as proposed by the Rothschild
Commission in 1977 when it recommended a reduction of duty to
37%, because the Football Trust/Football Grounds Improvement
Trust already acts as a suitable vehicle with proven track
record.
     2.      13 Much capital is made of the apparent overspending by-
clubs on transfer fees. The transfer sysyem does, in fact,
ensure the circulation of money throughout the game. Luton Town
is often cited as an example to the rest of professional football
and we discuss the club' s 100% membership scheme below. It should
be noted, however, that whatever Luton may have achieved in the
area of crowd control, the anticipated rfeturn to its stadium of
large numbers of lapsed supporters, bringing in fresh revenue,
has not occured. At the end of its financial year in May, 1988
the club was insolvent to the tune of £911, 132.  In a good season
on the playing field, turnover went up from £2,300,000 to
£3,900,000, but an operating loss for the year of £327, 000 was
returned.  The club' s cumulative deficit stands at £2, 200,000 and
only a profit of £835,000 on transfers over the last two years
has prevented the picture becoming even blacker.

       2,      14 It cannot be ignored that the main product of a
football club is a successful team. The experience of Glasgow
Rangers shows that improved facilities alone will not guarantee
big crowds.   Clubs must look to their playing strength as well as
to the comfort and safety of their grounds.   The current tax
system, however, pushes clubs in the wrong direction.   There are
no capital allowances for ground improvements.   There is only
minor relief for work necessarily carried out as a condition of
the issue of a licence under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.
Transfer fees, on the other hand, are treated as revenue.   The
Government would automatically stimulate greater expenditure on
improved facilities if it were to give capital allowances for
such projects.

      2.       15 With the best will in the world some clubs will not
be able to contemplate adding significant numbers of seats. The
Football Association believes it is essential, therefore, for the
Home Office and the Scottish Office to look once more at the
standing capacities that are allowed by the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds.  We believe it is also desirable for the Guide to
lay down the maximum number of steps permitted in one
uninterrupted drop on a terrace.   The Football Association places
itself at the disposal of the Home Office to assist in the
assessment of these maxima.   [Rewrite to say that if all-seater
not possible for all because of finances, we go along with
regulations for safer standing].



3.   MEMBERSHIP


3.1 The government is convinced that a national, compulsory,
membership scheme is the prime need, together with a range of
other measures, in the quest for a solution to the hooligan
problem.   In 1985, the Prime Minister asked The Football
Association and The Football League to tell her what football was
going to do about implementing a 100% membership scheme.   We said
then that we believed such a scheme would be impractical,
ineffective in terms of the sum-total of anti-social behaviour it
was required to stop and disastrous for the football industry the
scheme was presumably intended to protect.   Since that time, the
government has decided to legislate a membership scheme into
existence.   Football remains opposed.  It has stated, however,
that it has no intention of opposing the law of the land and
would wish to be given control over the scheme, should it come
into existence as the will of Parliament,
      3.      2 The Football Association and The Football League have
appointed the Management Consultancy, Arthur Young to advise on
all aspects of the establishment of a national membership scheme,
[Append Report] The Minister for Sport has stated that the
government will not sanction the introduction of a scheme until
such time as it is clear that the necessary technology exists to
ensure its successful implementation.    It has to be said that the
football authorities are still in the process of evaluating the
available technology.    No-one has the necessary experience in
what is an untried area to be able to say categorically that a
system can be produced that will work effectively in real crowd
situations.    One of the principal concerns expressed by the
football authorities and many other individuals and organisations
is that the process of computer-reading membership cards might
produce delays at turnstiles with the concomitant problems of
safety.   This concern must be deepened following Hillsborough.
Appended to this submission (Appendix A) are a computer model
produced by Arthur Young, based on queuing times at the
littlewoods Cup replay between Arsenal and Liverpool on 9th
November, 1988, when 3, 000 to 5,000 people were locked out, and
report by Manchester United on the National Membership proposals
that contains interesting references to admission flows into the
club' s Old Trafford ground.

      3.    3 In the process of examining the technology necessary
for the introduction of a successful membership scheme, The
Football Association will also look at the entire question of
turnstiles.  The standard model used on most Football League
grounds is antiquated.  The Football Association will give a lead
in researching a better system of filtering entry to football
grounds.

      3.     4 The Football Association and The Football League have
stated that they would wish the Football Spectators Bill,
should it be enacted, to give real powers for the exclusion
from membership of violent offenders, whether or not their
crime was committed in relation to a football match. The
government has not seen fit to accede to football's wishes.
The offences for which a person may be excluded from the scheme
are limited to those considered "football related".   The crux
of the argument against the proposals in terms of their likely
effectiveness is that millions - independent research by Target
Group Index in 1985 showed that 5. 7 million people attended at
least one football match during the course of a season - of
blameless football supporters will be put to great inconvenience
for the sake of what appears, on police figures of those
arrested, to be no more than 6,000 or so. Indeed, if we are to
talk about the effectiveness of the legislation in detaching the
hooligan from football, we should perhaps look at the numbers
of exclusion orders issued by the courts as a result of these
arrests.  The figure is 1, 760 between August 1987 and May 1989,
or approximately 900 per season.   [Insert recommendations for
amendment to bill giving courts wider powers to exclude all
violent offenders].

     3,     5   [Luton experience, quoting arrest figures,   but also
drop in attendance and financial problems]
      3,      6 Since May 1985, Leeds United Football Club has
operated under an all-ticket directive in respect of all its away
matches, as a result of an incident at Birmingham City.   Since
Ajpril 1987, the club has voluntarily chosen to deal with the sale
of tickets for these games through a membership scheme, entitled
"the New-U-Club",   Admission to away games can only be obtained
through the possession of a valid membership card together with a
match ticket.   The club provides twelve Of its own stewards for
all away games to check cards and tickets before spectators
approach the turnstiles.   Members who are arrested or ejected are
banned or suspended from attending further matches.

      3,      7 This is one means of largely eliminating undesirable
elements from games.   Most matches do not require such drastic
measures.   The away supporter is undoubtedly the focus for what
violence does occur in connection with games, but effective
control is achieved in the majority of cases by a combination of
police direction and “self-segregation" by the supporters.   In
other words, most spectators prefer to avoid trouble and will
automatically go to the section of the ground reserved for them
where they know they will be protected.

      3.      8 The Football Association would not wish to give the
impression from the foregoing that it is against the concept of
membership per se.    Quite the contrary. It recognise, that it is
in the interests both of the clubs and the supporters for a
closer relationship to be developed between the parties.    The
examples of clubs such as Barcelona and Real Madrid, each with
some 100, 000 members, illustrate what can be achieved through a
close identification of club with community.   Many clubs are
already moving rapidly in this direction. The Football Trust
has instituted a Community Relations Award Competition for
clubs, with cash prizes for the more enterprising schemes. In
its first year, Millwall and Preston North End shared the main
prize. While the submissions lodged with the Trust are too bulky
to attach to this document, they are all available for, and
worthy of, study.

     3.      9 If football rejects the enforced " solution" offered by
Part 1 of the Football Spectators Bill - it welcomes a Part 2
that offers for the first time the prospect of being able to
prevent known trouble-makers from travelling to away games
overseas - it understands that it needs to put forward other
immediate, as well as long-term, proposal's. The confrontation
between supporters needs to be eliminated.

     3.10 The Football Association recognizes that there is a
need to convince the public that all possible steps are being
taken to avoid clashes between supporters.   It proposes,
therefore, to make all away support "Members Only," It will also
introduce a sliding scale of security risk for all games.   It
wril be the responsibility of the two clubs to consult with the
police and to obtain a rating for each match at least one month
in advance, with the exception of cup matches.   The scale will be
as follows:

    1.   Low.        Away section - members only.

    2.   Medium.     All ticket.   Away section - members only.

    3.   High.       All ticket.   No visiting supporters.

    4.   Priority,   All ticket.   Members and season-ticket holders
                      only.
      3.     11 All-ticket arrangements have often foundered when put
to the test by supporters arriving for games without tickets. The
Football Association understands the problems faced by police
officers needing to make decisions bearing on public order over a
wide area.   Many will feel that they would prefer to have
potential hooligans within grounds rather that wandering the
streets.   However, if all-ticket restrictions are to work,
it is essential that supporters soon come to realize that they
will not be able to gain access to grounds without the proper
ticket and/or membership.   The whole-hearted backing of the
police and the clubs will be needed, particularly in the early
stages.   Early filtering and exchange of information about people
travelling will also be required.



4.   TICKET TOUTS


      4.1       The only certain answer to an industry that angers
supporters more than anything else is to make the sale of tickets
at more than face value illegal. There is no indication that
legislation to this effect will be forthcoming. The Football
Association will, therefore, continue its policy of sanctioning
those who have deliberately or negligently allowed tickets issued
to them to have found their way onto the black market. These
sanctions normally take the form of a reduction in the number of
tickets allocated to the person or organization concerned, or of
a total prohibition. The Football Association will, henceforth,
make public the names of those who have been found to be in
breach of the terms of issue of tickets and will seek to make
punishments more effective.   [Explain difficulty of proving
guilt, Propose sale of tickets on day outside ground illegal]

     4.     2 The Football Association has introduced revised
conditions of issue and a letter of declaration for those
receiving tickets for the Cup Final (Appendix).

     4.     3 The Football Association will examine the system of
allocation of Cup Final tickets, with a view to making more
tickets available to the competing clubs.  At present, the clubs
receive just over 50% of the available tickets.  A change in this
policy was made as a one-off in respect of the 1989 Cup Final,
when Everton and Liverpool were allocated around 85% of the
available capacity.

      4.     4 The Football Association will seek to make available a
reasonable number of tickets for what has come to be known as the
"executive" market.   In this way, people who are prepared to pay
high prices for luxurious facilities will be given an opportunity
to buy tickets legitimately and those who are tempted to sell
tickets at inflated values will have one potential outlet
removed.
5. PRE-MATCH ENTERTAINMENT


      5.     1 The Football Association will look closely at the
question of encouraging supporters into grounds earlier through
the provision of improved pre-match entertainment.   It has to be
stated, however, that experience in this area indicated that fans
are rarely impressed by the type of entertainment that has
traditionally been served up.   [Eddie Plumley evidence]   The
possible exception to this rule is the 'curtain-raiser football
match.   The Football Association will discuss with the supporters
organisations the concept of a "Supporters League", involving
matches between the supporters of the clubs taking part in the
main match to be staged as pre-match entertainment.    [Discuss
winter problems.   Call for capital allowances for large screens].



6. POLICY ON KICK-OFF TIMES


     6,      1 The Football Association recommends the establishment
of a common policy on delaying kick-offs.   [Make clear it is a
matter for the police to decide on delays].   In view of the
comments mad© about potential delays as a result of the
introduction of computerized membership checks at turnstiles
(paragraph 3. 3 ), we believe this is an essential measure.  The
safety and security of spectators are the only relevant criteria,

      6,     2 Morning kick-offs have found favour with regard to
certain problem matches.   It has become the practice in Scotland,
for example, for Rangers v Celtic games to begin at 1. 00 pm. This
effectively reduces the time supporters have to consume alcohol
before the match.   Early kick-offs do, however, give
organizational problems.   Some police forces also prefer all
matches to be starting at the same time to avoid supporters
clashing en route to games.   There is also the contract between
the Football League and the Pools companies to consider.   The
League are bound,to have the majority of their games played on a
Saturday afternoon.   The Football Association will give the lead
in finding ways of reconciling these conflicting criteria.
[Expand and explain.   FA as honest broker between League and
Pools ].



7.   FENCES

     7.      1 A physical means of preventing spectator encroachment
is still required.  The Cup Final on May 20th has shown that
supporters cannot be trusted 100% to respect calls not to come
onto the playing area.  The task, therefore, is to find a system
that affords ready access to the pitch in an emergency, while
protecting it from invasion in all other circumstances.    The
Football Association is investigating the possibilities and
will assist clubs in setting up common standards.   [Quote
confusion after Hillsborough.  eg Palace fences lowered.    Again
need for central authority]
     7,      2 An inspection of a self-opening system operating at the
ground of the Nimes Olympique club in France has already been
conducted.   Other potential alternatives to the standard
perimeter fence will also be evaluated.    One clear alternative is
the moat.   Most grounds do not have the space for the- type of
ditch found in some continental stadia, but the proposal that was
put forward in the seventies for a "double barrier" system -
effectively a dry moat at the same level as the pitch, created by
establishing a walkway between a continual barrier and a second
barrier or wall adjacent to the pitch - is worthy of careful
reappraisal.   Mr Justice Popplewell said in 1986 that, in his
view, The Football Association was the proper body to give a lead
in the setting up of standard designs in this area.    (Popplewell
Report - paragraph 4. 138).  At that time, The The Football
Association declined, pointing out that if its design was
unsuccessful it would undermine its disciplinary powers.    Such
considerations are no longer material.    [FA not setting itself up
as experts,   Finding out what is available for onward
transmission to clubs and central authority. ]



8.   SUPPORTER RELATIONS


     8.      1 The Football Association has employed for the last two
years an officer whose responsibility it has been to assist and
encourage clubs in the successful introduction and operation of
family enclosures within grounds.  The Football League has also
pursued this ideal and recently held a seminar on Family
Initiatives that was well attended by the professional clubs.
(Report attached - Appendix C. ) The Football Association
operates a family enclosure at all of its international matches
at Wembley and at the FA Charity Shield.  Children are allowed
into these family areas, accompanied by adults, at reduced prices
and special entertainment and incentives are provided.

     8,     2 The Football Association will build on this foundation
by ensuring better communication with supporters in general.   It
is already consulting organizations with relevant experience in
the area of customer relations, with a view to establishing an
effective system of supporter liaison.   It will give urgent
consideration to the appointment of a supporter liaison officer.
[Better expression required.   Stimulate closer club/supporter
liaison].



9.   MEDICAL PROVISION


      9,1      Hillsborough has illustrated that there is a gap in the
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds in the area of required levels
of medical provision.  At present, the levels of manning and
equipment are arrived at by mutual agreement between the club and
the voluntary organization - usually the St John Ambulance
Brigade - serving the ground.   The Football Association has a
very active Medical Committee, whose services will be placed at
the disposal of the Home Office should it wish to avail itself of
them in drafting amendments to the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds,

     9. 2 [ CFCH ]
 10.   OTHER MEASURES


       0, 1 The Football Association spends a large amount each
year on its educational programme. In the financial year 1988
the amount was El,181,440, made up of the cost of runninq
courses and The National Football School, and of supportinq the
FA Youth Trust and the FA National Sports Centre TrSst.     Since
1982, when Mr Bobby Robson was appointed as National Coach, The
Football Association has stepped up the marketing of its coachinq
and other educational activities, with the result that the
numbers attending courses have risen from 18, 524 in 1982 to
210, 809 in 1988.   Much of this increase is accounted for by the
introduction of teachinq and leisure proqrammes for young people,
^    ? , ^hese activities contain a strong emphasis on behaviour,
discipline and personal responsibility. A code of conduct
produced for young people attending FA course is attached.
(Appendix D) The Football Association has initiated an inner-city
coaching programme^for youths who are either criminal offenders
or ' at risk".   A pilot scheme in Birmingham has already been
tested and the project will be extended to other areas with
inner-city problems.     [Expand]



       GOVERNMENT   [More needed]

      11.     1 Some of Mr Popplewell's important recommendations have
not yet been implemented.  For instance, the police should be
given the unfettered right to search those entering football
grounds.  (Popplewell - Paragraph 4. 38).

      11.      2 There is a simple common law which works excellently
m Scotland - breach of the peace - which in practice covers any
act likely to provoke disorder.   The law there is flexible, but
in England and Wales the Government have not acted upon
Popplewell' s admirable recommendations.  (Popplewell - 4. 74).



12,    CONCLUSION

      8. 1 Football can survive the present problems and emerge
healthy and vigorous.   The game's governing body intends to lead
OUr^nat       sport into a future it can anticipate with pride and
confidence.




May 1989                                Graham Kelly
                                        Chief Executive
