        FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND FOOTBALL LEAGUE SUBMISSION
                       TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY




DRAF T/8/8 June 1989




1.   INTRODUCTION


1. 1 Football is the world's most popular team sport, being played
in practically every country.   There are 156 national football
associations in membership of the Federation Internationale de
Football Association (FIFA), the game' s world governing body.
There are four separate national football associations in Great
Britain - in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern. Ireland.   In
England, the association is named "The Football Association."
(The FA).   The name "England" does not form part of this title as
The Football Association w$s the first such body in the world to
be formed (in 1863).

1. 2 The FA is the governing body of the game of Association
Football in England.   It is responsible for the promotion,
development, regulation and control of the game within its
territory.   One of the principal activities of The FA is the
organization of a national knock-out competition for senior
clubs, called The FA Challenge Cup Competition (The FA' Cup).

1. 3 The FA is also responsible for the sanctioning, either
directly or indirectly through its constituent County Football
Associations of more than 2,000 leagues and competitions.   The
best known of these leagues is The Football League.   The Football
League (also without national title because it was the first of
its kind in the world, founded in 1888), is an organisation
consisting of 92 professional football clubs, who compete in four
separate divisions, with promotion and relegation between the
divisions.   Three of the clubs competing in The Football League
are affiliated to The Football Association of Wales and not to
the FA.   These three Welsh clubs, together with eleven others
from the Principality, also compete in the FA Cup.




                                -1-
1. 4 The FA is governed by a Council, made up of nominees and
elected representatives of various bodies involved in the game,
including those clubs in full membership of The FA and County
Football Associations.   The Football League is managed by a
Committee, consisting of four representatives elected by the
clubs in the First Division, three elected by the Second Division
and one elected by the clubs of the Third and Fourth Divisions
(The Management Committee).   The Management Committee in its
entirety also sits on The FA Council.

1. 5 The Football Association and The Football League have decided
to make this submission jointly.   The submission has been
prepared by a group of five members of FA Council, two of whom
are also members of The Football League Management Committee.

1. 6 The professional game in England attracts millions of people
from all walks of life, transcending barriers of class, race,
religion, politics and sex.   The total attendance at matches
involving Football League clubs in season 1987-88 was in excess
of 20,000,000.   Attendances in 1989-90 show an increase of some
2. 5%, which represents the third consecutive seasonal increase in
attendances.   (Attendance figures appended )

1. 7 It has become fashionable to point the finger at football and
to blame the game, or those who are responsible for its
administration, for the behaviour of the tiny minority of those
attending matches who create trouble out of all proportion to
their numbers.   Government figures show that, in season 1987-88,
6147 people were arrested in connection with matches involving
Football League clubs.   According to the information the Football
Authorities have to hand, only about a third of these were
arrested inside grounds.   The courts are entitled to designate
the offences of those found guilty as "football related" and to
issue an order excluding the offender from attending football
games.   In the period August 1987 to May 1989, only 1, 760 such
orders were issued.   This calls into question the basis on which
the calculation of the number of arrests considered by the police
to be football related is made.   Even if every one of the quoted
6,147 cases involved a football supporter at, going to or
returning from a football match - which seems highly improbable -
that would still mean that only three arrests were made in season
1987-88 for every 10,000 people attending a football game.
(Comparative arrest figures are appended ).

1. 8 The FA and The Football League accept that one arrest is one
too many and unequivocally condemn the conduct of this section of
so-called football supporters.   Football is, however, saddled
with a problem not of its making.   Blaming football for
hooliganism is akin to criticizing the householder for the crimes




                               -2-
of the burglar, to apportioning guilt to the victim instead of
the mugger.  Nevertheless, the football authorities recognize
that they must take a lead in attempting to rid the game of the
scourge that has beset it.   They understand that the world at
large will expect them to take the lead in dealing with
hooliganism.   Football has accepted this responsibility.  It has
tackled the problem - successfully, we contend - it is continuing
to do so.

1. 9 The problem is, however, complex.  There are no easy answers.
There are considerations of safety as well as of behaviour.   We
need to find long-term educational solutions as well as adopting
immediate, effective crowd control measures.

1. 10 Football, in partnership with the police, has developed an
intelligence network that allows matches to be planned in as
thorough a manner as is possible, taking into account the
unpredictability of human behaviour.    Every Football League club
is required to lodge with The League a "local plan", detailing
the measures it takes in ensuring the orderly conduct of matches
at its ground.   Appended ( ) as an example is the local plan for
Sheffield Wednesday.   Before every game, the police - from the
areas both of the home club and the visitors, - the visiting club
itself and the transport authorities decide the arrangements that
will apply.   The police rule on the number of officers that will
be deployed both inside and outside the ground.     The clubs pay an
agreed fee for each policeman operating within the stadium.     In
practice, the clubs are obliged to accept the ruling of the
police on the number of officers who should be deployed for each
game.   In 1987-88, the total police charges paid by Football
League clubs for the policing of League games was £3,355,000 - an
average charge per match of £1,650. . This burden is lightened
somewhat by the payment by The Football Trust of 35% of the
charges, excluding VAT.   The balance borne by clubs represented
4. 2% of gate and season-ticket receipts.   .{An explanation of the
role of The Football Trust is appended).

1. 10 The single most effective contribution to the fight against
hooliganism in the last decade has been close-circuit television.
It was a recommendation of the Home Office Committee of Inquiry
into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds of January 1986
(the Popplewell Report), that followed the fire at Bradford City
football club, that such systems be introduced at Football League
grounds in England and Wales (paragraphs 4. 92 to 4. 101). The
process had already begun prior to Popplewell.   It has now been
completed and all Football League grounds either have permanent
systems or access to a mobile one.




                                -3-
1. 11 All Football League grounds and Wembley Stadium are
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975.    The
legislation was introduced following the Ibrox disaster in 1971.
The FA and The Football League co-operated to the full wit h the
Inquiry of Lord Wheatley following that disaster.    It concurred
with the introduction of standard safety procedures.    It welcomed
the extension of the designation of clubs to those in the Third
and Fourth Divisions after.the Bradford fire and will assist in
any w ay possible, should it be considered, in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's findings, desirable to establish centralized
procedures to ensure the implementation of common standards of
safety at football grounds.   (See paragraph 3. 2, below)

1. 12 The installation of close-circuit television and the ground
alterations made necessary by the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
have, of course, absorbed significant amounts of money.      From
1978, much of this expenditure has been met by The Football Trust
and by The Football Grounds Improvement Trust.      To date, a total
of £68, 000, 000 has been provided.  £2, 775, 000 has been spent on
the installation of close-circuit television crowd surveillance
systems in England and Scotland.    £43,500,000 has been allocated
for safety and improvement work, also in England and Scotland.
The total amount spent on safety at English Football League
grounds, including the clubs' own contributions, is estimated at
almost £50, 000, 000 in the last ten years.    An incalculable amount
has also been spent on ensuring proper segregation of supporters
within grounds and on other security measures.

1. 13. 1 The net result has been a dramatic decrease in the number
of incidents within grounds reported to The Football Association
by referees, by its own officials or by the police as the table
below shows.


       table 1   Ca'ses of spectator misconduct involving
                 Football League clubs reported to The
                 FA


                 1981-82               42
                 1982-83               42
                 1983-84               41
                 1984-85               41
                 1985-86               20
                 1986-87               19
                 1987-88               19
                 1988-89                9


                 (Total matches approx 2,300 per season)



                                 -4-
1. 13. 2 The view of most club secretaries is that these figures
accurately represent the growing sophistication of clubs and
police in coping with the problems of crowd control within
stadia.    We have no reason to doubt that evidence from the police
authorities will substantiate this view.    The slight upward trend
in arrest figures can, in the opinion of The FA and The Football
League be ascribed to the effectiveness of close-circuit
television systems within and in the area of grounds in
identifying and bringing to court those whose misdeeds previously
went undetected.    Police undercover operations have also shown
that the committed trouble-maker now prefers to operate away from
grounds.

1. 14 Yet the public perception is still of a game beset by the
twin problems of hooliganism and outdated facilities.   As the
attendance figures quoted in the opening paragraph indicate, the
game enjoys a vast fund of goodwill.   Increasing numbers are also
playing the game.   The figures below indicate the steady rise in
participation since the Second World War.


        table 2   Number of clubs in England registered
                  with The Football Association


                  1948           17, 890
                  1961           22,680
                  1972           36, 904
                  1975           37, 641
                  1980           39, 730
                  1985           41, 173


1. 15 Following Hillsborough, The FA and The Football League
perceive their task as being to reconstruct general public
confidence in the -game on the foundations already provided by
healthy levels of participation and attendance.   In the following
pages, we discuss the lead that we shall be taking and the
recommendations that we have to make to other bodies.



2.   SEATING AND FACILITIES


2. 1 There is a strong groundswell of public opinion to the effect
that the conversion of stadia capacity to all-seating will
automatically solve all problems of crowd safety and hooliganism.




                                 -5-
The only club in England so far to have gone down this road is
Coventry City.   The club very soon reinstated some of the
seating.   There are three clubs in Scotland with all-seater
stadia.   Below, we examine the experiences of several clubs that
have gone either to all-seater, or who have more seating than
standing.

2. 2. 1 Between 1978 and 1981, Glasgow Rangers converted their
stadium from a 65,000 capacity, of which 20,000 were seats, to
44, 000, of which 35, 000 were seated.  At more or less the same
time, the Criminal Justice Act was introduced in Scotland.     These
factors, together with the success that, coincided with the
arrival of new manager Graeme Souness in 1985, have led to a
dramatic increase in average attendances, as the table below
indicates.    The club has some 20,000 season-ticket holders, all
of them seated.


          table 3     Comparative average attendances at
                      Glasgow Rangers matches


                      1980-81       19, 000
                      1981-82       17, 000
                      1982-83       18,000
                      1983-84       22,000
                      1984-85         ,
                                    2 1 000
                      1985-86       25, 000
                      1986-87       37, 000
                      1987-88       38, 000
                      1988-89       39, 000


2. 2. 2 Arrests at the ground have gone down considerably [ ].    The
Strathclyde police report that most of the arrests made at the
ground nowadays are in the standing sections.     The ground of
Celtic, which is still predomi nantlyCseatedC^) sees a far higher
proportion of arrests.    [ ] There is no doubt in the mind of the
police that Rangers has become a much easier stadium to police
since the advent of the new seating arrangements.

2. 3 Aberdeen PC went one step further than Rangers, converting
their Pittodrie Stadium to all-seater as long ago as 1978.   The
capacity is a respectable 23, 000 and, while the club does not
enjoy the massive support of its Glasgow rivals, it still
achieves a healthy average of around the 14,000 mark.   More
significantly, perhaps, the statistics for arrests in connection
with Aberdeen's home matches are remarkably low, as the table
overleaf illustrates.
           table 4     Comparative arrest statistics at
                       Aberdeen matches


                        1983-84         36
                        1984-85         25
                        1985-86         36
                        1986-87         30
                        1987-88         34
                        1988-89         16


2. 4 During the summer of 1981, Coventry City FC converted their
stadium at Highfield Road to all seats.    The capacity was set at
20, 500,  The club received enormous criticism from its supporters
and has felt obliged, over a number of seasons to revert to a
stadium offering mixed accommodation.    The present balance is
18,496 seats and 11, 304 standing places.   A letter from Coventry
City is appended (Appendix ).   It will be noted that one of the
major problems encountered by the club was the unwillingness of
spectators to sit in uncovered seating.    Another factor in the
decision to revert to a certain amount of standing has been the
action of some visiting supporters in ripping out seats to use as
weapons.

2. 5. 1 The experience of two clubs in Holland, a country that has
suffered as much as England in recent years from hooliganism, is
worthy of note.    Utrecht football club has recently moved into a
new purpose-built stadium on the outskirts of the city.
Interestingly, it has chosen not to make the stadium all-seater.
The old ground had 13,000 standing places and 7,000 seats.    The
new has a ratio of 14, 000 seats to 6, 000 standing.  The standing
accommodation is in the corners of the ground.

2. 5. 2 Feyenoord, a big club in Rotterdam, continues to use an
established ground that has 51,000 seats.    It has chosen to keep,
however, two small standing sections of 1, 500 places each.   Here,
the standing terraces are immediately behind the goals.

2. 5. 3 It is the view of Robert de Bakker, the Security Officer of
the Dutch FA, that all-seater stadia do not necessarily bring
better behaviour.    He sees the provision of a preponderance of
seats as desirable, but he points out that those who are likely
to cause trouble are not reformed overnight simply through their
being put into a seat.    He believes that a small section of
standing is desirable and will remain so for the time being.




                                  -7-
2. 6. 1 The first new purpose-built stadium in Scotland is that of
St Johnstone, in Perth,    The new ground is all-seater, with a
capacity of 10,000, adjacent to a Motorway.    The Scottish police
believe there is a significant improvement in behaviour at the
new ground.

2. 6. 2 The other all-seater ground in Scotland is at Clydebank FC.
This is unofficially by one Scottish police officer as "an old
stadium, revamped by the addition of bench-type seating. " He goes
on to say that the fans simply stand on the benches anyway.    "If
you want to go to all seats, you have to do the job properly and
take care of all the other problems like refreshment facilities,
access and parking. "

2. 7. 1 These varied experiences indicate to us that there is
distinct benefit to be gained by a move to more seating.
All-seater stadia, however, are not the panacea many believe them
to be.    Neither would they be acceptable to a large proportion of
the present football public.    It is the general view of the
police that seated spectators are more easily controlled.     The
tendency to taunt and gesture is less prevalent amongst seated
spectators.    Nevertheless, it is possible for spectators to stand
and watch football in safety.    The Football Association and The
Football League believe that it is possible to achieve a balance
between seating and standing accommodation that delivers the
requirement of safe stadia while satisfying the requirements of
the public.    We are prepared to commit football to the
achievement of this balance over a period of time.    It is not
reasonable or necessary to force football to undertake, with the
associated crippling expenditure, an immediate widescale
installation of seating.

2. 7. 2 The present ratio of seating to standing within The
Football League is appended (Appendix ).    We recommend that it be
made a condition of the issue of a licence under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act, or any legislation replacing it, that the
proportion of seating to ground capacity listed below be achieved
within the stated time-scale.


                     Percentage of Seating per Ground


         Season                 92-3       95/6         98/9

         Division 1              50        66. 6         75

         Division 2              25        33. 3        3 7. 5

         Divisions    3 & 4       —
                                            25          33. 3



                                  -8-
2. 7. 3 NB These percentages are of the total resultant ground
capacity.    time quoted.  Any promoted club would be given 3 years
from the season of promotion to meet the requirements of the
division concerned at the time of promotion.    It is not
considered necessary to apply the same criteria throughout the
four divisions in view of the smaller attendances in the lower
divisions and also the relative inability of the clubs in the
Third and Fourth divisions to finance large-scale changes to
their grounds.

2. 8 The operation will be costly,    It is estimated, at a cost of
approximately £35 per seat, that it would require £30,000, 000 to
seat the entire Football League.    This is not the end of the
story, however.   The Coventry experience indicates that people
will not sit in uncovered areas.    To cover the new seating would
take an estimated further £100, 000, 000.   In view of the abuses of
some new seated areas, when seats have been stood upon, or
deliberately broken, it will almost certainly be necessary to
agree on a more robust specification.     This certainly brings the
estimate of £35 per seat into question.     into question.  Nor
should it be automatically assumed that the prices that can be
charged for the new seated accommodation will automatically
compensate for the reduction in total capacity.     Liverpool FC,
for example, the most successful English club in the last 2 5
years, do not believe that they would be able to charge for the
new seating they are contemplating installing substantially more
than the present standing admission price. We discuss below,
(paragraphs 2. 15 to 2. 18), the financial implications.

2. 9 As we are proposing that standing accommodation should be
allowed to remain where the clubs and the public desire it, we
consider it essential for the criteria applied to the safety of
standing spectators to be re-assessed.   The FA and The Football
League will be proposing, (Section 3, below), that crucial areas
of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds be made mandatory.
Amongst these mandatory provisions should be capacity per
standing terrace, permitted capacities per access/egress,
strength of crush barriers and the number of steps permitted in
one uninterrupted drop.   It may also be necessary to confine
standing to the areas behind the goals.   As cited above (2.5.1),
the builders of the new stadium in Utrecht have, however, chosen
to put their standing sections at the corners of the ground.

2. 10 Clearly, the introduction of more seats will not in itself
bring in more supporters or effect a revolution in behaviour.
There must also be a commensurate improvement in facilities at
grounds.^  There is little incentive for the fan, particularly the
travelling supporter, to forego the pub unless the ground can




                                -9-
offer reasonably-priced, wholesome refreshment.  Again we discuss
below, (paragraphs 2.15 to 2.18), the financial implications of a
commitment to better conditions within grounds.  We also refer in
section 6 to what we consider to be the failure of the
government's legislation on the consumption of alcohol by
football supporters.   [ Exact name of Act]

2. 11 Many clubs, however, find themselves in geographical
locations where it is practically impossible for meaningful
improvements to b6 made.    Others share catchment areas in which
two costly to maintain stadia on prime development sites make no
commercial sense whatsoever.    Many of these clubs would
undoubtedly benefit from a move to an area providing better
communications, better parking and, perhaps, shared use of
facilities.    Many clubs spring immediately to mind as candidates:
The Bristol clubs, one of whom has no current home, Fulham and
Brentford, Blackburn and Preston, Bolton and Bury, Rochdale and
Oldham, Leeds and Bradford, Chester and Wrexham, Stoke City and
Port Vale, Huddersfield Town and Halifax, Watford and Luton Town,
Enfield and Barnet.    There is resistance.   Supporters do not like
leaving their traditional home ground, as the experience of
Charlton Athletic - playing on Crystal Palace's ground, but
anxious to return to their former ground - has shown.      However,
to set against this we have the experience of countries such as
Italy where big clubs such as AC Milan and Internazionale Milano
share a stadium with no perceiveable problems.     In our own
country, Scunthorpe United have provided the only recent example
of a Football League club moving to a purpose built stadium.
Walsall are currently building a new stadium,     we have already
referred    to the experience of St Johnstone and Utrecht.
(Literature on these ventures is appended ),

2. 12 It is now 23 years since England staged a major
international football tournament.   (The 1966 World Cup).   It is
11 years since we were asked to find a venue for the final of a
European club competition.   (The European Cup Final of 1978
played at Wembley between Liverpool and Bruges).   FIFA, the world
governing body of Association Football has made it clear that
they will, in future, only award World Cups to countries that can
provide all-seater stadia:.  Their exact criteria are: -

         " A maximum of 12 stadia with the following
           capaciti-es (all seats):

          First   Round     matches 30,000 - 40,000

          Opening match,
          Semi-Finals and
          Final                    minimum   50, 000. "




                                 -10-
2. 13 At present, only Wembley Stadium is capable of meeting the
criteria for the second category of matches.   It is expected that
the ground will be all-seat, with a capacity of 80,000 within the
next year or so.   No other ground can meet the requirements, even
of the First Round matches.   There are, however, at least 8
grounds capable of conversion that could provide the required
capacities.   The following table shows these grounds, converted
on the basis of one seat being gained for every two standing
places lost;


          table 4   Potential capacity of stadia
                    converted to 100% seating


                    Manchester United              41,   000
                    Sheffield Wednesday            39,   000
                    Manchester City                39,   000
                    Everton                        38,   000
                    Arsenal                        37,   000
                    Liverpool                      34,   000
                    Aston Villa                    32,   000
                    Chels ea                       32,   000


2. 14 This nucleus of all-seater stadia would also provide a pool
from which The FA could draw the venues for FA Cup Semi-Finals.

2. 15. 1 The provision of a nucleus of all-seater stadia; the
requirement by l aw for all grounds to have a minimum percentage
of seats; the need to encourage clubs to build new grounds, all
call for a massive injection of cash into the game.    The Football
Association and The Football League understand that it will be
expected of them that they make every attempt to find this
revenue from their own resources.

2. 15. 2 Sponsorship is one obvious area.  The game as a whole
already benefits from sponsorship to the tune of some £17,500,000
per year.    The FA's aim will be to supplement this with an
acceptable sponsorship of its most valuable commodity, the FA Cup
competition.    The Football Association has already set in motion
a search for a sponsor, with a proposal that offers the
prospective company a unique opportunity to be identified not
only with a competition of world standing, but also with an
initiative that can result in the World Cup's coming to England
in the not-too-distant future..   The sponsor will be invited to
pay an annual sum as is usual in such agreements.    He will also
be asked to provide a lump-sum figure of substantial proportions




                               -11-
in the form of an -interest-free loan. This sum would form the
basis of a fund to assist clubs with the installation of seating
and/or to help with the construction of new stadia.

2. 16 The time-scale for the introduction of higher percentages of
seating can be accelerated if assistance is available from
elsewhere.   The FA and The Football League will propose to other
bodies, such as The Football Trust/Football grounds Improvement
Trust, that such assistance be given.   A further reason for
giving these proposals, and those relating to safety on terraces
the backing of law, is that Football Grounds Improvement Trust is
entitled by its deed to grant aid work necessarily carried out as
a condition of the issue of a safety licence, up to 75% of the
total cost.

2. 17 Given The FA and The Football League's willingness to find
the necessary finances, there is a strong case for the. government
to reciprocate with a reduction in the pool betting tax from
42. 5% to 40%.  This would release £16, 000, 000 per annum which the
Pool Promoters might be persuaded to allocate for ground
improvements, thereby putting the game in receipt of over
£30,000,000 per year from pools sources.     There is no need to
create a Football Levy Board, as proposed by the Rothschild
Commission in 1977 when it recommended a reduction of duty to
37%, because the Football Trust/Football Grounds Improvement
Trust already acts as a suitable vehicle with proven track
record.

2, 18 Much criticism is levelled at football for what is seen by
many as wasteful spending on transfer fees.   This criticism
ignores the basic fact that transfers are a "circulating fund"
that enables smaller clubs to derive much needed income by
investing in young players and realizing the investment by
selling on the asset to one of the bigger clubs.   It is not a
case of choosing between facilities and players.   The success of
a club on the field of play is the major consideration for most
supporters.   A team that is winning attracts more spectators than
when it is not performing so well.   The attendance figures quoted
above for Glasgow Rangers matches indicate what can be achieved
when a club is playing well and, at the same time gives its
public good facilities.   Glasgow Rangers have invested as heavily
as any club in the transfer market in recent times.    Clubs must,
therefore, look to their playing strength as well as to the
comfort and safety of their grounds.   No club shies away from
expenditure on essential safety work.   Each club does, however,
have to decide for itself the appropriate balance between its
spending on players and on the improvement of facilities.    The
current tax system, regrettably, nudges clubs in the direction of




                               -12-
the former.   There are no capital allowances system, however,
pushes clubs in the wrong direction.   There are no capital
allowances for ground improvements.   There is only minor relief
for wor k necessarily carried out as a condition of the issue of a
licence under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.   Transfer fees,
on the other hand, are treated as revenue.   The Government would
automatically stimulate greater expenditure on improved
facilities if it were to give capital allowances for such
projects.



 3   SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT


3. 1 The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds does not have the force
of law.   It is the recommendation of The Football Association and
The Football League that certain parts of the Guide should be
made mandatory.   We examine these below. (3.3)

3. 2 It is the view of The FA and The Football League that, while
a certain amount of local flexibility is required, there should
be established a central direction to ensure standard practices
in the implementation of The Safety of Sports Grounds Act and the
issuing of safety 'certificates.  It is not our proposal that the
certificates should be issued centrally.   This should continue to
be the function of the local authority.   However, procedures -
and the criteria applied - do, in our view require
standardization.   A far from exhaustive enquiry amongst clubs has
revealed that the person responsible for the issue of the clubs'
safety certificates might be the Building Regulations Officer,
the Fire Officer or the Planning Officer.   In many cases, these
people have no direct experience of problems of safety within
football grounds.   The widely varying attitude to perimeter
fencing following Hillsborough illustrates this need for central
direction.

3. 3 Sections of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds that the FA
and The Football League recommend should be mandatory

3. 3, 1 Section 2 ^ Management responsibility

The role of "Management" in the safety of spectators is
diminished by the senior police officer taking overall control of
events.  This inevitably leads to the emphasis being placed on
public order, as against safety.  it is for this reason that we
recommend that management be recognized as the responsible body
with all that that entails.  The requirement to provide first-aid
facilites should be more clearly defined.   (See below. )




                               -13-
3. 3. 2 S e c t i o n 4 ^ I n s p e ctions   and Tests

Procedures should be standardized and inspections made
compulsory,

3. 3. 3 Sections _5 & _6 ^ Ingress and Egress

As stated above (paragraph 2. 9) the capacity of a stand or
terrace should be related to the turnstiles and entrances/exits
serving it.  Management should be required to take a close
involvement with the development and implementation of emergency
procedures.  As stated above, management's role as the
responsible body should be recognized.

3. 3. 4 Section 1_ - .Stairways and Ramps

Flow rates, barrier strengths,               width of passageways,   etc,   should
be given the force of law.

3, 3, 5 Section _8 ^ Terraces and Viewinq slopes

Provision for segregation, together with safe means of egress
from pens, should be compulsory.   We have already discussed above
(paragraph 2. 9) the need to define maximum capacities and
uninterrupted drops on terraces.

3. 3. 6 Section 10 ^ Seating

We have discussed above (paragraph 2 . 1 . 2 ) the need for. the
establishment of minimum seating requirements.

3. 3. 7 Section 11 ^ Fire Safety

The provision of access            for emergency vehicles should be
compulsory.

3. 3, 8 Section 12 ^ Communications

The provision of an effective system of communications and the
training of key personnel to use it should be compulsory.   So
should be the installation of reliable turnstile monitoring
equipment.  The Public address system should be capable of being
heard by supporters outside the ground.  All grounds should be
equipped with close-circuit cameras covering the outside of and
approaches to grounds.




                                             -14-
3. 3. 9 S e c t i o n   13 ^ S t e w a r d i n q

The training required by stewards should be catalogued and made
compulsory.  Stewards should be given full authority to act on
behalf of management in the area of crowd safety.  Management
should be entitled to require the presence of visiting club
stewards where considered necessary.

3. 3. 10 Section 15 ^ Pitch Perimeter Fence/Wall

The need to prevent spectator encroachment onto the pitch must be
made compulsory.  The Cup Final on May 20th has shown that
supporters cannot be trusted 100% to respect calls not to come
onto the playing area.   The task, therefore, is to find a system
that affords ready access to the pitch in an emergency, while
protecting it from invasion in all other circumstances.    The need
for central direction is graphically illustrated by the confused
attitudes to fencing produced by the Hillsborough disaster.    The
FA and The Football League do not present themselves as technical
experts in this area.   They will, however, monitor what is
available on behalf of clubs.   They have already inspected a
self-opening system in Nimes, France and are looking to conduct
an experiment with the system in England.    Even if there is no
one system that is appropriate to all grounds, the prevention of
pitch invasions by one means or another should be made
compulsory.  The alternatives, from which the club and its
licensing authority should choose, should be included in the '
Guide.  These alternatives may well include moats, as used o n ;
many continental grounds.   Another possibility is the proposal
that was put forward in the seventies for a "double barrier"
system - effectively a dry moat at the same level as the pitch,
created by establishing a walkway between a continual barrier and
a second barrier or wall adjacent to the pitch.

3. 3. 11 M ew section ^ Medical Provision

To make adequate provision for a large-scale disaster a club
would need to have a fully-equipped casualty ward at its
disposal.  This is clearly not feasible.  It is also not
reasonable to expect clubs to have at their disposal large
numbers of trained people capable of using resuscitative
equipment.  Such equipment in untrained hands can be lethal.
However, a reasonable level of preparedness should be compulsory.

a) Each club should have a designated First-Aid room, in addition
to the club's medical room.   The First-Aid room should contain at
least two beds, a sink, a work-top and a curtain to give the
necessary privacy.  The room should be supplied with power,
light, water and a direct line telephone.   There must be ready
access for emergency vehicles.



                                                   -15-
b) The First-Aid room should have a well-stocked, cabinet
containing antiseptics, analgesic, bandages, etc.   Management
should designate one person as being responsible for the up-keep
of both room and cabinet.

c) Stretchers,    a carrying chair and oxygen should be available.

d) The club doctor's primary responsibility is to the players.
The presence of at least one other qualified person should be
required.  The location of this person within the. ground should
be noted clearly in the First-Aid room.

e) At least one fully-equipped ambulance should be in attendance
at all matches with an expected attendance of [ ].  The ambulance
should be equipped with defribillators and resuscitative
equipment.  An ambulance can be hired for around £90 per match.
As it would not be stationed permanently at the ground, its
equipment would be secure during the week and it would be manned
by fully-qualified personnel.

f) All first-aiders serving at grounds should be fully trained
and experienced.   Clubs should be furnished with a complete list
of trained staff by the organization providing their first-aid
service.  The minimum number of first-aiders present at a match
should be 1 per 1, 000 spectators.

g) Club emergency procedures must be reviewed periodically in
conjunction with the police, fire and ambulance services.  Such
procedures should -be subject to obligatory inspection.



4.   MEMBERSHIP


4. 1 The government is convinced that a national, compulsory,
membership scheme is the prime need, together with a range of
other measures, in the quest for a solution to the hooligan
problem.   In 1985, the Prime Minister asked The Football
Association and The Football League to tell her what football was
going to do about implementing a 100% membership scheme.   We
append the reports of The FA and The Football League to the Prime
Minister (Appendix ).   It will be noted that, among the other
concerns expressed, was the worry that the verification of
membership cards at turnstiles might add to congestion and
thereby produce danger for the public.   Further incidents of
crowd misconduct have persuaded the government that it is
necessary to legislate for the introduction of a compulsory




                                 -16-
national membership scheme for football.  Football remains
opposed to the concept.  It has stated, however, that it would
wish to be responsible for the implementation of the scheme
should the legislation be accepted by Parliament.

4. 2 The FA and The Football League have appointed the Management
Consultancy, Arthur Young to advise on all aspects of the
establishment of a national membership scheme.    [Append Report]
The Minister for Sport has stated that the government will not
sanction the introduction of a scheme until such time as it is
clear that the necessary technology exists to ensure its
successful implementation.   In our view, a successful
implementation must entail an assurance that the public can be
admitted to grounds without undue additional delays.    It is the
view of the government that there should be a central
computerized registry of members and that membership cards should
be computer read at the point of entry to the ground.    Our
concern, which must be deepened following Hillsborough, is that
the time taken to read each card and to deal with invalid or
defective cards will add intolerable waiting times to those
already experienced.   Appended to this submission ( ) is a study
conducted by Arthur Young at the -Littlewoods Cup replay between
Arsenal and Liverpool on 9th November, 1988, when between 3,000
and 5,000 people were locked out of a full Highbury Stadium.     The
conclusion that Arthur Young have drawn from the' queuing model
forming part of their study is that the absolute maximum
additional admission time that can be coped with for the
processing of each membership card is 2 seconds.    Arthur Young
are currently evaluating the proposals that they have received
from a short-list of companies asked to bid for the provision of
the technology required for the implementation of the national
membership scheme.   While it is too early to judge whether the
companies will be able to meet this 2 second requirement, it is
certain that no system has been tried and tested to these
standards in the real environment of a football match.

4. 3 The FA and The Football League would not wish to give the
impression from the foregoing that they are against the concept
of membership per se.   Quite the contrary.  They recognise that
it is in the interests both of the clubs and the supporters for a
closer relationship to be developed between the parties.   The
examples of clubs such as Barcelona and Real Madrid, each with
some 100,000 members, illustrate what can be achieved through a
close identification of club with community.   Many clubs are
already moving rapidly in this direction.   The Football Trust has
instituted a Community Relations Award Competition for clubs,
with cash prizes for the more enterprising schemes.   In its first
year, Millwall and Preston North End shared the main prize.
These submissions, together with that of Arsenal FC are appended
to this document.   (Appendix )



                               -17-
4. 4 Also appended is a feasibility study carried out by Peat
Marwick McLintock on behalf of The Football League into
reciprocal membership schemes for League clubs.    It is worth
noting that the clubs have advanced well down this road.
[Illustrate with details of Luton, Colchester, Plymouth,
Scunthorpe, Torquay - especially failure of computer schemes. ] In
season 1987-88 the number of persons in membership with Football
League clubs was 604, 600.  Average membership per club, expressed
as a percentage of average gate, was 84. 1%.   The objection of
football to the proposed 100% compulsory scheme is that it makes
no provision for those who do not wish, for one reason or other,
to join a club scheme.   An independent survey conducted by Target
Group Index in 1985, showed that 5, 700, 000 that 5.7 million
people attended at least one football match during the course of
a season.   A Mori poll, quoted in the Peat Marwick McLintock
report referred to above indicated that 2 5% of football
spectators attend 4 or fewer matches per season.    It is our
contention that these "casuals" who, by any statistics, are 99.9%
blameless, will be largely lost to the game, because they will
not be prepared to go to the trouble of joining a compulsory
scheme that will require them to complete a form, identify
themselves and provide photographs together with a membership
fee.   The government looks to football to produce a workable
scheme, but it will insist on the procedures outlined in the last
sentence.

4. 5 The FA and The Football League are convinced that the
progress already made towards the establishment of individual
club schemes that can in due course be integrated into an
effective reciprocal system, together with the other initiatives
detailed in this submission, are infinitely preferable to the
proposed government legislation.   It is recommended that Part I
of the Football Spectators Bill, which makes provision for the
establishment of a compulsory national membership scheme for
football spectators, be withdrawn.



5.   TICKET TOUTS


5. 1 The only certain answer to an activity that angers supporters
more than anything else is to make the sale of tickets at more
than face value illegal.   There is no indication that legislation
to this effect will be forthcoming.   The Football Association
will, therefore, continue its policy of sanctioning those who
have deliberately or negligently allowed tickets issued to them
to have found their way onto the black market.   These sanctions




                              -18-
normally take the form of a reduction in the number of tickets
allocated to the person or organization concerned, or of a total
prohibition.  The FA will, henceforth, make public the names of
those who have been found to be in breach of the terms of issue
of tickets and will seek to make punishments more effective.

5. 2 The FA and The Football League recommend that the government
legislate to make the sale of tickets on match days in the
vicinity of football grounds illegal on the part of any person
other than official agents of the club.   The activities of touts
can be considered a danger to the public in that they cause
obstruction, create a potential for disorder and, by selling
tickets indiscriminately, threaten to disrupt the planned
segregation of supporters.

5. 3 The FA will examine the system of allocation of Cup Final
tickets, with a view to making more tickets available to the
competing clubs.   At present, the clubs receive just over 50% of
the available tickets.   A change in this policy was made as a
one-off in respect of the 1989 Cup Final, when Everton and
Liverpool were allocated around 85% of the available capacity.

5. 4 The FA will seek to make available a reasonable number of
tickets for what has come to be known as the "executive" market.
In this way, people who are prepared to pay high prices for
luxurious facilities will be given an opportunity to buy tickets
legitimately and those who are tempted to sell tickets at
inflated values will have one potential outlet removed.



6.   GETTING THE PUBLIC I N T O GROUNDS EARLIER


6. 1 it has become the practice since Hillsborough for the police
to insist upon the delay of kick-offs when there has been a
build-up of supporters outside grounds close to the scheduled
start of a match.   This is understandable, but is clearly
unacceptable in the long-term.   if it becomes the rule rather
than the exception for matches to be delayed, the effect will
simply be to encourage people to come later rather than earlier.
The fears expressed in paragraph 4. 2 about further delays caused
by the need to verify membership cards make it even more
imperative for a means to be found of persuading the public to
come to grounds earlier.




                                -19-
6. 2 The FA and The Football League are looking closely at the
question of encouraging supporters into grounds earlier through
the provision of improved pre-match entertainment.            It has to be
stated, however, that experience in this area indicates that fans
are rarely impressed by the type of entertainment that has
traditionally been served up.            Watford FC, regarded within
football as one of the most progressive clubs in its attempts to
create a family a t m o s p h e r e 1at its matches, is a regular provider
of pre-match entertainment.            A letter from Mr Plumley, the club's
Chief Executive, is appended ( ).            The programme of entertainment
was dropped following Hillsborough as a mark of respect.             Prior
to that, a variety of entertainments had been provided before
thirteen matches.    A brief quote from Mr Plumley's letter is
sufficient.   "I have never been under the impression that
pre-match entertainment has encouraged supporters to come any
earlier or that it attracts additional support.            Nevertheless,
whilst the entertainment is in progress it is fair to say that it
adds to the spectators' pre-occupation prior to the game
commencing. "

6. 3 The possible exception to this rule is the curtain-raiser
football match.   The FA and The Football League will discuss with
the supporters organizations the concept of a " Supporters
League", involving matches between the supporters of the clubs
taking part in the main match to be staged as pre-match
entertainment.   Of course, the problems posed by the British
winter cannot be ignored in this context.    At certain times of
the year, pitches are simply not capable of taking extra wear
prior to games.   It is usually acceptable, however, even in
adverse weather conditions, to stage some form of football
related event - for example, a penalty competition - in a corner
of the pitch where there is more grass.    Artificial pitches are
not the answer, as they are widely regarded by the public,
coaches and players as detrimental to the quality of football
played.

6. 4 Big screen entertainment at grounds, with, for example,
re-runs of the clubs previous matches, is an attractive
proposition.   However, such equipment is extremely expensive          [how
much].   It would be a positive incentive for clubs if the
installation of screens attracted capital allowances.

6. 5 It is the vie w of The FA and The Football League that the
provision of adequate refreshment facilities is the single most
important factor for the public in deciding at what time they
arrive at a ground.    The [alcohol legislation] introduced in [ ]
with the very best of intentions has, unfortunately, had the
opposite effect from that intended.    A football ground has never




                                   -20-
been the place for someone who seriously wanted to make himself
drunk.   There is simply not enough time to consume sufficient
alcohol.   However, because of the common perception -
well-founded, doubtlessly - that football hooliganism was drink
related, the illogical conclusion was drawn that, if you stopped
people from drinking at football matches, you would eradicate
drunkenness among football supporters.   This has not happened.
The standard practice now, among those who take moderate amounts,
as well as those who consume too much, is either to buy alcohol
in supermarkets or off-licences and drink it in the street, or to
stay in the pub until the last minute.   The net effect is
potentially lethal.   Large numbers of people, some the worse for
drink, arrive late and in a hurry to get into games.    The police
prefer to get supporters into grounds early, where they can be
properly policed.   They will only go voluntarily into grounds at
a reasonable time if they can have something palatable to eat -
and drink.   The prohibition on the consumption of alcohol on
trains and in coaches going to football matches has resulted in
more and more people travelling to matches in private vehicles.
The hired mini-bus has become particularly popular.    The number
of special trains bringing Liverpool supporters to the last three
semi-finals at Hillsborough in which the club has featured has
been, in chronological order, 13, 3 and 1,    A greater load is
thus thrown onto the road system and the police have greater
difficulty in obtaining intelligence about the movement of
supporters.   The FA and The Football League recommend, therefore,
that the elements of [ alcohol legislation] restricting the sale
of alcohol in grounds and prohibiting the consumption of alcohol
on transport, be repealed.   It is further recommended that coach
operators, carrying football supporters to matches be required by
law to register with the police their schedules and projected
routes.



7.   POLICY 03Sf KICK-OFF TIMES


7. 1 By tradition, weekend matches in The Football League and FA
Cup begin at 3. 00 pm.   From time to time the suggestion is made
that crowd control would be facilitated by the greater use of
morning kick-offs.    It is in fact the practice of some clubs to
begin bank holiday games at 11.00 am or 11.30 am.    Most prefer
the traditional start time.    Some years age [ how many] the
Metropolitan Police persuaded all of the London Clubs to begin
their bank holiday games in the morning.    After one [?] season,
the experiment was dropped as gates had fallen, local Public
Houses were losing business, supporters were travelling the night




                                  -21-
before and creating a nuisance, supporters were also staying on
after games and causing trouble and considerable expense was
incurred by the clubs who had to take overnight accommodation.

7. 2 It has become the practice in Scotland, for matches between
rivals Celtic and Rangers to begin at 1. 00 pan. The police
believe that this reduces the time supporters have to consume
alcohol before the match.

7. 3 Some police forces prefer all matches in an area to start at
the same time to avoid supporters clashing en route to games.

7.4 There is a contract between The FA and the Football League.on
the one hand and the Pools Companies on the other that provides
for the large majority of games each week to be played on
Saturday afternoon.  This contract brings more than £3,000,000
into the game of football.

7.5 If kick-offs were moved to, say, 11.00 am on Saturdays, the
problems outlined in 7. 1 above in relation to the bank holiday
games in London could well be repeated.   Any drinking prevented
by the earlier start would, in view of the relaxation in the
licensing laws, simply be transferred to the post-match period.
There would be the additional risk of clashes between visiting
supporters and the usual Saturday morning shopping public,

7. 6 Sunday mornings have also been suggested.  Many of the above
criteria apply equally to Sundays, to which must be added the
objections of residents, a substantial proportion of w h o m still
regard Sundays as a day of quiet and rest.   Furthermore,
according to law, a club may not legally deny entry to a match on
a Sunday to anyone who does not wish to pay.

7. 7 The FA and The Football League see no compelling argument for
a move from the traditional Saturday kick-off time of 3. 00 pm.
They do, however, fully accept that certain matches should be
played at other ti-mes in the interests of security.  They will
continue to respond flexibly to recommendations from the police
on the timing of this minority of problem games.



8.   SUPPORTER RELATIONS


8, 1 The FA has employed for the last two years an officer whose
responsibility it has been to assist and encourage clubs in the
successful introduction and operation of family enclosures within
grounds.   The Football League has also pursued this ideal and




                              -22-
recently held a seminar on Family Initiatives that was well
attended by the professional clubs.  (Report - Appendix   )
The FA operates a family enclosure at all of its international
matches at Wembley and at the FA Charity Shield match.   Children
are admitted, accompanied by adults, at reduced prices and
special entertainment and incentives are provided.   84 of the 92
Football League clubs operate family areas.

8. 2 The FA and The Football League will build on this foundation
by ensuring better communication with supporters in general.
They are already consulting organizations with relevant
experience in the area of customer relations, with a vi e w to
establishing an effective system of supporter liaison.    They
already hold regular meetings with the existing supporters'
organizations.



9     EDUCATION


9. 1 The FA spends a large amount each year on its educational
programme.    In the financial year 1988, the amount was
£1, 181, 440, made up of the cost of running courses and The
National Football School, and of supporting the FA Youth Trust
and the FA National Sports Centre Trust.    Since 1982, when Mr
Bobby Robson was appointed as National Coach, The FA has stepped
up the marketing of its coaching and other educational
activities, with the result that the numbers attending courses
have risen from 18, 524 in 1982 to 210, 809 in 1988.

9. 2 Much of this increase is accounted for by the introduction of
teaching and leisure programmes for young people.   All of these
activities contain a strong emphasis on behaviour, discipline and
personal responsibility.   A code of conduct produced for young
people attending FA course is attached.   (Appendix D) The FA has
initiated an inner-city coaching programme for youths who are
either criminal offenders or "at risk".   A pilot scheme in
Birmingham has already been tested and the project will be
extended to other areas with inner-city problems.



10.   GOVERNMENT


10. 1 Some of Mr Popplewell's important recommendations have not
yet been.implemented.   For instance, the police should be given
the unfettered right to search those entering football grounds.
(Popplewell - paragraph 4.38).   In answer to a written



                              -23-
parliamentary question, Mr John Patten, on behalf of the Home
Office, has stated that it would be wrong to provide a power of
search that went further than existing statutory powers based on
reasonable suspicion.  The FA and The Football League cannot
reconcile this view with the draconian measures in respect of
membership planned by the government.  We would urge the
government to reconsider giving police this practical additional
power in respect of football matches.

10. 2 There is a simple common law which works excellently in
Scotland - breach of the peace - which in practice covers any act
likely to provoke disorder.   The law there is flexible, but in
England and Wales the Government have not acted upon Popplewell's
admirable recommendations.   (Popplewell. - 4.74).  Mr Patten has
again responded to a question in parliament by stating that the
government does not intend to dispose of the qualification
applying to the offence of disorderly conduct provided for in
section 5 of the Public Order Act, 1986, that someone within
hearing or sight of the conduct in question is likely to be
caused alarm, distress or harassment.    Again, the football
authorities urge the government to reconsider.

10. 3 Much excellent police work has been carried out in
identifying the hard-core of committed trouble-makers who attempt
to orchestrate much of the anti-social behaviour connected with
football.   We urge the government to introduce further measures
aimed specifically at these conspirators.   We particularly
recommend, in addition to increased financial and custodial
sentences, the wider use of exclusion orders and attendance
centres.   We support Part II of the Football Spectators Bill and
recommend its extension to apply to matches in the United Kingdom
as well as abroad.

10. 4 We have already discussed at length our recommendations
concerning the Safety of Sports Grounds Act and the [ alcohol
legislation],



11.   CONCLUSION


11. 1 Football can survive the present problems and emerge healthy
and vigorous.   The FA and The Football League believe that they
have demonstrated their grasp of the requirements both of the
game and of the public. . We have shown that we are prepared to
take positive action and call upon all persons and organizations
with the good of our national game at heart to respond
constructively tb the recommendations that we have made.
               V-j£




                              -24-
11.2 We list in 12 below the recommendations that we are making.



12.   SUMMARY OP RECOMMENDATIONS AND PROPOSED ACTION


[ LIST   ]



June 1989

Ian Stott (Football League)
Barry Bright (Kent County FA)
Ron Noades (Football League)
Geoff Thompson (Sheffield and Hallamshire County FA)
Noel White (Liverpool PC)




                               -25-
