Report on the neurological cases admitted through casualty at

the Northern General Hospital from Hillsborough 15th April

1989    -   Dr. F.P. Ryan.



       In all 19 patients suffering from severe neurological

effects of asphyxia were admitted through the casualty

department.     The mean age was 19.6 years.^Many patients on

first arrival in casualty exhibited extreme restlessness,

confused agitation, whole body shivering, and screaming in

the so-called    'encephalitic' manner.   Unlike our usual

experience in post-arrest patients, many also developed a

progressive worsening of signs long after the initial trauma,

from states of agitated restlessness to repeated fits and

subsequent deep coma.    This late onset of deterioration could

be very misleading.     One young man, who was initially

conscious but dazed, suddenly started to scream an hour after

his admission.    The screaming lasted for several minutes and

was followed by status epilepticus accompanied by deep coma,

requiring urgent resuscitation.     The delay in the onset of

his deterioration caused us to question an extra-dural

haematoma but a subsequent CAT scan of his head was negative.

Another young man initially stable, although somewhat

confused and drowsy, rapidly deteriorated an hour and a half

after admission, developed fixed dilated pupils and

decerebrate spasms and again needed urgent resuscitation.
Both these young men subsequently made complete recoveries.

A third man,    initially conscious and stable, became confused

an hour after admission and lost his vision.     Subsequent

neurological examination diagnosed cortical blindness, which

to date has resulted in only a poor recovery.     Several other

patients showed lesser degrees of deterioration between one

and two hours after admission.     This is an important

consideration for clinicians faced with a similar catastrophe

in the future.

     Fourteen of the nineteen patients with cerebral damage

progressed to recurrent fits in the casualty department or

the resuscitation ward next door to it, these fits usually

taking the form of status epilepticus, which was clearly a

dangerous development in patients already suffering brain

damage as a result of asphyxia.     The fits were controlled

with intravenous bolus injections of diazepam,    followed by

diazepam infusions.     Two patients did not progress to fits

but the degree of agitation was so extreme that they also

required diazepam intravenously and a diazepam infusion to

control this.     All brain damaged patients were given

dexamethasone intravenously during the immediate

resuscitation and they were all intubated and ventilated,

before being transferred to intensive care.

     Three patients were referred to the neurosurgeons at the

Royal Hallamshire Hospital during the initial period of

resuscitation because the sudden deterioration described

above raised the possibility of an intracranial bleed.        All

of their CAT scans were negative.     Fifteen patients were

admitted to either the General Intensive Care Unit or to the

Cardiac Intensive Care Unit at the Northern General, four

further patients being referred from these two units to the

Royal Hallamshire Hospital either for Neurosurgical opinion
or to relieve pressure on our intensive care units.     Sedation

and ventilation was continued in the intensive care units,

which allowed intensive medical therapy for cerebral oedema

and the suppression of fits in some of the more severe cases.

More detailed description, together with follow-up, of these

patients will subsequently be published.

        Of the 19 patients with severe cerebral damage, one

patient died within two hours of arrival and a further

patient died several days later after being diagnosed as

"brain dead"'.     Nine patients made excellent early recoveries

and two patients made "good" recoveries, all being discharged

home.     Five patients are left at this time with severe

disability with one further patient as yet showing no

recovery of useful cerebral function.
