*   *    %


                                        HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                                 Management of Patients in Ward 60
                                   General & Orthopaedic Surgery


         For the first 30 to 45 minutes all experienced staff were required in
         the Resuscitation Rooms.     A Senior Registrar briefly checked each patient
         in Ward 60 ensuring that they, were conscious and had an acceptable pulse
                                                                          I

         and blood pressure.     Their care was left to the Nurses on the^Ward whilst
         resuscitation and triage was continued in the Accident & Emergency
         Department.
         As Accident & Emergency stabilised, then the emphasis changed to Ward 60
         where approximately 30 patients had been admitted.     Ten or 12 of these
         had mild injuries only and the emphasis was placed on assessing the 20
         or so patients with significant injuries.
         The mechanism of injury was not at all clear in the early and mid periods
         of the event and there was a strong impression gained both from the
         patients and from the history available from the ground, that these patients
         had sustained crush injuries.     For that reason repeated and sustained efforts
         were made to look for visceral and limb injuries which were almost completely
         absent.
         A senior member of Staff (Senior Registrar or Consultant) was given charge
         of each bay (6 patients) with assistance from other Staff of all grades
         depending on the problems which arose.     Most of these problems were the
         onset of cerebral irritability and fiting, presumably from increasing
        cerebral oedema.   Three (? 4) patients had to be intubated and ventilated
         by rapid sequence induction.     There was adequate anaesthetic personnel
         and experience to do that safely but supplies of the necessary drugs were
         not close to hand and had to be sent for.
         The Major Accident Plan calls for Ward 60 to be used to treat those patients
         who have sustained significant injuries and will probably require surgery.
         It was not envisaged that this area would be used for resuscitation and
         therefore no anaesthetic drugs or equipment were close at hand.       It was
         fortunate that there was no great demand for anaesthetic and theatre staff
         in Theatre^as they were able to help with the movement of equipment to the
         ward.
         Once the patients with cerebral oedema had been transferred to the Intensive
         Care Unit it was then possible to initiate combined orthopaedic and general
         surgical ward rounds.     These ward rounds continued at regular intervals


                                                                          /2
                                    -   2-

over the next 48 hours.   This aided greatly in the continuing
assessment of the non I.T.U. patients who were discharged home
or transferred to hospitals nearer their homes over the ensuing
48/72 hours.
The possibility of viseral injury was to the forefront of many minds.
There was concern that a number of patients in the I.T.U. who had been
ventilated on arrival in the Resuscitation Roomjor very early in their
Hospital stay, might have sustained intra-abdominal injuries.      A number
were haemodynaraically unstable and there was concern that their apparent
hypovalaemia {fall in B.P., rise in pulse, responding to I.V. fluid bolus)
was due to visceral injuries.     One laparotomy was done about 90 minutes
into the event on this clinical suspicion - fall in B.P with tachycardia,
responding to fluid bolus on 3 occasions.      This laparotomy was normal
and the patient subsequently recovered.      The clinical picture clarified
and it became clear that traumatic asphyxia rather than crush injury was
the major clinical problem.     A number of peritoneal lavages were then
performed, all of which were negative.
Staff, management could have been improved.    The breakdown   in the
"Call out cascade" meant that the "On call" General Surgical Consultant
did not reach the Hospital until well into the event.     Consequently the
Senior Registrar who should have been acting as Surgical Controller was
fulfilling both clinical and managerial roles.     In consequence the latter
suffered.
