                                                                              Sheffield Health Authority




Our ref.     J r i/D S
                                                                        Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU
 Your ref.                                                                    Telephone 0742 434343
 Please reply to                     Ext.
                                                                                    Fax 0742 560472




             2^th May 1989

             The Editor,
             British Medical Journal,
             British Medical Association,
             Tavistock Square,
             London,
             WC1H 9JP


             Dear Sir,

             We would be grateful if you could consider the paper "The Hillsborough
             Tragedy. An Overview of the Hospital Response" for publication in the
             British Medical Journal.   Although the authors listed below all had
             important parts to play in the management of this tragedy, the article is
             really a distillation of the experience of over a hundred medical students,
             junior Medical Doctors, Consultants and General Practitioners, who were
             involved with the treatment of the victims of this Major Incident.

             We would therefore ask if you would consider publishing the article with
             the authors listed as "Hie Staff of the Northern General Hospital, Sheffield
             and The Staff of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield" with the
             address for correspondence being "The Chairman of the Hospital Medical
             Staff Committee, Northern General Hospital, Sheffield".

             Yours faithfully,




             Dr.    J. Alderson, Chairman, Hospital Medical Staff Committee, Northern General Hosp.
             Dr.    G. Clark, Consultant Anaesthetist, (Intensive Care,- Northern General Hospital)
             Mr.    A.C. Crosby, Consultant in A & E Medicine,(A & E., Royal Hallamshire Hospital)
             Mr.    J. Duncan, Senior Registrar, General Surgery (Admitting V/ard, Northern
                                                                          General Hospital)
             Dr.    D. Edbrook, Consultant Anaesthetist (Intensive Care, Royal Hallamshire Hospital)
             Dr.    F.P. Ryan, Consultant Physician (Traumatic Asphyxia) Northern General Hospital
             Dr.    T. Shaw, Consultant Anaesthetist (A & E Resuscitation, Northern General Hospital)
             Mr.    I. Winson, Senior Registrar, (Orthopaedic Receiving Ward, Northern General
                                                                                    Hospital)
             Dr.    S. Yates, Registrar, Radiology (X-Ray)
             Mr.    J. Wardrope  (A & E, Northern General Hospital and Editor




G. 1 53 0
                                                                  BM A H ouse
                                                                  Tavistock Square
                                                                  L on d o n WC1H 9JR
                                                                  T e le p h o n e : 01-387 4499
From the Editor                                                   T e le p h o n e from 6 May 1990:
D r Stephen Lock MA MD MSc FRCP                                                      071-387 4499
                                                                  Facsimile: 01-383 6418
                                                                  T elex:            265929

                                                                  Direct:



                                                                  17 January 1990




Very many thanks for your letter of 10 January.   I in fact read the paper
on the Hillsborough tragedy when it first came in and although we have
not got a copy of it now I do remember it quite well.   It was, if you do
not mind my saying so rather a muddle, reading as if it was written by
a committee of junior housemen and telling us little more than we know
already.   I am aware of what one might call a medical post traumatic
syndrome - which is not to be facetious, but true because these events
must be just as shocking to the carers as to the patients; but I am of
course concerned with getting a clear message across to our readers and
by all accounts you are just the person to do it. We have carried accounts
of most of the major incidents certainly in the past fifteen years or so
and it would be a pity if we did not include a proper medical account of
Hillsborough, given the Personal View and the Christmas article we have
already had.   So of course the message is that we should be delighted
to consider the amended report, and please do not take the referee s
remarks as the total reason why the paper was rejected:    far from it,
 several of us here having read it, but all agreeing that in no way could
 this be a final account of what was obviously a very important and moving
 occasion (and if we are to get anything out of it at all I'm sure that
 a clear account with some clear lessons - if these can be provided - would
 put everybody in your debt).

 Yours sincerely




 Dr FP Ryan
 Department of Gastroenterology
 Northern General Hospital
 Sheffield
 S5 7AU
        FPR/JLP

                                                            29 January 1990

Dr S Lock
Editor
British Medical Journal
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR


Dear Dr Lock

Many thanks for your letter of 17th January 1990. I would be delighted to
co-ordinate the redrafting of our paper on the Hillsborough Tragedy and
we will send it on in due course.

Yours sincerely




F P RYAN
Consultant Physician
                                                      iVdCcpj.
DEPARTMENT                                               NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
OF GASTROENTEROLOGY
                                                                         SHEFFIELD S5 7AU
C o n su lta n t Physicians:
                                                                     T elephone 4 3 4 3 4 3 (STD Code 0 7 4 2 )
F. P. RYAN, F.R.C.P.
D. J. D AW SO N , M .D ., M.R.C.P.


Our R ef:         FPR/JLP

Your R el:                                                             14 February 1990

PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL




Please find enclosed a photocopy of the personal letter I have had from
Stephen Lock, the Editor of the BMJ.

As you will be aware, our medical report of the Hillsborough tragedy was
turned down by the BMJ a little while ago. Jim Wardrope asked me for
assistance with this and I contacted both the Editors of the BMJ and the
Lancet to see where we should go from here. I have had disucssions particularly
with the BMJ about the alterations that we need to make in our report -
a lot of these reflect both the narrative style and factual content.
I think the letter from Stephen Lock is very encouraging and I hope that
we should be able to write a paper that the BMJ will accept in time.
I would be grateful if you could keep his communication to me confidential.
I have sat down with Jim Wardrope and made a first draft of the casualty
aspect of the new paper. I would like in time to do the same with the
Intensive Care aspects and the neurological aspects with Dr Clarke and
with Dr Venables.

Kind regards

Yours sincerely




F P RYAN
Consultant Physician


Sent to;               Mr N S McKay Unit General Manager   NGh
                       Dr G S Venables Consultant Neurologist NGH
                       Dr G Clarke Consultant Anaesthetist ITU NGH
       FPR/JLP

                                                          19 October 1990

Dr S Lock
Editor
British Medical Journal
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London
WC1H 9JR


Dear Dr Lock

Please find enclosed the redrafted paper, "The Hillsborough Tragedy". We
would be most grateful if you would consider this for publication in the
BMJ.

Yours sincerely




F P RYAN




J WARDROPE




G CLARK




G VENABLES




P REDGRAVE




C CROSBY
                            Department of Internal Medicine,
                            Northern General 'Hospital,
                            S heffield,
                            Tel 434343 ext 4826/5300
                            October 26th 1990,

Dr Stephen Lock,
Editor,
British Medical Journal,

Dear Dr Lock,

     Following our previous correspondence in January, please
find enclosed the new and radically altered paper on the
Hillsborough tragedy.  I apologise about the long delay which
was caused in part by the difficulty of getting multiple
authors from very different disciplines to agree, a
determined effort on all our parts for accurate numbers, and
finally a temporary illness on my own part.  I hope this
paper on such a very important event is now acceptable to you
for publication.  There appear to be all too many lessons to
be learnt and, I believe, some important general conclusions
and recommendations with regard to management of major
disasters here in the UK.  I hope you will find it more
acceptable. We have, as requested, kept to a narrative form
and we have also deliberately kept the number of figures down
to five. We have included one colour alternative to the
black and white photograph of the ground (cameraman unknown)
because the quality of the photograph is a little poor (?
done from a video camera) and detail is more easily seen in
colour.

     Thank you for the patience and consideration.

Yours sincerely.




Dr Frank P Ryan.
BMT
1840-1990v-F
16 November 1990
                                                                                                                                                            British M edical Jo u rn a l
                                                                                                                                                            BM A House
                                                                                                                                                            Tavistock S quare
                                                                                                                                                            L o n d o n W C 1H 9 JR

                                                                                                                                                            T ele p h o n e : 071-387 4499
                                                                                                                                                            Facsim ile: 071-383 6418
                                                                                                                                                            T elex:           265929
Dr Frank P Ryan                                                                                                                                             Direct:
Department of Internal Medicine
Northern General Hospital
Sheffield
S5 7AU


Dear Dr Ryan

re:         paper number 90 3373 - The Hillsborough Tragedy

Thank you for sending us your paper. It was discussed at our last full editorial
committee meeting and I am pleased to say that we would like to publish it in the
BMJ. The committee felt, however, that the paper still needed substantial revision
and suggested that this was done by one of the editors here.

Several parts of the paper need revision. Firstly, the description of the events
that led up to this disaster have already been described in detail in the mass media
and were, presumably, submitted to the Hillsborough inquiry. Therefore we do not
think that this description is necessary in an article in the BMJ.

On the other hand, we thought that the description of the difficulties of triage
and the delays in implementing a full major disaster plan were important and
interesting. These descriptions should form the first part of the revised paper,
after a brief introduction.

Lastly, the clinical account of crush asphyxia should form the second part of the
paper. We would be grateful if you would let us know where the more detailed
description of these patients is to be published — perhaps you could provide a
copy of that report.  If it has been accepted for publication elsewhere we must
reference it in the BMJ paper and will therefore need all the details in the
Vancouver style.

I hope that you are willing for us to do this. We hope to end up with a short,
crisp account (of no more than 1000 words) in the Middles section of the Journal.
We will, of course, send proofs for your approval at the appropriate stage.

I look forward to hearing from you shortly.

Yours sincerely




Patricia Groves MB BS MRCPsych
Assistant Editor




      R eg iste re d Office: B M A H o u s e , T av is to ck S q u a re , L o n d o n W C 1 H 9JR. A C o m p a n y lim ite d by g u a ra n te e . R e g iste re d N o . 8848 E n g l a n d
                          d r .f . p .r y a n .
                                              if.r .c .p .
                                  Consultant Physician

Telephone (0742) 351691                                      2 W OODBINE COTTAGES
Fax (0742) 620148                                            VICARAGE LANE
                                                             DORE
                                                             SHEFFIELD S17 3GX


                                                           19th August 1991,

             Stella Lowry,
             Assistant Editor,
             British Medical Journal,
             BMA House,
             Tavistock Square,
             London WC1H 9JR,
             Dear Doctor Lowry,
                 panp.rs 90*088 and 903         - The Hill shorouqh Tragedy
                  Further to your letter of 11th July and our subsequent
             telephone conversation, I have, with th®       anC^h°s should
                                                                               hj.


             particular the case histories might be put in smaller p n n            .


             the
              original.^ x f l L ^ l o i f u s t o S T ^ i s ^ ^   ^
              further copies, please let me know as soon as possible.
                   I do apologise for the time it has taken, however it has
              given us the advantage of longer follow-up on the
              neurological cases and has, I hope, improved the final paper.

              Many thanks for your patience,

              Yours sincerely,




              Dr Frank Ryan
                                                                                                                                                                       British Medical Jo u rn a l
                                                                                                                                                                       BM A H ouse
                                                                                                                                                                       Tavistock S quare
                                                                                                                                                                       London W C I H 9JR
                                                                                                                                                                       T e le p h o n e : 071-387 4499
br fP Ryan                                                                                                                                                             Facsimile: 071-383 6418
bepartffleht of Gastroenterology                                                                                                                                       T elex:            265929
Northern General Hospital                                                                                                                                              Direct:
Hetties Road
Sheffield S5 7AU
                                                                                                                                                                28 August 1991


Dear Dr Ryan


Paper N o {                905088

Titlei                The Hillsborough Tragedy


We are pleased to accept your revised article for publication in the                                                                                                                                      bmj,
and will send you proofs for your approval in due course.
May we remind you that your paper is accepted for publication on
condition that its contents have not appeared elsewhere. Could you
therefore not discuss your paper with the medical or lay press
until we have published it»

Vou t s sincerely



Tony Delaiftothe                      md mrcp
Deputy Editor




   R e g i s te r e d O f f i c e : B M A H o u s e , T a v is to c k S q u a r e , L o n d o n W C I H 9 J R . A C o m p a n y lim i te d by g u a ra n te e . R e g i s te r e d N o. 8 8 4 8 E n g lan d

                                                                              A          P r in te d o n r e - c y c le d p a p e r
                                                                   B M A H ouse
                                                                   Tavistock S quare

1840-1990                                                          L o ndon W C I H 9JR
                                                                   T e le p h o n e: 01-387 4499
                                                                   T e le p h o n e from 6 M ay 1990:
                                                                                     071-387 4499
                                                                   Facsimile: 01-383 6418
Papet Nd:
                                                                   Telex:            265929
                                                                   Direct:




Please ttould yotl and any co-authors edch complete the attached copyright form(s) and
retlitti it/them as Soon as possible»

We heed the signatures of all the authors* Please would you therefore ensure that all
your eo-authots sign eithet the enclosed forin(s) or a photocopy of it/them
Publication may be delayed if the forms ate not returned properly.




   /
British Medical Journal:           Unsolicited articles accepted for publication
                                                                     i

Papers ai*e accepted on condition that they have not been published by
any other journal


the BMJ requires an assignment of copyright to help ensure international
protection against infringement of copyright, in particular
indiscriminate photocopying, and so that it can handle appropriately
fequests from third parties to reproduce articles or parts of articles.


In consideration of the publication in the BMJ of my article(s)




1 hereby assign all rights and copyright throughout the world for the
above   article Without payment.         I   confirm that       I   am the author of the
atticle which is ffly original work          and   that   I   own all the copyright and
that I have not granted any rights ol* interests in the article or
licensed anyone to publish the same.


Signed____________________________________________ Date________________


Address                     ______________________________________________




tt the copyright tests with the author’s employer the author cannot assign
the copyright but    S h o u ld   obtain his employer*s consent to the BMJ handling
copyright matters with third parties;

Mote    3   If the author has not already signed a covering letter to say that
            he has seen and agreed the submitted manuscript his signature on
            this form Dili b& taken to rnean that ho has seen and approved
            the manuscript.

        2   Authors may themselves Use minor parts (Up to 15%) of their own
            work after publication without seeking written permission
            provided they acknowledge the original source.

        3   Authors may not reproduce substantial parts of their own
            material without written consent.
9




 6


 8
 9
                                                                           SSnor
                                                                               (norfloxacin, MSD)

 10
 16 February, Saturday            7th week 47-318                     17 February, Sunday            7th week 48-317
• ♦ © O O O C O O O O O O O O O S O O O O C - O O O S O C O O O C O O O C O O O G C O O G O O Q O O O O O O Q O O C - C O e O O O C




                          February                                                            February



  16                      Saturday

                          7th week                                    17                      Sunday

                                                                                              7th week
                                        FPR/JLP

11 December 1990

Dr P Groves
Assistant Editor
British Medical Journal
BMA House
Tavistock Square
London WC1H 9JR


Dear Dr Groves

Thank you for your letter of 16th November and our
telephone conversation. We are delighted that you wish
to publish the paper THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY. We
are agreeable to your editing it as you suggested.

I have enclosed a copy of a draft of the neurological
paper as you requested. Please note that this is in
an unfinished form but it will give you a clear idea
of the intended contents.

I look forward to hearing from you in due course.

Yours sincerely




F P RYAN
CONSULTANT PHYSICIAN
                                                   FPR/JLP

   19 February 1991

  Dr T Delanothe
  Senior Assistant Editor
OBritish Medical Journal
  BHA House
  Tavistock Square
  London
  WC1H 9JH


   Dear Dr Delamothe

   Thank you very much for your letter dated 14th F£bruary.
   I am afraid there has been some misunderstanding. We
   realise that the paper NEUROLOGICAL DAMAGE DOE TO ACUTE
   CRUSH INJURY - THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER needed some
   polishing, and the references completing but I was asked
   by Dr Groves to send it in at this stage so that it
   could be taken into consideration in the light of your
   wish to publish the first of the two papers THE HILLSBOROUGH
   TRAGEDY. This explains many of the referees comments.
   Some other comments are relevant and I will correct
£)all of these and let you have a corrected copy as soon
   as possible. I suspect you might have to give some
   explanation to the referee. I will be in touch.

   Yours sincerely




   F P RYAN
   CONSULTANT PHYSICIAN
                                        FPR/JLP

4 February 1991

Dr P Groves
Assistant Editor
British Medical Journal
BMA HOuse
Tavistock Square
London WC1H 9JR


Dear Dr Groves

Further to our previous correspondence on the paper
THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY, I have not heard anything from
you since early December and we would be very grateful
if you could let me know what is happening.

Many thanks,

Yours sincerely




F P RYAN
CONSULTANT PHYSICIAN
BMJ
14 February, 1991.
                                                                                                                                                                     B ritish M edical Jo u rn a l
                                                                                                                                                                     B M A H ouse
                                                                                                                                                                     Tavistock Sq u a re
                                                                                                                                                                     L ondon W C IH 9JR

                                                                                                                                                                     T e le p h o n e : 071-387 4499
                                                                                                                                                                     Facsim ile: 071-383 6418
                                                                                                                                                                     T elex:            265929
                                                                                                                                                                     Direct:



Dear Dr. Ryan,

     Thank you for your letter about what has been happening to your Hillsborough
papers.   We now have two opinions on the paper devoted to neurological damage.
We would like you to take account of the referees' criticisms, providing for us,
separately, how you have responded to each of their points.

     When we have this we will set about subediting a combined Hillsborough paper
as quickly as we can.

                                                                         Yours sincerely,




                                                        Tony Delamothe, M.D., M.R.C.P
                                                            Senior Assistant Editor




Dr. F.P. Ryan,
Dept, of Gastroenterology,
Northern General Hospital,
Herries Road,
Sheffield S5 7AU.




   R e g i s te re d Office: B M A H o u s e , T av is to ck S q u a re , L o n d o n W C I H 9 J R . A C o m p a n y l i m i t e d by g u a ra n te e . R e g i s te re d N o . 8848 E n g l a n d
       Referees' comments


       Referee 1

        The paper looks as though It has been prepared in a rush;   for example,
     there are references missing from the reference list, and quite a lot of
     typing errors.   There are also various questions of detail which I think
     really ought to be addressed before it is published.   I don't want to
| ;2 sound pedantic, but Ireally do think we need some kind of definition of what
     the authors think a neurological injury is and also we need to get some
   2 idea of the severity of the neurological injuries, at least as they were seen
     coming through the accident and emergency door.   In the first paragraph headed
     "Patients" the authors switch between "central nervous system injuries" and
  3 "anoxic" injuries.    They do need to be a bit more precise about what they are
   £ talking about.   Perhaps it would be helpful to have some more detail of the
     neurological deaths;   I presume that these were due to anoxic brain damage
     and they must, I guess, have been coroner's post-mortems to prove that.

  S’      It's not clear to me why so many patients were ventilated.    Was this
       because they were hypoxic on admission to the hospital with insufficient
       respiratory drive, or was it because they had status epilepticus?    Also,
  L    in the case reports, it would help to know who was ventilated and when.    The
       discussion of early deterioration seems a bit abbreviated.    Presumably some
       of this deterioration must be explained by anoxic seizures, severe enough to
       put the patient into status epilepticus.   I also wonder whether alcohol
       consumption had anything to do with the seizures;   perhaps this could be
       discussed.

       Referee 2

          The account of the neurological group as a whole and the individual case
       reports are succinct and informative.    I have no major criticisms here but
       it would add to the reports to know the interval between injury and arrival
       in hospital (they do not state the time of the disaster, only the time of
       arrival in hospital).    Secondly, it is not entirely clear to me whether
       psychometric testing was performed in cases one and three, though I think
       from a later comment, they probably did.    This should be clarified.   Thirdly,
       the report of the peripheral nerve and brachial plexus injuries is very brief.
       Obviously, this is not the main subject of the paper, but it would be helpful
       to know a bit more about it.    Perhaps information about these injuries could
       be presented in a table.

          As you say, the major interest in this group of patients is the late
       neurological deterioration which occurred in a substantial number.   Post-
       hypoxic fits are common and a well recognised complication, but the authors
       of this paper describe disorientation, restlessness, agitation, and extensor
       spasms preceding fits, and in one patient, the development of cortical blindness.
       This delayed deterioration occurred between one and 72 hours after the crush
       injury.

          The features of the delayed deterioration are clearly described, but
       inadequately discussed.    The authors refer to the work of Plum and associates
       but they do not compare and contrast the previous reports with the present
       observations in their patients.    I need to be convinced that this really has
       not been described before.    The authors need to be asked to expand this part of
       the discussion which, at the moment, is very weak and inconclusive.
   T(%re are quite a lot of careless spelling errors (eg, vegitative persistant)
and the grammar is poor in places, some sentences appearing in note form
(eg, report of male, 42 on page 4).
                                                                                                                                                             British Medical Jo u rn a l
                                                                                                                                                             BM A House
                                                                                                                                                             Tavistock S quare
                                                                                                                                                             L o n d o n W C I H 9JR

                                                                                                                                                             T ele p h o n e : 071-387 4499
                                                                                                                                                             Facsimile: 071-383 6418
                                                                                                                                                             Telex:            265929
                                                                                                                                                             Direct:


                                                                                                                                                               11 July 1991




Dear Dr Ryan

Paper 905088 - Neurological damage due to acute crush injury - the
Hillsborough disaster

Our records show that the above paper was sent back to you on 14 February
for revision with a view to possible publication in the BMJ. Would   you
be kind enough to tell us what is happening with it?

We will be able to consider a revised version of your paper only if we
receive it within three months of the date of this letter.    If we do not
hear from you within three months we will assume that you do not intend
to submit your paper to us, and we will close our file on it.

If you have already returned your revised paper perhaps it was under a
changed title and has escaped our computer records.   In that casecould
you possibly let us know its final title so that we   can   amend our
records, and we apologise for the inconvenience caused by this request.

Thank you for your help.

Yours sincerely




Stella Lowry MB ChB BSc
Assistant Editor




Dr FP Ryan
Consultant Physician
Department of Gastroenterology
Northern General Hospital
Herries Road
Sheffield
S5 7AU




  R e g i s te re d Office: B M A H o u s e , T av is to ck S q u a re , L o n d o n W C I H 9JR . A C o m p a n y lim i te d by g u a ra n te e . R e g i s te re d N o. 8848 E n g l a n d
              h
Telephone (0742) 3S1691
Pax (0742) 620148
                          Dfc. F. P. RVAN.iF.R.C.P.
                                 Consultant Physician


                                                         2 WOODBINE COTTAGES
                                                         VICARAGE LANE
                                                         DORE
                                                         SHEFFIELD S17 3GX


                                                        19th August 1991,
            Stella Lowry,
            Assistant Editor,
            British Medical Journal,
            BMA House,
            Tavistock Square,
            London WciH 9JR,
            Dear Doctor Lowry,
            Re tjacetS 905088 and 903373 - The Hillsborough Tragedy
                  Further to your lettet of 11th July and our subsequent
            telephone conversation/ I haVe, with the assistance of my
            colleagues, amalgamated the two papers into one. This should
            make youi: task a good deal easier * The amalgamated paper has
            been fUrthfer screened and edited by each of the participants
            but may tetjuite futther editing down by yourselves.  In
            patticulair the case histories might be put in smaller print.
                 Please note that 1 have not enclosed a further copy of
            the figutes* Figure 1 in the original paper has now been
            omitted/ So that figUteS 1 - 4 correspond with 2 - 5 in the
            ofiginal.  ±f there is confusion about this or you require
            furthet copies, please let me know as soon as possible.
                 I do apologise for the time it has taken, however it has
            given us the advantage of longer follow-up on the
            neurological oases and has, I hope, improved the final paper.
            Many thanks for your patience,
            Yours sihcerely,




            Dr Frank Ryan
                                                                                                                                                                      British M edical Journal
                                                                                                                                                                      BMA House
                                                                                                                                                                      Tavistock Square
                                                                                                                                                                      L on d o n W C IH 9JR
                                                                                                                                                                      T ele p h o n e : 071-387 4499
dr PP Ryan                                                                                                                                                            Facsimile: 071-383 6418
Department of Gastroenterology                                                                                                                                        Telex:            265929
Northern General Hospital                                                                                                                                              Direct:
Hetries Road
Sheffield S5 7AU
                                                                                                                                                               28 August 1991


Dear Dr Ryan

Paper Nos                  905088
title*.                 The Hillsborough Tragedy



We are pleased to accept your revised article for publication in                                                                                                                             the        bmj,
and Will send you proofs for your approval in due course.
May we remind you that your paper is accepted for publication on
condition that its contents have not appeared elsewhere, could                                                                                                                             you
therefore not discuss your paper with the medical or lay press
until we have published it*

yours sincerely



Tony Delamothe M d                             mrcp
Deputy Editor




   R e g i s te r e d O f f i c e : B M A H o u s e , T a v is to c k S q u a r e , L o n d o n W C I H 9 J R . A C o m p a n y lim iie d by g u a ra n ie e . R e g i s ie r e d No. 8 8 4 8 E n g lan d

                                                                                        P r in te d on r e - c y c le d p a p e r
                                                                       BM A H ouse
                                                                       Tavistock S quare

1840-1990                                                              L o ndon W C I H 9JR
                                                                       T e le p h o n e: 01-387 4499
                                                                       T e le p h o n e from 6 M ay 1990:
                                                                                         071-387 4499
                                                                       Facsimile: 01-383 6418
                                                                       Telex:            265929

                                                                       Direct:




Please VoUid yoll and any co-authors each complete the attached copyright form(s) and
return It/them as soon as possible.
We flfied the signatures o f all the authbirs. Please W o u l d you therefore ensure that all
your fcb^aUthors sign either the enclosed fbtn(s) or a photocopy of it/th^m

Publication may be   delayed if the forms ate not returned properly.




                                                                                                            *
                                                                                                                                                                   British Medical Journa l
                                                                                                                                                                   B M A H ouse
                                                                                                                                                                   Tavistock Square
                                                                                                                                                                   L o n d o n VVC1H 9JR

                                                                                                                                                                   T e le p h o n e: 071-387 4499
Dr FP Ryan                                                                                                                                                         Facsimile: 071-383 6418
Department of Gastroenterology                                                                                                                                     Telex:            265929
Northern General Hospital                                                                                                                                          Direct:
Herries Road
Sheffield S5 7AU
                                                                                                                                                            28 August 1991



Dear Dr Ryan


Paper No:                905088

Title:                The Hillsborough Tragedy



We are pleased to accept your revised article for publication in                                                                                                                          the BMJ,
and will send you proofs for your approval in due course.

May we remind you that your paper is accepted for publication on
condition that its contents have not appeared elsewhere.   Could you
therefore not discuss your paper with the medical or lay press
until we have published it.


Yours sincerely




Tony Delamothe MD MRCP
Deputy Editor




   R e g i s i e r e d O ffic e : B M A H o u s e , T a v is lo c k S q u a re , L o n d o n W C I H 9 J R . A C o m p a n y lim i ie d by g u a r a m e e . R e g i s ie r e d No. 8 8 4 8 E n g lan d

                                                                             &         P r im e d on re - c y c le d p a p er
