                                                                                 Sheffield Health Authority




O ur ref.           DE/CB                                               Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU
 Your ref.                                                                     Telephone (0 7 4 2 ) 4 3 4 3 4 3

 Please reply to                        Ext.




                    27t’
                       a April 19S9


                    Hr. J. Uardrope,
                    Consultant in Accident £ Emergency Medicine,
                    Northern- General Hospital.


                    Dear Mr. Uardrope,

                    As requested the report on the Physiotherapy Department,
                    Saturday 15th April, the date of the Hillsborough disaster.

                     The Physiotherapy Department was a designated area for the walking
                     wounded and was staffed by both nursing staff and very helpful    V
                     physiotherapists. Physiotherapists turned out in large numbers
                     and were very useful in providing both patient assistance and
                     material goods. -The .number of patients taken through the department
                     was. relatively small. I was only present in the department from
                     gftsr 5.00 p.m. to 7.00 p.m. At that time ue saw one patient who
                     was not connected with the Hillsborough disaster but who had
                     sustained an open injury of his knee whilst playing a football
                     game locally. We also saw an 13 year old girl who was subsequently
                     admitted with.bad: injuries and loss of consciousness. There
                   1 were numerous other walking wounded who were all treated conservatively
                     and discharged.

                    Of particular commendation, wore two medical students who reviewed
                    patients initially and despatched them to more senior colleagues
                    accordingly.

                    As far as I am aware there were no other admislons through this
                    department and all other casualties were minor injuries which were
                    dealt with locallj'" prior to discharge.

                    Yours sincerely,.




                    D . EDWARDS
                    Orthopaedic Registrar




G. 1530
                  ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL

The Royal Hallamshire Hospital has a 10 bedded General
Intensive Care Unit and a four bedded Neurosurgical High
Dependency Unit.

At the time of the incident there were six patients in the
General Intensive Care Unit, three of whom were moved to the
general wards as a matter of urgency.   Their subsequent
progress was without mishap.

Seven patients were admitted from the Hillsborough incident.
Six  via the Northern General Hospital and one from our
Accident and Emergency Department.   Six were admitted to the
Intensive Care Unit following C.T. Scan and one to the
Neurosurgical Critical Care Unit.   One of the patients had
undergone a laparotomy at the Northern General Hospital
before transfer.   All admissions occurred between 17.30 and
21.30 hours on the 15th April 1989.

All the patients had suffered from cerebral hypoxia and six
had epileptiform convulsions.   The cerebral injuries were
treated in a similar manner to the patients at the Northern
General Hospital with ventilation and control of P C 0 2 . Fits
were controlled with anticonvulsants in six of the seven
patients but one patient required a thiopentone infusion to
gain control of the fitting.

All the admission C.T. Scans were normal limits subsequent
scans showing varying slight brain swelling which persisted
for up to 5 days after the incident.

All the patients showed signs of gastric dilations which was
probably due to mouth to mouth resusitation at the scene of
the disaster.   This settled with nasogastric intubation
over the first 24 hour period.

Surprisingly none of the patients suffered any bone injury
but one suffered a brachial plexus injury.

Of the seven patients two have appeared to make complete
neurological recovery,  one was transferred back to local
hospitals with possible  mild neurological damage and four
with severe neurological damage.   It is difficult to predict
what psychological damage this incident will produce in the
two patients who appeared to make complete neurological
recoveries.

Despite the number of admissions in a short space of time,    in
view of the media coverage of the event large numbers of
staff arrived before the cascade system could take effect
and consequently the unit was at all times adequately
staffed.
