       DEPARTMENT                       NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
   O F GASTROENTEROLOGY
                                                        SHEFFIELD S 6 7AII
       Consultant Physicians:
                                                     Telephone 434343 (STD Code 0742)
       F. P. RYAN. F.R.C.P.
       D. J. DAWSON. M.D.. M.R.C.P.
                                               27th April, 1989
       Our R»l:
                   DJD/RN
       Your Ref:



Dr. J. Alderson,
Chairman,
Medical Staff Committee,
NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL.

Dear

                           re : Hillsborough Disaster

     In reply to your letter asking for comments
about the Major Accident Plan, I enclose a copy of the
Debriefing Meeting which I held with the Medical
Junior Staff after the disaster.   I will also be
discussing these at a further debriefing session
organised by Jim Wardrope for Friday, 28th April.

                                  Yours sincerely,




                                    D . J . Dawson.
                                Consultant Physician.

Copies to :            Dr. F. P. Ryan
                       Dr. C. A. Hardisty
                       Mr. N. McKay.
DEPARTMENT                    NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
OF GASTROENTEROLOGY
                                         SHEFFIELD S5 7AU
Consultant Physicians:
F. P. RYAN. F.RC.P.                   Telephone 434343 (STD Code 0742)
D. J. DAWSON. M.D.. M.RC.P.


O ut R ef:   FPR/JLP

Youi Ref :                                  28 April 1989


Dr J D Alderson
Chairman
Medical Staff Committee
Northern General Hospital


Dear Dr Alderson

In reply to your queries sent to all Medical Staff,
as you will know I attended the early resuscitation
of the accident victims from Hillsborough in Casualty
and on’ward 60. I would like to make t&e following
comments;

Firstly, I was not invited to attend the Hospital,
I was alerted to the crisis by watching the television
and actually*phoned the switchboard and was told there
was no major disaster plan in operation.   I camein
anyway.  I would particularly like .to emphasise the
lack of importance given to physicians on call in
the major disaster plan when in fact, it proved to
be very important indeed that physicians did attend.
I would recommend very strongly that the major
disaster plan is amended to include physicians and
particularly the senior Consultant on cover at the
time.

It was relatively easy for me to get into the
Hospital, once I had got past traffic jams on the
southern part of the city. The Police had, in fact,
blockaded roads and I could use the Police blocks to
get in very quickly.

 I was not contacted at any time to be told to coi&e
in.

On arrival at the Hospital I went to Casualty and
spoke to Mr Wardrope immediately and a very good
liaison was set up as a result of this.

There was no problem in locating beds. We were
fortunate that a large number of anaesthetists
arrived on the scene, since a particularly important
item of equipment was a large number of ventilators
which were essential for patients who were in status
epilepticus and brain damaged.   It was very helpful
to have the assistance of Consultafcjff"Anaesthetists
at this stage and I would particularly mention
Dr White, Dr Murray-Wilson, DrAppleyard and
Dr Clarke.

The Northern General has a serious gap in the
medical facilities required and this is a lack
paid to the need of the General Physicians to
be involved at a much higher level in the cascade,
than is written into the major disaster plan.

Yours sincerely




i' P Ryan
Consultant Physician

cc    Mr N S McKay Unit General Manager NGH
      All Consultant Physicians at the Northern
      General Hospital.
                         NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL

To:      All Medical Staff

From:    Dr J D Aiderson, Chairman, Medical Staff Committee



Dear Colleague,

Now that we are all beginning to recover from the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster it would seem appropriate to seek views as to how successful the
Major Accident Plan was as applied to the Northern General Hospital, I
would be grateful therefore if you could identify any particular problems
that you encountered with the operation of the plan and indeed any
suggested improvements that you feel would be appropriate for amending the
plan.

Particular questions that I think should be addressed include?

        Kow easy was it for you to get into the Hospital once you were
        contacted by Switchboard?

        Were you contacted at the appropriate time or was there too much of a
        delay?

        Was the job description allocated to you in the Major Accident Plan
        appropriate or does it need modifying?

        Was there a problem in locating beds or equipment?

        Does the Northern General Hospital have an obvious gap in the medical
        facilities required.

Please feel free to comment as widely as you feel is appropriate around
this subject«            -



J D Alderson
Chairman
Medical Staff Committee


JDA/EEE/17..4.89«




                                         1
