          nra-Ffc Report op the TT-mshqroagh. Disaster fear Submission

              to the Co-ordinat±pq Ccnmittee care of Mr J W&rflrope


li Alert Procedure

Frcm approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday the 15th April 1989 information

regarding sane form of incident began to reach the Royal Hallamshire Hospital

switchboard through staff making enquiries following television and radio

reporting.   At approximately 15.20 the Police at Hillsborough telephoned the Nurse

in charge of the Accident & Rnergency Department asking-the-hospital "stand by to

expect casualties".   This call was mcnitored by the switchboard which advised key
 —— —"   '                                p
members of staff following this message^-/ The Senior Registrar and Consultant in

charge of the Department were alerted by a long distance pager and arrived within

minutes of each other at about 15.37.     At that time initial preparation for the

receiving of a large number of casualties had ccnroenced. \ Seven-pat-ients—in the




the accepted control point.    In response to hospital staff enquiries, they

confirmed that a major alert was in being and the duty Nursing Officer took the

formal step of notifying switchboard to cannence the major disaster procedure.



2. Medical and Nurse Response

Doctors and Nurses who currently work and have previously worked in the Accident &

Emergency Department began to volunteer their services fran 15.40.       They were

alerted by word of mouth fran neighbours and fran radio reports which they had

overheard in public places.    The medical staff in the Department grew fran

numbering 6 at 15.40 to at least 45 two hours later.\ A Senior Surgeon and a Senior

Physician, both of whan happened to be in the hospital at the time of the i n i t i a l

alert, undertook to clear available beds on their wards.      An E.N.T. ward, which had

been previously designated to receive major disaster victims was cleared. 1
                                     -   2-



    3. Departmental Arrangements
    The A&E Department was divided into resuscitation and major injuries.       The third

    area for walking wounded was established in the adjacent orthopaedic clinic, and

    staff were distributed between these three areas in such a way that each area had

    a number of senior clinicians.



T   4- Patient Arrival

    a n patients were brought to the hospital by the Ambulance Service, the first two

    arriving without warning at 15.40.        The first of these patients died and his body

    remained in the Department for sane hours.        The second patient was intubated and

    transferred to the Intensive Care Unit.        There was then a period during which the

    departmental plans could be fully organized before the sudden influx of a large

    number of patients, sane on stretchers but most walking which occurred a few

    minutes after 4.00 pm.   In all 71 patients were brought to the Royal Hallamshire

    Hospital, A&E Department, 45 of whan were discharged that day and 25 of whan were

/   admitted.



    5. Patients     __ \

                                         young~ma!es~ and there-was no statistically

                                                                   discharged on the day of

    the— Lncident. Sane_patients--were -adndtted uhder the Orthopaedic Surgeon~~of •bhe

    dayf m e of whan required manipulation of a fractured radius and ulna.        Six

    patients were admitted under the General Physician of the day, most of whan had

    felt dizzy and light headed after being removed the crowd.        Eleven patients were

    admitted with varying degrees of abdominal tenderness after being pressed against

    projections   The majority of patients who were not admitted were suffering from

    emotional disturbance and minor soft tissue injuries which did not require

    treatment or referral.   All but one of the admitted patients was fully conscious.

    That evening the majority were allowed hane within the next 48 hours
     Termination of Incident

   ie last patient was received at approximately 5.00 pn.   The Department was

   leared and ready to receive routine referrals of both Ambulance and walking

  ases by approximately 6.15 pm.



  /. Difficulties Experienced

 Ihe lack of carntunication fran both the Police and Ambulance Services at the

 scene in the initial stages of the incident was keenly felt.    Because of the

 public nature of the disaster the large number of volunteer medical staff, sane

 of whan have little recent experience in resuscitation work, proved difficult to

 manage.   It was felt that a triage point for volunteer staff was almost as

 necessary as one for arriving patients.   These staff lingered lcng after it

 became clear that no further patients would arrive fran the football grc

j Same difficulty was experienced by nursing and clerical staff because worried

 relatives were phoning the Department directly fran Liverpool and other parts of

 Sheffield
