                                SHEFTOLD HEALTH AUTHORITY - MEMORANDUM
 From         Mr J Adams                            To     See Distribution List belov?
              General Services Manager

r Rate        A July 1989
  Pef.        JA/SD
  Tel. Ext.   4755               -
                                                    Ref.                                  G .1779




              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


              Please find enclosed one copy of the Unit's Report on the Northern
              General Hospital response to the Hillsborough Disaster. This document,
              together with the Major Disaster Plan will be relevant when we re­
              convene the Major Disaster Plan Working Party.




              Mr J Adams




              Distribut ion:-  Mr McKay - General Manager
                               Hiss R Dancio - Matron
                               Mr Batty - Charge Nurse- A & S :
                            . Mrs Irani - Assistant Matron - Obs & Gynae
                               Dr Shaw - Consultant Anaesthetist
                               Mr J Wardrope - Consultant A & E
                               Miss J Oates - Planning & Information Manager
                            •: Dr Ryan    Consultant Physician
                               Chairman of Surgical Division
               DRAFT DOCUMENT -        STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL




 THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY : AN OVERVIEW OF THE MEDICAL RESPONSE




    THE   STAFF, NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL SHEFFIELD.

    THE STAFF ,ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE HOSPITAL ,SHEFFIELD.

    GENERAL^PRA€TIT I ^ E ^ ^ S H E ^ t B dbD.




ADDRESS FOR CORRESPONDANCE
                                     Dr. J. Alderson,
                                     Chairman,
                                     Hospital Medical Staff Committee
                                     Northern General Hospital,
                                     Sheffield   S5 7AU.
          Saturday the 15th of April, was a fine sunny day, The
perfect — day— to “take the kids T:o the park,— mow the lawn or
    j-/-> a •Pmthai i matr?h  Ai- 1 ^ .on pi ay commenced in the
F.A. Cup semi-final match between Liverpool and Nottingham
Forest. At 15.06 the match was stopped by the referee due
to what appeared to be some crowd trouble. For some minutes
the exact nature of the trouble was not clear even to those
in the ground and certainly no-one realised that they were
witnessing the worst disaster at a sporting event in this
country in recent times.
W i

      \




          At the Ground.
                                                           •
                   The first medical aid to the casualties came from
          V doctors and nurses attending the match as spectators. There
            were two main areas with large numbers of casualties. The
            most obvious problem was on the terraces but there was
            also a major incident in the access tunnel to the terraces.
            Five or six doctors and some nurses began resuscitation on
            the pitch while two doctors and a nurse struggled to help
            the large number of casualties from the tunnel. During this
            period there was no resuscitation equipment available.
            Makeshift stretchers were made from advertising hoardings.
                  Within 25 to 30 minutes most of the casualties were
            removed from the terraces and the tunnel. Thus there was an
            overwhelming   number of casualties presenting to       the
            emergency services within a very short space of time. Many
            victims were carried accross the pitch to a large sports
            hall behind the stand.

                     Local radio broadcast an appeal for doctors to go to
             the ground and between 15 .30 and 15.4.5 about 20 doctors
             arrived in the sports hall. They began treating the
             inj ured,some requiring cardiopulmonary resuscitation and
             others with chest      or limb injuries. Their emergency
             equipment soon ran out due to        the large numbers of
             casualties. At about 15.45 the major accident equipment
             arrived in the sports hall and the medical staff were able
             to use the airway care apparatus and to set up intravenous
             infusions. By 16.15 most of the casualties had been removed
             to hospital.
the Accident and Emergency Departments

         The A/E departments of the Northern General Hospital
  (NGH)  and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital       (RHH) both
  implemented their major disaster plans shortly before
  15.30. The first casualties were evacuated to the NGH since
  this hospital was the closest.

   The NGH.
           The A/E consultant arrived at the NGH just after
   15.30   to find three patients already in the resuscitation
   room having come in as cardiac arrests. These patients
   were being treated by the two A/E senior house officers
   (SHO), an anaesthetic SHO and the paediatric    SHO. There
   were three other less seriously injured patients in the
   department.
            Almost immediately a second wave of ambulances
   arrived with a large number of serious casualties. Some
   were      receiving    cardiopulmonary   resuscitation,some
   unconscious and others were fitting. Fortunately the A/E
   department was well designed to cope with these large
   numbers of patients requiring resuscitation. At one time
   there   were   at least 18 patients     requiring    urgent
   resuscitation, airway care or control of convulsions.
           Many other patients were arriving complaining of
   difficulty breathing or pelvic and back pain with injuries
   sustained in the crush. Most of these patients were triaged
   fce- direct to the receiving ward adj acent to the A/E

           About 15.40 there was a request for.
   to go the the ground.      Two doctors were
   major accident equipment and the
   equipment.
                     ill casualties       still
                    many   more
                   At this point those patients with no cardiac
           were triaged as dead, a difficult decision in young
           whose only injury was asphyxial hypoxia.
           During the first hour the department received 87
    casualties         patients were intubated ,ventilated and
       .tted to the intensive care units . Resuscitation was
               in at least six patients presenting in cardio-
                arrest. Two of these patients were admitted to
      msive care . In total 11 victims were either brought in
         or resusbitat^ionin the department failed.
              During this period the department also dealt with
          other emergencies including anofther cardiac arrest
        related to the Hillsborough Disaster/€hfcfc*.also required
      ensive care.
Traumatic asphyxia

        Traumatic     asphyxia is an uncommon and usually
sporadic medical emergency but 19 patients suffering from
severe asphyxia were admitted through the A/E department of
the NGH. The mean age was 19.6 years.
       Many     patientson    arrival     exhibited  extreme
restlessness,confused agitation, whole body shivering and
screaming in the so called " encephalitic manner". Unlike
other hypoxic cerebral insults some patients developed a
progressive     worsening of signs long after the initial
trauma. This late onset was very misleading. One young man
initially appeared to be slightly dazed but otherwise
conscious     suddenly started to scream an hour        after
admission.     The screaming lasted for several       minutes
followed by status epilepticus and coma . This pattern was
observed in another patient 1 hour 30 minutes after
admission. One other patient became confused and lost his
vision 2 hours 30 minutes after admission. Subsequent
examination confirmed the diagnosis as cortical blindness.
         14 of the patients had fits. These took the form of
status epilepticus and although they were partly controlled
by intravenous diazepam . The definitive treatment was
intubation and ventilation. The patients also received
dexamethasone soon after arrival.
       Two patients      did not have fits but the degree of
agitation prompted early treatment and ventilation.
       Three    patients were transferred from the receiving
wards to the RHH .        The sudden deterioration described
above raised the possibility of an intra-cranial bleed and
urgent CT scans were requested. All of the CT scans were
negative. Four patients were transferred from the intensive
carev unites to the RHH for: the same reason.
        Over Jtlje next few      th^^at^eivt^^Sr^tee^ted in
              'qaper''ui^4£S'i
       AT more detailed study of these patients and the
longer term outcome is underway but the results in these
patients are as follows; one patient died within two hours
of arrival rone patient died several days later after being
diagnosed brain dead. Nine patients made excellent early
recoveries and two patients good recoveries. At this time
five patients are left with severe disablitily with one
further patient as yet showing no signs of useful cerebral
function.
The Intensive care units.

        The NGH has; two intensive care units the General
Intensive care (GICU) and the cardiothoracic intensive care
(CICU)   . As the incident occurred at a weekend there was
only     one   patient who could not         be moved      out    of
intensive care. Thus the units were cleared to make way for
the influx of casualties.
        The first patient was received at 16.30             and by
17.30    ten patients had been admitted          to GICU. These
patients were already intubated and required ventilation.
The GICU was then full and a further five patients were
admitted to the CICU,the last one arriving about 18.30. One
further patient was admitted to CICU with a pneumothorax
and severe chest pain but he did not require ventilation.
        The ma jor problem wap -feho --treatment---of hypoxic
        i damage mnnrfl by frr rm rnn   t- ir-   n , (The treatment
  of the hypoxic cerebral damage       which had been started in
the A/E department- was continued.            This consisted of
ventilation to maintain good oxygenation and an arterial.
pCCU of between 3.5 and 4 kPa.^ Fluids were closely
restricted    and mannitol and frusemide were used                if
necessary. Fits were controlled with anticonvulsants.
        Four of the most seriously injured were transfered
to the RHH for CT scans to rule out intracranial bleeding.
        The   majority of the patients showed signs of
inhalation    of    stomach   contents      and     were    treated
aggressively with antibiotics. One patient developed a mild
chest infection,, bat /^o patient developed adult respiratory
distress syndrome.
        Five patients deve±G|>ed pneumothoraces and              one
patients had a corneal abrasion. One patient developed*
hypotensis^f a^FrcP^a rigid abdomen and had a laparotomy but
this proved to be negative.
        Two of the fifteen ventilated patients had been
resuscitated from cardiac arrest. One died shortly after
admission and the other was declared brain dead some days
after admission.
       This incident was a severe test of the ability of the
ICU's to cope with large numbers of patients arriving with
a very short timespan. There was a rapid response form all
IlgU staff. 2 § anaesthetists attended along with large
numbers of intensive care nursing staff and operating
department assistants (ODA) . Most of these staff came into
hospital on hearing of the incident through the media. The
 large numbers of staff allowed each patient to be attended
to by one doctor and any patient requiring transfer were
accompanied by an anaesthetist and an ODA.
Secondary Triage.

        At the NGH those patients with significant injuries
on initial triage were taken to the designated major
accident receiving ward which is adjacent to         the A/E
department.For the first 30 minutes of the incident      all
experienced staff were required in the resuscitaion rooms.
A senior registrar briefly checked that each patient was
conscious with no major respiratory or cardiovascular
compromise.
        As the situation in the A/E department stabilised
the emphasis      changed to the accurate assessment of the
patients on        the ward. The mechanism of injury was not
clear in the initial stages of the assessment.           The
patients histories suggested crush injury and for that
reason repeated examinations were made to rule out visceral
and limb injuries.
        A senior member of staff was given charge of each
bay of 6 patients and directed the efforts of other staff.
The most urgent of the early problems was the sudden
neurological deterioration in some patients. Four patients
required rapid sequence induction and ventilation.     These
patients were then transferred to         the intensive care
units or to the RHH for CT scans.
        Many patients had chest pain and pain on breathing.
Most of the chest Xrays were normal. One patients had an
arch aortogram since a widened mediastinum was seen on the
chest x-ray.
    There was anxiety that some patients might develop
delayed respiratory complications but the anaesthetic staff
performed ward rounds using the combination of clinical
examination and pulse oximetry to monitor patient progress.
      Many patients had abdominal pain but a combination of
clinical examination, ultrasound and peritoneal lavage
enabled the conservative management of these patients.
        The General Surgical, Orthopaedic , and Anaesthetic
staff made repeated ward rounds over the next 24 hours to
ensure that no significant injuries were overlooked. Many
had severe bruising often involving the genitalia. This
appeared to be a result of being cruched against barriers.
Similar    bruising involving the back musculature       was
encountered.    One patient had severe pain from traction on
the brachial plexus. He had been trampled while lying
against a barrier.
        The majority of the ward admissions were discharged
home within 48 hours. Four        patients required furjater
convalescence    and they were transferred to       hopitals
nearer to their homes.
X-RAY

        The x-ray department of the NGH faced very heavy
demands during the early stages of the incident. Well over
200 films were taken in the first six hours. Five rooms
were    used as well as mobile apparatus in the         A/E
department, on the wards and in the ICUs. As the films
emerged from the processor they were inspected by two
radiologists   and hand written reports attached to each
film.
      Ultrasound    was used in     the evaluation of some
abdominal injuries.
        There werefew abnormal findings. Only four patients
had    visible rib fractures. 7 patients showed ,changes
compatible with aspiration into the lungs. There/was one
skull fracture. There were no long bone fractures/
The Relatives
       The nature of the tragedy and the proximity of the
football stadium to the hospital meant that very quickly
large numbers of people arrived seeking information about
their   friends and relatives. The hospital staff canteen
was used to accommodate these people and soon a crowd Of
250   to 300 people had gathered ,all desperate         for
information.   In the early stages there were real problems
in identification of the victims. The dead and unconscious
were on three sites, most of the injured arrived in
hospital wearing only t- shirts,jeans and gym shoes. A
senior manager took charge of this situation and as
information became available he had the onerous task of
trying to distribute this to the crowd. Large numbers of
nursing staff/ chaplains and social workers also helped in
this task. Many of the relatives had to be transported back
to the stadium to identify the dead.

The press

       The event attracted large numbers of the press and
by and large they acted with great responsibility. They
were   given facilities and information as it       became
available and once the clinical situations were under
control the some patients consented to be interviewed and
the appropriate arrangements were made.
Summary
       Table 1 lists the statistics for patients injured
in   the major incident dealt with in the       Sheffield
Hospitals.

TABLE 1
                               NGH         RHH   TOTAL


 Patients brought to A/E       88          71     159

Dead on arrival/not resusc.    11           1      12

Treated and discharged         21          45      66

Admitted                       56          25      81

Ventilated initially           1^7          1      19

Transfers                          7 (to RHH)       7

Late deaths                        2                2

Dead at scene                                      81



      The major injury was traumatic asphyxia leading a
hypoxic cerebral insult.
       Six   patients at time of writting still         have
significant neurological disability.
      There were 5 patients with pneumothoraces.
      One patient had a profound brachial plexus inj ury.
      There were a large number of soft tissue crush
injuries of varying severity. There were no long bone
fractures.
      Formal injury scoring was not carried out since there
is as yet no Abbreviated Injury Score for traumatic
asphyxia.




                              10
  The lessons

         This incident is the subject of a Public Enquiry and
  many of the major lessons of this disaster will be examined
  in great detail by this Enquiry. We would not like to pre­
  empt this process but there are a number of other important
  points need discussion.

           As     in   almost     every    other      maj9F      incident
   communications were a -ma jor --p r oblem^^<g/i~»&7 dJfcCuJlr .
 ^       _ Geguaunioations— at the ground were diff-a^re^t.^ Uni ike
j many otKer recent maj or incidents l:here was no               definite
   beginning t o the incident such as a plane or train crash
   where it is fairly obvious from the outset that there is a
   high likelihood of large numbers of injuries. The first
   real indication that something was wrong was of people
   spilling onto the pitch. Even at this point the seriousness
   of the event was not clear. Some doctors in other parts of
   the   ground left at this point since it appeared that the
   game had been abandoned di^ to .crowd trouble.
           It was not apparent ^M~nat there were two maj or
   incidents> the more obvious on the terraces but also fefee-^
   equally serious but concealed event in the tunnel beneath
   the   stand. Lack of adequate communication lead              to some
   delay in treatment of the casualties in this area.
           The first doctors on the scene had no equipment to
   help with the resuscitation of the inj ured.           This led to
   great frustration since all that could be done for the
   critically ill was basic first aid.
           The large numbers of casualties that were evacuated
   in a short time span lead to confusion and difficulties
   with triage ^t^he^scgne of the incident.                  &t'&sUjLdl ts-'
           There were aXso c^offijnurilcatlons problemsj ±ir the
   hospitals.There was no clearjnotification that there^as a
   major incident. The cascade call out system depended on
   junior medical staff informing their superiors. However the
   lack of clear information and the sudden influx of large
   numbers of patients requiring resuscitation meant that the
   junior doctors were involved in urgent clinical work and
   did not have time to make the relevant calls. Fortunately
   because of the media nature of the event> large numbers or
   staff arrived with great speed by-passing the cascade
   system.
     The     incident was very different from many                 recent
   disasters in the nature of the^ And^ie£.                 Most major
   disasters involve surgical problems*. t^£i»tfpmajor accident
   plans        the consultant physiciansr'some role/ im t- mos%- of-
   the ’
       ^aet^Iod      faiatructA ono arc?— £ear the surgical             and
   anaesthetic staff. The main onus of the treatment of the
   most seriously injured in this incident fell to the
   intensive     care department and the physicians.                 Major
   accident plans should include definite roles for consultant
   physicians .
           The unusual nature of the injury was also a problem
in the early management of the incident since many of the
staff had a "mental set" that the injured patients all had
"head injuries". It took some time for senior staff to
explain the nature of the problem.         Fortunately the
principles   of treatment were appropriate      for    both
problems.
       As mentioned large numbers of staff arrived to deal
with the acute dramatic incident. One important management
point is that definite plans should be made to give support
over the next few days to those departments worst affected.
The anaesthetic department was highly organised in this
issue and    once the clinical situation was under control
rotas were drawn up to utilise the large numbers of staff
volunteering. This process should be included in major
incident plans.
       Recent major incidents have highlighted the need for
counselling after such events.Hospital staff were quickly
and efficiently    given such help . However some groups ,
especially those involved in the care at the ground may
have had the opportunity for counselling .
