   Sheffield Health Authority                     Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                                                  Glossop Road
                                                  Sheffield S10 2JF
                                                  Telephone Sheffield 766222 (STD 0742)



   O u r ref                         Y our re f                                 Date



               D L E /J F                                      25TH May, 1989.


               Northern General Hospital
               Herries Road
               Sheffield S5 7AU

               For the attention of Dr. J. Wardrope -
               Consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine

               Dear Jim,

               I enclose a rough copy of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital’s
               contribution in which I have included the patient on
               Neurosurgical I.T.U.

               Unfortunately I am doing a list at the time of your meeting
               but have no objection to you making any alterations that you
               see fit to my "bit".

               I have tried to fit it in the style that you have adopted for
               the manuscript.   If you want any further information let me
               know.

               Yours sincerely,



                Dr. David L. Edbrooke
               'Consultant Anaesthetist
                Intensive Care Unit
                Royal Hallamshire Hospital




HH 2135
                            THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.


    The- ■tej&ea&i'vo
              ^     /i-o.-capo
                            -  facilife-       r~The Northern General Hospital
                                       i-oo -afe^fche
 coas-
     i-e-fe^ o T two'uni£s^ a general intensive care unit (GICU),
 n p m a lj=y> f itmdoet-£Gig-
 naJ20iaXJ-_U-     m d n i i - t o r ,s j v h e r l^ h n -fc r.ri f h hpH q n a m g .   fo_)-al/.P__hai>-   J      0           Z D                        r
                  and a post-operative cardiothoracic unit (CICU) -€apab-  l-e                                  ^ u jJ             k d f.
                                  Fortunately        e ,t^rae of the
 incid                                           were-      f vea4il-a-
                                                                      ting                                                         1\akb*Jo           &
                               d to tne general wards, to make way for
                               patients. Their subsequent progress was
 witho
                              ubated, and artificial ventilation
initiated, in the Accident and Emergency Department or the
receiving wards. The first patient was admitted to GICU at 1630
hours. By 1730 hours^ fcpj-patients had-been admitted, and the
unit now— b‘6xffifj? fullta^f'urther five ventilated patients were
admitted to CICU. 'One further patient was admitted to CICU with a
pneumothorax and severe chest pain. He at no time showed evidence
of cerebral hj'poxia, did not lojzfee consciousness, and did not
require ventilation. Two patients in the receiving wards
developed relatively late cerebral deterioration, becoming ‘                                                                   C c tA   .
unconcious and fitting over one hour after admission. These
patients were intubated and ventilated on the ward, and both
intensive care units now being full, were transferred directly to
the Royal Hallamshire Hospital (RHH), where further ICU
facilities were available. Four of the more seriously ill
patients in NGH ICU's were also transferred to the RHH, as it was
felt that C.T. scans were indicated, to exclude intracranial
bleeding. One patient requiring ventilation was admitted to the
RHH directly from the football ground.
            See figure for distribution of patients.


      On admission to the I.C.U., all patients rapidly had arterial
  lines, central venous pressure lines, urinary catheters and
  nasogastric tubes inserted. It was possible to do this in a
  relatively short space of time on the large number of patients,
  because of the huge response of medical staff, nurses and
  technicians to media reports of the disaster. 25 anaesthetists
  were in the hospital in the first critical few'houri^ Besides
  ensuring prompt resuscitation of patients in the A. and E.
  department, it allowed at least one experienced anaesthetist to
  be designated to each patient as they arrived in the intensive
  care unit.
      It was rapidly apparent that the major injury suffered was
  that of hypoxic cerebral damage, caused by the crush and the
  subsequent inability to breathe, though the possibility of head
  injury and intracranial haematoma had to be borne in mind.
  Treatment was therefore directed at maintaing good oxygenation,
  prevention of any further fitting, and the prevention and
•treatment of post-xhypoxic cerebral oedema.
      Hyperventilation and lowering of arterial pC02 rapidly reduces
  cerebral blood volume, reducing brain bulk and intracranial
  pressure. In previously normocapnic patients, acute
  hyperventilaton to a paC02 in the range of 3.5 to 4 kpa provides
 maximum intracranial decompression with minimal risk of cerebral
  ischaemia. Therefore all patients were ventilated to achieve
  this,with added oxygen to maintain an arterial p02 between 15 and
 20 kpa. All patients were sedated with either propofol, fentanyl
 or alfentayl.
      The ten ventilated patients who remained at the NGH ( Patients
 2-4 and 7-13) (one patient (Patient 1) died soon after admission)
 also received mannitol to reduce or prevent cerebral oedema. This
 was combined with fluid restriction and frusemide to ensure a
 slight negative fluid balance, with careful monitoring of
 haemodynamic variables to ensure an adequate cardiac output
 despite moderate dehydration. All these patients also received
 high dose dexamethasone at a dose of 1 mg m . per kg..
 Dexaffie'Chasone is known to be efficacious in the reduction of
 raised intracranial pressure associated with mass intracranial
 lesions such as tumours, but its use in the control of cerebral
 oedema following head injury or hypoxic insult is more
 controversial. It was used in this instance on the rationale that
 it might do some good, and was unlikely to do harm if its use was
 not prolonged.......                               — .-........ __
   ' A patients (8,9,12,13,) had further fits after admission to     —                                                                                        I c u
                                                                                                                   - lL   aJ   /
 I.C.U. and received further diazepam. One patient (13) continued
                                                                                                                                            /t-       ^                   .
 to fit on the second day and was given phenytoin and sodium
 valproate as well.                                                                                                                     C£ei      V                   /
     Seven patients were admitted to RHH I.C.U. (one' direct, and
 six transferred from NGH.) All patients received C.T.scans on
 admission, all of which were normal. As at the NGH, they were
 ventilated and sedated to acheive good oxygenation and a pC02 of
 between 3.5 qnd 4 kpa. Four of these patients (15, 16, 17, 18,)
 continued to fit and were given various anticonvulsants. Two
 required thiopentone infusions to control their fitting.
     Apart from cerebral hypoxia, there were remarkably few other
 injuries.-yConsidering the severTW~or~dTer— iftejrdefl4-^ w R were
■expecting to be faced with severe abdominal trauma, bone
 fractures, chest and head injuries. Traumatic asphyxia is a
 syndrome first described by Ollivier in victims crushed to death
 in 1837, and further defined by Perthes in 1900. It is
 characterised by facial oedema, sub-conjunctival haemorrhages,
 petechial haemorrhages on the upper chest and face and
 craniocervical cyanosis. Our patients did not show this typical
 picture. Craniocervical cyanosis was present in the majority, but
 rapidly disappeared after admission. Two patients had petechial
 haemorrhages. The other features were not present. This may be
 because the pressure on their chests was applied gradually,
 increasingly slowly over several minutes, rather than suddenly as
 is described in the majority of patients. A closed glottis would
 not have been a feature. It has been suggested that a closed
glottis with the resultant high intrathoracic pressure is
necessary to produce the typical features.
     Two patients (1,2,) were admitted to the A.& E. department in
cardiac arrest, and were resuscitated there. Patient 1 re­
arrested soon after admission to the I.C.U., and further attempts
at resuscitation failed.. Throughout his admission, his pupils
were fixed and dilated. On admission to I.C.U., patient 2 had
fixed dilated pupils and absent brain stem reflexes. After 48
hours brainstem tests on two occasions revealed brainstem
death,and ventilatory support was di srnnJijnnprl— ------------------
     In 5 patients, there was evidence of inhalation of gastric
contents (either gastric contents in the pharynx observed at
intubation, suction of material from the endotracheal tube, or
chest X-ray changes.) All these patients received metronidazole
and cefuroxime. None of these patients subsequently aevelopedL
chest infections. Five patients (13,14,15,16,18,T d i d develop
chest infections. None had received antibiotics initially. They
were ventilated from four to eleven days, and the prologed
intubation may have been the primary cause of infection. However
these patients are very likely to have had full stomachs, were
subject to intense pressure on their abdomens, and became
unconcious, a situation where re-gurgitation and inhalation of
gastric contents was very likely. The possibility exists that                                                                        'V/
this played a large part in the development of the chest
infections. The patient declared brain dead at 48 hours was found                                                                             9
at post-mortem to have inhaled and had developed
bronchopneumonia. It would thus seem wise in similar incidents in
the future, to institute antibiotc. thjgj^pjy— f_com--the--S-tai?i^
                       was"note at initial intubation to have
laryngeal oedema. This was presumably due to a similar mechanism
as that which causes facial oedema in the traumatic asphyxia
syndrome. This laryngeal oedema persisted, necessitating a
tracheostomy.      This same patient soon after initial
resuscitation, became hypotensive, with very poor peripheral
perfusion. Rapid infusion of colloid and clear fluid restored his
Dlood pressure. He then developed a rigid abdomen with no bowel
sounds, and further hypotension. Intraabdominal bleeding, or a
ruptured vicus was suspected, and a laparotomy was performed,
however, the only abnormal finding was a dilated stomach. The
hypotension may have been related to poor right ventricular
function (see later).
    Five patients (3,10,11,15,19) developed pneumothoraces. In
four, the initial chest x-ray showed no pneumothorax. One patient
(15) developed bilateral tension pneumothoraces. In one
patient(3) the pneumothorax became apparent after 24 hours, when
ae was breathing spontaneously, and a chest drain was not
required. In all other patients, chest drains were inserted.
    Nine patients had changes on their electrocardiograms
indicative of right ventricular strain. In seven of these
patients echocardiograms revealed impaired right ventricular:__
:unction. Three patients had -pericardial effusions.^jAcute right
leart strain may have occured for several reasons? Abdominal
:ompression, causing increased filling of the right heart,
together with thoracic compression raising intrathoracic pressure
ind pulmonary artery pressure might well induce right ventricular
strain. This might have been compounded by a rise in pulmonary
vascular resistance secondary to hypoxia. Direct cardiac trauma
.s also a possibility (three patients developed pericardial
iffusions). Only two patients were haemodynamically compromised.
)ne patient became hypotensive soon after admission (see earlier)
ind underwent laparotomy because of fears of bleeding or a
’uptured viscus. A second, patient required inotropic support.
    The other major abnormality found was a remarkably raised
:.P.K. level in all patients. These ranged from 1140 to 9490
 normal 300). The cardiac isoenzyme fractions (C.K.M.B.) were not
ilevated, indicating a non-cardiac origin. It was presumed to be
■elated to muscle damage caused by the crush. Fitting was
inlikely to be the cause, as patients who did not fit had raised
 nzyme levels. Enzyme levels did not correlate with severity of
lypoxic injury as judged by length of time of ventilation.or
 eurological outcome (see figure). Serum myoglobin levels were
leasured in five patients, and all levels were raised (307 to
25, normal 100). Again levels ,were unrelated to severity of
 its or prognosis. Urinary myoglobins were negative in all
atients.       One patient (14) had a traumatic left brachial
lexus palsy. There were no other serious injuries. A number of
 atients had a abrasions, one a lacerated ear, and one a corneal
brasion. Apart from one patient with fractured ribs, there were
o bony injuries.

regress.

  As mentioned above, one patient (1) died soon after admission,
nd another (2) was declared dead on brain stem criteria after 48
ours. Six patients (3,4,5,6,7,8,) showed signs of recovery
ithin 24 hours, sedation was stopped, and they were extubated                                                                                             / J    o
ith no further problems. Four patients (9,10,11,12,) were
entilated for a further 24 to 48 hours, as initially they
ontinued to show signs of cerebral pathology, such as mild
apilloedema or extensor posturing. However, they were all
uccessfully extubated within 72 hours of the initial incident.
11 these patients made excellent recoveries. The remaining six
atients required ventilation from four to fourteen days, had
rolonged fitting, and on discharge from the ICU all had severe
eurological deficit.




atients numbered as follows:

 1.       Adam Spearitte
 2.       Lee Nichol
 3.       Edward Spearitte
 4.       Hazel McKay
 5.       Sean Lucket
 6.       Paul Johnson    7.                 Mark Aspden.
 8.       Jeffrey Armstrong
 9.       Rob Reid
 10.      Joseph Lowthian
 11 .     Colin Auton
 12.      Graham Bunclarke
 13.      Gillian Edwards.
 14.      Garrie Curry
 15.      Anthony Bland
 16.      Robert Graham
 17,      Sean Connolly
 18.      Andrew Devine
 19.      Robert Brittle
