                                                                                     1


                    Dr F.P.   Rvan -   Wednesday April 19 1989

           Summary of mv experience with the Hillsborough Tragedy


Saturday 15th April 1989

     I came to realize there was a major problem when I switched on my

television and the picture showed a disturbance with play stopped and spectators

on the pitch. The commentators declared there was a serious incident with many

injured and possibly some fatalities. The time was probably about 3.20 or 3.25

pm. I phoned the Northern General Hospital switchboard and asked if there was

a Major Incident. I was informed that they were aware there was a problem but a

serious incident had not then been declared. I told the switchboard I would come

into the hospital straight away.

     Difficult traffic delayed me. By the time I was halfway there I heard a call

over the local radio for all doctors to go straight to Hillsborough. I diverted there,

along Penistone Road. Penistone Road, from the junction with Rutland Road,

was blocked by the police, with football supporters walking into town from the

ground. I drove up to the Penistone Road aspect of the ground and was directed

into this entrance by police (when I told them I was a doctor). I parked (approx

3.50 to 3.55 pm) where directed opposite the West end of the South Stand,

where there were ambulances loading injured and several dead bodies. I got out

of my car and spoke to two doctors whom I took to be general practitioners. I

also looked over the situation and could see nobody that I could help. My

impression was that all of the seriously injured were either already on route for

hospital or were currently being loaded into ambulances. Since I was the
                                                                                   2


consultant in charge of medical (as opposed to surgical) emergencies at the

Northern General, I left after no more than 3 or 4 minutes and drove up Herries

Road to the hospital.

     I went straight to casualty (approx 4.05 to 4.10 pm), reporting to Mr

Wardrop and asked what I could do to help. The first need was to clear ward 60

(adjacent to casualty) of all patients to receive the injured, so I was delegated to

see to this. I spoke to the Sister on this ward and explained the urgency. Within

minutes I returned to casualty and looked at the mass of patients who had been

admitted. My main priority was perfectly obvious. Three or four patients were

unconscious and in status epilepticus. I re-routed my own junior staff and we

gave these patients dexamethasone 8 mg iv each and diazemuls iv. W e then set

up iv infusions with diazemul 20 mg in 500 mis.

      Within ten or fifteen minutes, a total of 13/14 patients appeared to exhibit a

very similar syndrome. They were either unconscious already or were partially

conscious, appearing confused and bewildered. Many began to scream. All of

them went on to develop status epilepticus. This, under the circumstances, was

 life-threatening. I moved from patient to patient, organizing their treatments with

 iv dexamethasone, diazemuls, setting up diazemuls drips. I spoke to Dr White,

 consultant anaesthetist, and Dr Appleyard (ditto), and also Dr Murray-Wilson -

 and many others. It was my opinion that every patient who was fitting had

 cerebral oedema and they should all be ventilated and receive intensive care. I

 checked that each patient had the attentions of an anaesthetist. Next, between

 us, we counted the numbers of ventilators (immediately available) and Dr
                                                                                  3


Murray-Wilson organized the number we were deficient of to be obtained from

theatre.

     Every patient who was regarded as at risk was put onto a ventilator, being

transferred subsequently to either Intensive Care, Post-Operative Cardiac

Intensive Care, or transferred to the Intensive Care Unit at the Royal Hallamshire

Hospital. In the case of two patients we were concerned, because of increasing

loss of consciousness, that there might be extra-dural haematomas and these

were discussed with Mr Forster, consultant neurosurgeon, and were transferred

to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital for CAT scanning.



      Solicitors for Sheffield Area, Oxley & Coward (Mike Jennings) acting for

Neal McKay (Hospital Manager). Helping to compile report for Douglas Hurd.



      My statement may be used at the Public Enquiry (Mr Justice Taylor),

Government Public Enquiry and Enquiry for S. Yorks. Police Authority.
