MR I G WINS0N?S ACCOUNT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



WARD 60 AND WARD REASSESSMENT



The Ward immediately adjacent to the Accident and Emergency Department

(Ward 60) was used as a triage point for those who appeared to have

sustained significant injury but who did not require airway protection,

resuscitation or ventilation.



During "the first 30 to 40 minutes following the arrival of the first

casualties the majority of medical staff were diverted to the resuscitation

rooms in the A & E Department.      This left this Ward relatively poorly manned.

Initially, however, none of these patients needed more than limited

resuscitative measures.    With the arrival of increased numbers of medical

personnel and increased casualties it became apparent that the state of^ajaumber

of patients was    deteriorating.    The parity of knowledge available at that

 time as to what had precipitated the disaster led to some confusion as to the

nature and extent of injury.     Patients were assessed vigorously for signs of

visceral injury and major skeletal injury on the understanding that they had

 been crushed.    In no case did it subsequently prove to be the case that such

 injuries had been sustained.    The crushing involved had been the slow

 application of pressure leading to suffocation and cerebral anoxia.       The

 deterioration seen in patients on Ward 60 was as a result of cerebral oedema,

 leading to cerebral irritation and in some cases fitting.     As a consequence,

 11 patients required elective sedation and ventilation.     By necessity, this was

 initiated on Ward 60, a situation that had not been envisaged.      A number of

 patients prior to elective ventilation developed localising signs suggesting

 an intra-cranial bleed, blindness or visual disturbance being of particular

 note.   As a consequence some patients were transferred to the Neurosurgical

 Department at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.      None of these patients subsequently
■B M   p i




             proved to have a localised intracranial bleed.



             The majority of the remaining patients had trauma to skeletal muscles only though

             there was suspicion of pelvic ring fractures in some.     None proved subsequently

             to have such a fracture.^ M a n y of these patients developed extensive bruising

             often involving the genitalia.   This appeared to be as a result of being

             crushed against crash barriersT^Similar bruising involving back musculature

             was encountered.   There were no bony injuries involving the spine.      One patient

             suffered an undisplaced fracture of the upper end of humerus.     This patient

             was suffering from severe pain resulting from extensive soft tissue bruising

             and traction on his brachial plexus.   He had been trampled on while lying

             against the side of a crash barrier^



             From Ward 60 patients were transferred to one of four wards or to one of the

             two Intensive Care Units.   Once it became apparent that casualties were no

             longer being received a number-.Of' patients were retained by Ward 60.    This

             was now at a time 3 hours from the start of receiving patients.



             A process of reassessment was then initiated by combined surgical and orthopaedic

             ward rounds and anaesthetic reassessment.   This continued for the next 48 hours.

             Though an exercise that was necessary, reassuring and informative, in the light

             of increasing knowledge of what had actually occurred at Hillsborough, these ward

             rounds revealed no previously undiagnosed problems.     Of particular

             importance was the reassessment of the patients on the Intensive Care Units

             where no information was available about pre-resuscitation.     Neurological

             abnormalities and the possibility of spinal injury had to be carefully

             reconsidered.   Again, no injuries of this nature were seen.



       /|    The vast majority of ward admissions were discharged home within 48 hours, with

             only a few staying for longer than this period or requiring transfer to units

             closer to their homes.   This again was in keeping with the nature of the
injuries they had sustained.   The majority were young, their recovery

proportionately quick and their desire to return home to reassure relatives

and friends paramount. I
