>   fc




         B m C K Cv;K U U i D
                      Association Football (soccer) is the most
         popular spectator sport in the United kingdom. Most
         Saturday5 there will be           peopie attending matcnes
         of teams in the Football League. Liverpool Football
         Club is one of the most successful teams in the
         country and attracts a large number of supporters.
                 On Saturday 15th of April 1939 Liverpool were
         to play Nottingham Forest in the semi-final of the
         Football Association Cup,, This is a knock out
         tournament and such matches are normally played on
         a neutral ground.
                        The Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield was
         chosen as the venue. !h.i s ground had been used tor an
         identical match in 1983 and the arrangements had worked
         we 11 .
                       The match an 15th April 1939 attracted a
         crowd of 54,000. The match was due to commence at 15.00.
         At 14.45 there were 5,000 of Liverpool supporters still
         outside the turnsti1es at the Leppings Lane entrances.
         They were intent on getting into the ground before the
         start of the match,, This caused a pressure in front of
         the turnstiles and people were being crushed. The police
         tried to control the crowd but the warnings went
         unheeded and even mounted police were ineffective in
         preventing the flow of supporters to the turnstile
         area.
                  The police officer in charge of this area asked
         for one of the large EXIT gates to be opened since by
         this time there appeared to be a real danger that peolpe
         might d i a infront of the turnstiles. Three large
         exit gates were opened. 2,000 fans entered through
         Gate C (see figure) in the five minutes from 2.52.
         Smaller numbers of the crowd also entered through
         gates A and B 1 „
                  Gate C is direcly opposite the entrance to the
         tunnel leading to the standing area behind the goal. Most
         of the spectators went down the tunnel„
                   The terracing behind the goal is a favoured
         position for spectators in such matches. Even before the
         exit gates were opened Pens 3 and 4 were overcrowded1.
                   The addition of the 2,000 fans greatly increased
         the crush,, The spectators in the front could not escape
          due to a S foot high fence designed to keep spectators off
         the pitch,, They could not escape into the pens at the
         sides (pens 3 and 5) due to further fencing.
                   As the match started the pressure further
          increased as the spectators pressed forward in response
         to events on the pitch.
                   It became increasingly evident to those in
           front of pens 3 and 4 that a serious situation was
          developing. However from a distance the nature of
         the trouble was not clear. At 13.06 a police officer
          ran onto the pitch and the match was stopped.
       In the crush 95 people died and 148 required
immediate hospital, treatment. The deaths and the most
serious injuries were due to crush asphyxia.


 At the Ground,

             The public address system was not used summon
help to the injured. Some doctors in the ground le-ft
thinking the match had been abandoned due to a pitch
invasion by hooligans.         In a short time large numbers of
critically' injured and dead were brought onto the
pitch.Others were evacuted through the tunnel to the
Loppings Lane entrance.         The police and St. John's
ambulance per son ell began to give -first aid. .....
doctors in the crowd near to the incident went to help on
the pitch and      .,. doctor from the West stand went to
help at the Leppings Lane end.
             There was little resuscitation equipement
available,, Many of the victims were unconscious. It is not
possible to give accurate numbers of those who required
basic cardio-pulmonary resuscition. ? rephrase.
             In the early stages of the rescue spectators
ripped down advertising hoardings to use as stretchers.
       At about        15.20 Radio Sheffield appealed      for    local
doctors to go to the ground. Between 15.30 and 15.45 twenty
doctors arrived in the sports hall. Most of these
doctors were local general, practitioners and only had
the equipment they would normally carry on home
visits. These supplies soon ran out,,
        Attempts were made to categorise patients for transport
so that the most needy could be given priority.
        Two doctors.-! began the task of confirming death on
the large number of bodies„
        At a p p r-o x imate Iy 15.45 b o x e s of m a jo r a c c id e n t
equipment arrived. Intravenous infusions were commenced
and airways and self inflating bags used.
        By  16.15 most of the injured had been removed to
hospi tal.

Lessons
       The numbers of cr i t icall, y in jured was the mai n
problem„

          Mot like a large traumatic disaster. Most of the
dsad had no wounds / marks , The majority we;re young ,
I)iff icLi11 t o d ecide w h a should receive res u sci tatio n „

        Very little equipment for advanced life support.
        Also no personnel trained in advanced support,,
        N o clear me d ica 1 r e s p o n s :i.b :i.11 y for the crow d
at f ootb a11 mat ches„
The A c c i d e n t and Emer g tj n c y Dg p c:ii t m0 n c s .

            The Accident and Emergency dspartmsnts uv Liit;
    Northern General Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire
    Hospital both received a message at 15.20 -from the
    police that they were " on casualty standby", h'revi ous
    discussions with the emergency services had established
    the procedure to alert the hospitals that a major
    incident was taking place. The correct procedure
    would have been to telephone the hospital
    switchboard with the message "Implement the Major
    Disaster Plan." No such message was received at
    ei ther hospital.
            The first c a s ua l ti e s were evacuated to the
    Northern General Hospital since this hospital was the
    c 1osest,
            ,

     The Northern General.

                    The Accident and Emergency department had a two
     hour waiting time when the police message was
     received,,         The Accident and Emergency consultant was
     called and the senior nursing staff informed. At
     15.25 a message was received from the South
     Yorkshire Ambulance Service control "expect a child
     cardiac arrest". There was no mention of
     !-l:i.11sbor ough ,  .
                     At 15.27 three patients undergoing
     car d iopu1monar y resuscitati on ar rived and the charge
     n u r s e in t h e A c c id e n t a n d E ine r g e n c y d e p a r t m e n t
     implemented the Major Disaster plan,,
                      The A c c id e n t a n d E hie r g e n c:y c o n s u 11 ant a r r iv ed a t
     the hospital at 15.33. He confirmed that the major
     d:l.sater plan had been implemented. At that time three
     p at ients in the resusci t ati on r oom and t hree less
     s e r io u s Iy ill p a t ie n t s in tra n s it to t h e aclm is s io n ward.
     There were four other doctors in the department at that
     t ime „
                     Almost     immediately a second wave of ambulances
     arrived with a large number of serious casualties. IVie
     influx of these c r it ic a l l y ill patients c««sed severe
     problems in those first 10 minutes. The staff were trying
     to complete the prsparati ons for a Major disaster and at
      the same time had 17 or more patients requiring
     urgent resuscitation,, Due to the .lack of a clear warning
      the 1tia jar inc id en t documentation was n ot in pI ac e w it h in
     the triage area for the first fifteen minutes of the
      incident. 'This coupled with the e xt em e ly fast rate of
     arrivaI of t h e in jlare d made d acum en ta ti on very
      d :i.f f ic u 11.
                 Figure 3 summarises the status of the patients on
      arrival, initial treatment and disposition. Within the
      ■first hour the department had received 87 casualties,, 13
      were receiving cardiopulmonary resusci tati o n „ 2 of these
patients were admitted. 15 others required endo-tracheal
intubation and ventilation to treat the neurological
sequelae of the crush asphyxia.
     The Accident and Emergency department is well
designed to cope with large numbers of patients requiring
resuscitation. The normal resuscitation area, two
operating theatres and anaesthetic rooms, and a large
plaster room are interconnected and become one large
resuscitation area. There are four permanent resuscitation
points with full anaesthetic equipment including
ventilators. A further 8 prepacked boxes of equipment
containing the essentials for initial resuscitation are
placed at the backup oxygen and suction points. These
twelve points were not sufficient to deal with all those
requiring urgent resuscitation. Some points had two
patients at a time. Each point was used more than once as
patients were either declared dead or moved to other
wards.
       At 15.40 there was a request for a site mobile
medical team. At this time there were not enough medical
staff to treat the patients in the department. However
within five minutes large numbers of staff arrived and
two doctors with the major accident equipment were                 <
a i s p a t c h e d ^ t h e stadium.       ^            WM   t M            .

       By 17.30 the resuscitation areas were clear and thW             \j
were able to take patients rpior to transfer to the Royal
Hallamshire
The Royal Hallamshire.
         The Accident and Emergency consultant and senior
registrar both arrived at 15.37. The nursing staff had
already began to prepare the department to receive large
numbers of casualties. At this time two police officers
arrived and confirmed that a major incident was taking
place and the hospital then formally implemented the major
disaster plan.
           The first two patients arrived at 15.40. One was
intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. The
other victim was dead. There was then a period when the
departmental plans          could be fully organised.


                                       5
           Between 16.00 and 17.00 there department
    received 75 patients. 24 required admission. The
    commonest complaint was soft tissue injury to the chest or
    pelvis. One patient required manipulation of a forearm
    fracture.   45 patients were discharged after treatment.
    The majority of these patients were suffering from
    emotional disturbance and minor soft tissue injuries.

 Lessons
       The combined effect of no adequate warning and large
  numbers of patients requiring immediate resuscitation
  arriving in a very short space of time led to severe
  problems in the Accident and Emergency department. There
  is evidence that the police control at Hillsborough
  initiated the Major disaster Plan at 15.07. This
  message was passed to police control . The ambulance service
  was notified quickly. The delay in informing the hospitals
  and the use of the wrong message caused confusion during the
  early stages of the hospital response.
       Similar problems with the alert were experienced by the
  receiving hospitals during the M1 disaster. It is essential
  that the government consults with the emergency services and
  issues new procedures that must be followed during major
  incidents.
       The unusual nature of the major injury lead to some
  problems in initial triage. The triage of all those
  arriving in cardiac arrest as dead would have eased the
  pressure on the resuscitation room. This would have been a
  difficult descision in young people whose sole injury was
  hypoxic cardiac arrest.
  /    Large numbers of volunteers arrived at the triage
 /area. This further complicated patient flow through the
I tr&lge area. Although there was a designated volunteer
I reporting point this was not used. Such volunteer points
\ should be very close to the Accident Department.




                                 6
