V

                                                                                         S h e ffie ld H e a lth Authority



                                            N®irtlk©m (Skmsffat H ospital
    ° ur ref- JW.DS                                                              Herries Road, Sheffield S5 7AU
    Your ref.                                                                          Telephone 0 7 4 2 4 3 4 3 4 3
                                                                                             Fax 0 7 4 2 5 6 0 4 7 2
    P le a s e reply to                     Ext.

                 Accident and Emergency Department


                 14th August, 1939


                 Please see distribution list below




                 Dear        f,JL
                 The Hillsborough Tragedy

                 It is with regret that I have to inform you that the article on the
                 Hillsborough Tragedy has been rejected.

                 I enclose a copy of the referee's comment and admittedly I would agree
                 with some of them, but disagree fairly strongly with others.   However,
                 this is probably by the by.

                 The major question is where we should go from here.   I would value your
                 comments as to whether we should submit this to another Journal and if so,
                 which Journal.    Failing this, perhaps we should abandon this project and
                 "Do our own thing".


                 Yours sincerely.




                 J. WARDROPE
                 Consultant in Accident and Emergency Medicine.


                 Dr.       P. Redgrave, G.P., 263 Halifax Road, Sheffield S6 1AF
                 Dr.      G. Clark, Consultant Anaesthetist, Northern General Hospital
               \/br.      F.P. Ryan, Consultant Physician, Northern General Hospital
                 Dr.      S. Yates,   Registrar, Radiology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                 Dr.      J. Duncan, Senior Registrar, General Surgery, Northern General Hospital
                 Mr.      A.C. Crosby, Consultant in A     & E Medicine, Royal Hallamshire Hospital
                 Dr.       D. Edbrook, Consultant Anaesthetist, IntensiveCare Unit,   RoyalHallamshire
                 Dr.       J. Alderson, Chairman, Medical Staff Committee, N orthern General Hospital
                 Dr.      T. Shaw, Consultant Anaesthetist, Northern General Hospital.




    G . 1530
                COPY OF REFEREE'S COMMENTS ON PAPER 893373
                "The Hillsborough tragedy"




          This is indeed, and in several ways, a very strange
paper.

          First, it appears to be written with the authors in a
daze or certainly with hazy recollections of what for them was
clearly an episode of Umberto Ecco's 'hyper-reality'. In
consequence it abandons the Roman gravitas which I think is
essential for the management of disaster and for its subsequent
analysis (this may sound a bit pompous but I am sure from
experience of many mini episodes that it is true).

          Second, it gives separate views (which include much
repetition) of the reality such as it was: from the football
ground; A & E department;   and the wards. This approach may be
acceptable but would have to be handled at a higher level of
reporting if it is to be helpful.

          Third, the general clinical accounts are very
fragmentary even allowing for the confusion that must have
reigned.   If the Northern General received 87 patients in the
first hour it is not enough to say 'many' were intubated,
ventilated and admitted to ITU. At the Royal Hallamshire it is
insufficient to say 'there was a large influx of patients'.
                                             *

          Fourth, and probably the most interesting, there are
some very bizarre features of the 'traumatic asphyxia' described
on p.8. If these observations are really true and can in any way
be supported by blood gas tension.analyses then they do give us a
new clinical dimension on this syndrome.  However I am sceptical
about giving too much weight to the report if (top of page 9) two
patients were ventilated primarily because of 'the degree of
agitation'.   Moreover an even more world weary cynic than myself
would be tempted to say that the medical teams were on occasion
confusing mental and physical findings:

          ... extreme restlessness, confused agitation, whole
body shivering and screaming ...

are as much (if not more) features of the aftermath of a very
acute life threatening episode as they are of traumatic asphyxia.

           Fifth, other clinical details are sloppy - e.g. 'the
majority of the patients showed signs of inhalation of stomach
contents';   'all patients showed signs of gastric dilatation'

          Sixth, management details are meagre - 'mannitol and
frusemide were used if necessary';   'ultrasound was used in the
evaluation of some abdominal injuries'.

          An investigative journalist could write a better report
on the medical response which would make interesting reading'but
                       -   2   -




would add little new to the usual story which surrounds the
management of major accidents in the UK: initial shambles; fast
ad hoc recovery; and eventual satisfactory outcome accompanied
by the usual round of self and mutual congratulation.   Detached
clinicians might piece together a more comprehensive and
deliberate account of the interesting clinical syndromes that
were encountered - but can the present authors? I doubt it which
is a pity.  Therefore, though it might enhance the status of the
BMJ as the journal of first choice for disaster description, I
think this offering should be rejected.
