                                                           HILL
                                                        DICKINSON
 E Q U IT Y & L A W H O U S E                                                   & C O                                            T E L E X : 6 2 7 3 2 7 H IL D IC G
 4 7 C A STLE STR E ET                                            —                                                              C A B LE S: H ILL D IC K L IV E R P O O L
 L IV E R P O O L L 2 9 U B                             -------------------------------------------------------------            D X 1 4 1 5 3 L IV E R P O O L
                                                               S O L IC IT O R S             N O T A R IE S                      FA X ' 05 1 -2 2 7 1^ 5 ?
 T E L E P H O N E : 0 5 1 - 2 2 7 3151                 -------------------------------------------------------------




                                                                                                                                 YO U R REF
 R.M. Whalley Esq
 Secretary to the Inquiry into the
 Hillsborough Stadium Disaster                                                                                                   o u r ref     PWJ.KEL.1860-002
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 LONDON                                                                                                                          d a te   6th July 1989
 SW1H 9AT



 Dear Sir

                                                                        HILLSBOROUGH


             After the stewards employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football
 Club at the West Stand and terrace end of the ground had given
 evidence to his Lordship's Inquiry, they requested to meet with
 our clients, the Football Supporters Association, to discuss the
 question of stewarding generally with particular reference to
 Hillsborough.                            Since that meeting the stewards have formed
 themselves into a Committee and have intimated to our clients that
 the stewards will be seeking to join our client's organisation and
 liaise with the South Yorkshire Branch of our client's
 organisation on future matters relating to their role at Sheffield
 Wednesday.


             However, the stewards' Committee has, in the meantime, drawn
 up a submission of its own which it would wish to submit to his
 Lordship through the auspices of our client.                                                                                    Accordingly, we
enclose herewith 3 copies of the submission that has been sent to
us and we should be grateful if you could place it before the
tribunal for their consideration.


             Whilst we appreciate that many of the matter raised in the
submission may be pertinent to Part 2 of his Lordship's Inquiry,
 it may well be that some of the points ought to be considered
prior to an interim report being made by the Inquiry in the event
that his Lordship feels that any of the submissions can be taken

                                            ROY G. HILL

J.D. GREGS0N                               PETER JACKSON                           DAVID WAREING                        LONDON ADDRESS                   THIS FIRM IS REGULATED
ANTHONY HARDING-HUBER                      RICHARD MARTINDALE                      JOHN WOLFE                           IR0NGATE HOUSE                   BY THE LA W SOCIETY
MARTIN G. HILL                             JOHN M A X W E LL                       ASSOCIATE:                           DUKE'S    PLACE                  IN THE CONDUCT OF
JOHN H U IM E S                            DAVID S W A FF IE LD ,                  ANNE D0BIE                           LONDON      EC3A 71P             IN V ESTM EN T BUSINESS
                              CONTINUATION   SHEET
 From Hill, Dickinson & Co.

 To    R.M. Whalley Esq                  No     2        Date    J u l   89




on board in readiness for the new football season commencing in
August.


       We are sending a copy of this letter and the submission to
the Treasury Solicitor.         We should point out that in the interest
of ensuring that the Inquiry receives this submission, we are
setting aside any question of potential conflict of interest
between our clients and the stewards in so far as the event on the
day may be concerned.


                               Yours faithfully,



                              HILL DICKINSON & CO.


c.c.    The Treasury Solicitor
   X j Football Supporters' Association
              HILLSBOROUGH WEST STAND STEWARDS ' COMMITTEE
              SUBMISSION TO THE FSA REPORT TO THE INQUIRY


Background


Since the Hillsborough Football Disaster the club stewards in the
west stand used by away supporters have organised themselves into a
representative committee.


The committee was formed because the stewards wanted to find a
collective way of expressing their concerns about matters to do
with organisation at the ground, some of which they have tried to
express through the existing channels of communication with the
club in some cases over many years.


The stewards feel that the points have broader relevance for clubs
up and down the country, not just in Hillsborough.


The areas of the stewards concern broadly fell into the following
categories:   (1) communication/liaison between clubs, police and
stewards (2) security (3) ground organisation (4) recruitment,
training and organisation of stewards.


1-   Communication/Liaison Between Club, Police and Stewards


     A proper consultation/liaison system needs to be recognised
     between the clubs, stewards and police.    Currently in
     Hillsborough the only 'system' in operation is that the
     stewards feed any points they want to bring up with the club
     through each stand's chief steward.    This system is not
     adequate and    there is no way of checking whether matters of
     concern have been fed and picked up through the system.     How
     can 3 or 4 chief stewards possibly be expected to represent
     600 stewards.    They would need to be supervised.


     It is recommended that regular liaison meetings are set up
     with the three parties in question and that matters of concern
     raised at such meeting are properly followed up with
     appropriate action.
                              - 2 -



     The stewards feel that e.g. crowd direction at the ground
     could have been better tackled had such liaison meeting been
     taking place regularly before the ill-fated match in April.


     Currently the stewards are treated as a casual, unorganised
     workforce with no particular specialist knowledge to offer in
     the management of a ground.   Yet they are the workers in the
     front line in contact with spectators and have through that
     contact a lot of experts and first hand observations to offer.
     It seems a great waste not to recognise the potential value
     for more efficient management of a ground and club that the
     stewards can offer providing proper liaison exists.


2.   Security


     There is a need for security patrolling inside the ground
     during matches - this is currently not done in Hillsborough.
     A private security firm operates outside the ground area, but
     the stewards feel that an 'in-house'   operation by the club
     with a security team trained specifically to work in that one
     location would be a better solution.


3.   Ground Organisation


     First and foremost it is felt that section pen fences - both
     in the terraces and in seats only areas must be taken down.
     This is the only way that a safe flow of spectators can be
     guaranteed.


     Secondly, signposting should be much clearer.   As an example
     it should be possible to have signs in different colours to
     different parts of the ground with tickets of the same colour
     as the sign indicating the correct area.   For the colourblind
     it should be possible to print on the ticket and the sign in
     writing the colour in question (NB This is done at the
     Crucible Theatre in Sheffield and works very well).
                               - 3 -


More stewards and at different points in the away stand are
needed. This is particularly necessary during league and
other large games. Stewards should be placed at terraces and
at gates to direct spectators to the correct area. Away
supporters should be accompanied by specially trained stewards
from their own club, this could be done by setting up a rota
of experienced stewards at each club and the club should
organise and pay for their transport to away games. An
example of the value of "Home Ground" stewards at an away
mat<?h was       seen at the disaster match, when the ground was
eventually being emptied of fans the exit went smoothly as
soon as the two Liverpool stewards present at the Leppings
Lane end spoke to the fans in their own accent and language.


There should also be a police officer at every decent size
gate at the ground.
             j




Lockable 'hot line' telephones should be installed at
                               if

strategic points at the ground.        These should have a direct
link to the ground office and to the police control.        Stewards
should have a pass key to these phones as should any other
personnel at the ground that might have to resort to emergency
measures to alert other relevant personnel.


There should also be several aid points at strategic places
around the ground.        These should be easily accessible and
well equipped (see later for training).


There should be adequate small change at every turnstile,
currently they often run out of change and fans are left
waiting till more money is brought in.        If security is the
reason for not holding much change, then security rather than
leaving fans frustrated should be increased at turnstiles (see
also security above).


Facilities at the ground for both fans and stewards should be
improved.        There is.very little on offer for away fans at the
moment and the stewards do not even have an office or secure
                                 - 4 -


     area where they could leave their belongings.     Fans have
     difficulty in getting programmes because of the sales
     organisation being patchy - proper kiosks for programme sales
     should be made available.


     There should be fullest possible consultation with the
     stewards - and fans - to ensure that facilities are improved
     appropriately to suit the users needs.


4.   Recruitment. Training and Organisation of stewards


     A proper and appropriate system of management needs to be
     introduced into the stewarding of grounds.     This should
     include proper interviewing of stewards prior to appointment.
     It should also include a longer period of "apprenticeship" as
     it appears was the case a few years ago.     Then it was
     necessary for a new steward to observe his peers for half a
     season before he was allowed to become a fully-fledged member
     of staff.


     The current "system" is based on stewards good will, at times
     patronage in recruiting and the fact that all stewards are
     club fans anyway, so somehow in all that casually they must
     have the ground's interests at heart.     This is not a good
     enough way to keep a very large, albeit casual, workforce
     going.


     Proper training, if necessary by apprenticeship with
     experienced stewards should follow proper recruitment
     procedures.     Training must include first aid procedures with
     the club covering stewards insurance cost for such a purpose.
     Currently some have training, some don not and none of the
     training is through the club all those with first a i d training
     have clearly received it elsewhere.


     All stewards must have proper identification at all grounds
     and should be organised in smaller groups with more chief
     stewards.     This way it would be easier to organise
                          - 5 -


consultation with groups of stewards as well. The chief
stewards should be representative of the stewards; and in any
case the stewards should have the right to independent
representation of their interests in any consultations with
club management.


conclusion

It is a sad reflection on the current situation in clubs that
we as stewards may now finally be listened to because 95
people have lost their lives and countless others have been
injured and psychologically scarred for life.

Many of these points we have attempted to make over the years,
it is not because we want an axe to grind, we are all football
fans ourselves - we love the game but we also want to make
sure that it is a safe game that can be enjoyed by all in the
community, regardless of their age, sex, race or any other
thing.

We feel however that the only way to ensure that goal is by
all those with the interest of the great game at heart working
together.    We want to start our bit here and now.


3rd July 1989


West Stand Stewards Committee
Hillsborough
Sheffield
