MINUTES OF THE FSA COUNCIL, ON 9 JULY 1989


Present       Rogan Taylor                   Campaign co-ordinator
               Adrian Goldberg               West Midlands
               Richard Pegg                  Anglian
Branch reps   Sheila Spiers                  Merseyside
and National John Tunnon                     Greater Manchester
Officers      Chris Wright                   South Cheshire and North Staffs
               Graham Turvey                 Chiltem
               Dave Fleming                  London
               Martin Jones                  Mercia
               Mark Goulboum                 Treasurer
               Peter Garrett                 Membership Secretary
               pe.fc&y' po/ste-v
               Cfixry f^La^hiS               Avon.
In the absence of the National Chair, Peter Garrett was elected Chairman of the
meeting.

Apologies

Stan Gate
     Yorkshire Branch
Pauline Whitby
Nigel Grant

Minutes of previous meeting

Accepted as true and correct.

Matters arising

None.

Officers’ report

Chairman       None
Secretary      None
Membership

Presently over 4,200 members. Need to ensure that members now joining pay £2
until the subscriptions are raised in August. Documentation must be altered to
suit.

Any branches requiring membership lists at any future meeting to let Peter
Garrett know at least 10 days before the meeting.

Address labels for members can be printed by Peter.   A charge may be levied to
branches at the rate of 13p for each 24 printed.

A computer disk can be supplied by Peter on an IBM 5 V floppy disk at no
charge. Branches are instructed not to use this disk to input data. It must
only be used as a database.
The position of affiliated membership was discussed. Rogan had been approached
by Grimsby Town for affiliated membership. Although Clause 10 of the
constitution already deals with this point, the Council recommended that this
question be referred to the Management Committee.

It was suggested that membership could be paid by Direct Debit which would be
financial advantageous. Rogan instructed to approach the bank with a view to
implementation for the August renewal.

Treasurer's report

A draft receipts and payments account for the period from 1 May 1989 to 30 June
1989 was circulated and discussed in detail.

The question of the net cost of "Reclaim the Game" was raised and it was noted
that it cost £425 for the period. The original deal with the printers should
have led to no cost for the FSA. Rogan to approach the printers to check if
that in the event of there being any profit on the advertising then this could
be passed to the FSA.

The West Midlands branch noted that the NEC did not appear to have met with
their undertaking on this matter.

The Treasurer reported that the loss on the conference was still to be paid as
was expenditure to the Campaign Co-ordinator and the question of future
expenditure for full time FSA officers was also needed to be considered when
looking at the surplus in hand at June.

The Treasurer had also received an explanation from the Auditor concerning the
incorrect annual accounts. The £1,053 for miscellaneous incane should also
have been added to the £492 cost shown in the profit and loss account.

Re-starting ID card campaign

Rogan reported the Government's intention that all the Bill should pass its
stages prior to the interim report issued by L J Taylor and that the intention
was that the National Membership Scheme would be in operation for the start of
the 1990/91 season.

Any ID card petitions must be submitted to MPs who should undertake to register
these in the House of Commons by the end of July. Rogan to be contacted if
there are problems.

It was also reported that MPs are looking for "anecdotes" to add to the debate.
It was also emphasised that FSA members must write to both the Commons
Committee Members and to their local MPs.

The presentation of the petition is to be highlighted by the FSA. Rogan to
arrange the presentation of the petition and to co-ordinate the meeting.

A brief for MPs was to be prepared by Steve Beauchampe.

Rogan to contact Craig Brewin about representations to be made to the Commons
All Party Football Committee and also to arrange a meeting with Neil Kinnock.
Branch officers are to indicate to Rogan as quickly as possible how many
signatures have gone to-.MPs and how many signatures are to come in order that
an accurate total may be obtained.

Branches are also to consider the position after the legislation has been
passed through Parliament.

National Officers

Two positions are vacant, Chair and Secretary.

The nominees are to write an address to be sent to Robin Jeeps together with a
written statement of approximately 700 words for circulation to delegates
attending the recent AGM. Delegates have two weeks to submit their nominations
and South Yorkshire are to distribute the documentation and announce the result
within 21 days.

If any delegates have not registered with South Yorkshire branch on the date of
the AGM then they must do so immediately.

The nominations for Chair are Nigel Grant and Tony Goulboum.

The nominations for Secretary are Chris Wright and Martin Jones.

The nominations for the five National Manager positions are as follows

Chris Wright                                Sheila Spiers
Martin Jones                                Mark Wilson
Ros Brown                                   Stan Gate
Sue Melkman                                 Pauline Whitby
Sara Tustin                                 Guy Lovelady
Judith Gibbons                              Craig Brewin

A proposal to elect the five officers at the meeting was defeated.

A motion to invite members ,to submit written or oral statements for the next
FSA Council Meeting was passed. It was felt important that branches made every
effort to attend.

Management Ccranittee

The terms of reference for Management Committee were to act on and to report
back to the FSA Council on matters referred to them by the Council.

The Management Committee will be responsible for the day to day running of the
FSA and for staff matters.

Biployment

Rogan's contract with the FSA expired on 26 June. Tom Simn©r has been
assisting Rogan on the admin side as an unpaid helper.

It was resolved that the FSA does need to employ full time staff.
Rogan presented his case for selection stating that as funds currently stood
the FSA could not afford full time staff. However, £10,000 was promised to the
FSA from Liverpool out of their FA Cup final money and a letter indicating that
was circulated. In addition, various Round Table organisations had indicated
that funds could be made available to the FSA. Rogan would require
approximately £1,000 per month and Tom Simner approximately £20 per day on a 2
to 3 days per week basis.

Premises have been made available to the FSA by the Marie Curie Cancer Care
Association at Albert Dock in Liverpool and Liverpool City Council had also
indicated that premises could be made available.

The meeting asked Rogan to inspect the premises offered by Marie Curie with a
view to accepting their offer.

It was proposed that Rogan and Tom be remunerated on the basis indicated above
as a temporary measure. The Treasurer would attend the next meeting with a
report as to future finances when further consideration of this matter would be
made.

It was also resolved that the office accommodation and furnishings should not .
be paid for except for the normal operating expenses associated with a
permanent office.

Student Members

Associated with the discussion about affiliation, it was resolved that a £2
rate be offered to student bodies with one representative being treated as the
member and entitled to benefits of membership.

Taylor enquiry

Part I of the FSA's submission had been sent to Lord Justice Taylor.

Part II of the submission was in the process of being written by Rogan who was
to report to branches as soon as practical and when possible. It was
appreciated such liaison be as often and as frequently as possible bearing in
mind the time constraints put on by Lord Justice Taylor in requiring
submissions.

The Hillsbrough stewards were not separately represented at the meeting and
made their submission through the FSA. Branches to approach stewards of local
clubs if possible with a view to liaising with them and for them to sit on
branch committees where practical.

Reclaim The Game

The next issue is to be published on Friday 11 August and to be sent direct to
members from the publishers.

Other copies to be sent to branches for direct selling. Branches must indicate
to Rogan as quickly as possible how many copies would be needed.

If any branches wanted to advertise their future activities then space would be
found if possible.
A request was made for the printing of parts of the FSA submission to the
Tavlor enquiry in full in Reclaim the Game. This was rejected on the grounds
of but it was resolved that a paraphrased revision should be sent to the Editor
for inclusion.
Adrian Goldberg was appointed as the Editor of Reclaim the Game without
responsibility for the commercial and fund raising side. His remuneration
would be discussed at a later meeting.
Branches are to be encouraged to sell Reclaim the Game and also to approach
their local clubs and newsagents for them to sell copies.

Corrmission is to be paid for sales at the rate of.lOp per copy with 20p going
to FSA funds. Would branch officers please send any alteration to their names
and addresses of contacts and telephone numbers, inserting where applicable
evening telephone numbers.

FA cup sponsorship

It was resolved that the FSA could not afford this]

Any other business
The FSA diary was to be printed separately for Scotland and England (and
Wales).
The possibility of a separate Scottish Football Supporters' Association would
be considered for the future.
 Branches to be encouraged to find places where meetings are held to ^
 accessible to disabled members. Greater publicity should be given to branch
 meetings to encourage more attendance.
 Guy Lovelady has made an anti-ID card record which is to be advertised m
 Reclaim the Game. Profits are to go to the FSA.

 From the point of view of legality, if a nominated branch officer cannot attend
 an FSA council meeting then prior notice should be given m writing of his/
 replacement.
 The West Midlands branch indicated that they would bring to a future meeting
 some suggested dates and venues for next years AGM.

 Date of next meeting

 This is to Sunday 30 July at 12.00 o'clock.

 The election of National Managers is to be placed high on the agenda.



                                                            Martin Jones
                                                            10 July 1989
