                       H I L L D I C K I N S O N DAVI S C A M P B E L L
                                         SOLICITORS
                               Pearl Assurance House, Derby Square, Liverpool L2 9XL.
       Telephone: 051 -2 3 6 5400 D.X. 14129 Fax:051-236 2175 Telex: 627116 Cables: H illdick Liverpool


Mi ss Sheila Spiers

T.TVFRPOOI,                                                                    yoP H & T .   1 8 6 0 -0 1 6

                                                                               Our Ref:




                                                                                  29th November 1990


Dear Sheila

                                        HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

At the meeting on Monday I was, as you will recall,                                                 instructed by
the Branch to write a letter in some form to either the Coroner or
the media in an attempt to redress the extent of the evidence
relating to the behaviour of Liverpool supporters which has so far
been called at the Inquests and reported in the media.


Following your suggestion, and after much thought, I have decided
that our best approach wouldbe to write directly to the Coroner with
a request that he places the letter in front of the jury.                                                     I enclose
herewith a draft of the letter I propose to send and I would welcome
any comments you may have.                         In an attempt to obtain some sort of
view from the branch, or at least the Branch Committee, I have also
sent a copy to Peter Garrett, Rogan, Paul Kelly and Paul Hyland.                                                       I
would also welcome any comments they may wish to make.


I would like to get the letter off on Monday,                                             if at all possible,
whilst the relevant evidence is still fresh in the Jury's mind.


Yours sincerely                                                                                                    n




PETER JACKSON
c.c.      Paul Kelly Esq                                      Peter Garrett Esq
          Paul Hyland Esq                                     Rogan Taylor Esq




                     ALSO AT: EQUITY & LAW HOUSE, 47 CASTLE STREET, LIVERPOOL L2 9UB

                    IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS THIS FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY
S.L. Popper Esq
H.M. Coroner                                             SLP.JT
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street                                            PWJ.KEL.
SHEFFIELD                                                1860-016
S3 7ET

                                                 29th November 1990
                                              BY FAX NO: 0742-726247


Dear Sir

                   HILLSBOROUGH - RESUMED INQUESTS

As you will recall from our letter of 16th November our clients'
(the Football Supporters Association)   funding is such that we have
been unable to attend before you to represent our client's interest.
Our clients' attempts to raise financing are, however,   still
continuing and it may be that our clients will be able to attend at
some later date.   Should financing become available our clients
would, of course, have to take a view as to whether an appearance
after the Inquests had started could usefully assist you.


At the pre-inquests meeting our representative   stated that ifour
clients were unable to represent the interests   of Liverpool
supporters there would in effect be a void in representation before
you.   We have to say that on the basis of the reports on the opening
days' evidence at the Inquests which both we and our clients have
read in the media, this void in representation   is now marked and    is
possibly affecting the outcome of the Inquests   themselves.


Our clients have asked us to write to you to explain their views in
the light of the various media reports we have been reading and
hearing in respect of the first weeks of evidence.   As a party whom
you invited to be represented before you, we would invite you to
place copies of this letter before the members of the Jury,      as this
        S.L. Popper Esq                       2             29-Nov-9 0



may be our clients' only way of having their views considered.
You can obviously stress to the Jury the weight which you feel
ought to be placed upon the sentiments and views we set out below.


The source of our clients' frustration and anger has been the gist
of the evidence concerning the behaviour of Liverpool supporters in
the hours leading up to the disaster occurring.     The general
impression given by the evidence lead to show the behaviour of
Liverpool supporters seems to be t h a t :-


1.   The vast majority of Liverpool supporters had drunk to excess
and that drink has affected their behaviour.


2.   That Liverpool supporters were not only drinking to excess in
public houses but had purchased large quantities of alcohol from
local stores and off-licences.


3.   That Liverpool supporters largely arrived "late" at the game,
and that this lateness was caused by drinking in local hostelries.


4.   That there were hundreds,   if not thousands of Liverpool
supporters without tickets and that these ticketless supporters
were in some way responsible for the disaster.


5.   That Liverpool supporters were involved in other criminal
activities which in some way influenced the cause of the disaster.


It would appear to us from reports seen by our clients that this
scenario is not being substantially challenged.     In saying this we
imply no criticism of the representatives of those bereaved or
injured at Hillsborough.    It has already been accepted that their
brief and emphasis has,of necessity, been different to that of our
clients.   If our clients had been able to be present at the Inquests
they would have challenged this scenario most rigorously, as it is a
scenario they do not accept as being factually correct.
        S.L. Popper Esq                     3                   29—No v —90



Our clients would like to draw to the attention of the Jurors the
following facts:-


1.   At the Taylor Inquiry the South Yorkshire Police produced
excellent collections      of photographs of the crowd outside the
Hillsborough Stadium in the hours leading up to the disaster.
These photographs were timed and presumably give an accurate
reflection of the visibly apparent nature of the crowd,     in so much
as it would appear to an onlooker.      None of those phtographs at any
time support the view that the majority of Liverpool supporters were
carrying large amounts of alcoholic drinks.       Indeed, the
photographs show that three or four individuals     (in separate
photographs)   are seen to be carrying one can of beer.


2.   The video compiled by the West Midlands Police investigation
team similarly does not support the theory that vast numbers of
supporters around the ground were carrying large quantities of
alcoholic beverages.      Nor does it support the view that the vast
majority of the crowd were badly behaved or openly hostile towards
the South Yorkshire Police.      It does show quite clearly that some
elements of the crowds at the back of the mass of supporters seeking
entrance to the ground were boisterous; it supports the view that
there was an altercation between one Police Officer and one fan; but
it does no more than that.      There is a marked difference between the
boisterous, excited bahaviour of a football crowd, expectant of
seeking an exciting,    important game and the badly behaved crowd, the
picture of which appears to have been painted on the basis of the
report we have seen.


3.   We have heard reports of bad behaviour of Liverpool supporters
in public houses well away from the ground - one particular incident
involving supporters who allegedly pulled a cigarette machine off
the wall of a public house.      Our clients feel that this evidence
has little,    if any, relevance to the matters in issue.
        S.L. Popper Esq                  4                  29-Nov-9 0



4.   Our clients are firm believers that Lord Justice Taylor's
interim report provided an accurate description of the factual
circumstances which ensued on 15th April,    1989.   Our clients feel
that Lord Justice Taylor heard sufficient representative evidence to
have formed an accurate factual overview of the events.


We know that you have discussed the use that you will make of the
Taylor Report and we do not know, because of our absence,    of the
final view you have formed in this regard.     However, bearing that in
mind our clients would like to make the following points:-


A.   Lord Justice Taylor heard much evidence as to the alleged
bahaviour of Liverpool supporters in the hours leading up the
tragedy.   On the question of the alleged drunkenness of the fans he
heard evidence from many of those witnesses appearing at the
Inquest, such as witnesses Hockenhull, Lindley and Buck, and will
have read many other statements. In dealing with this aspect of the
behaviour of Liverpool fans, he concluded at Paragraph 19 6 of his
interim report:-



       "Of those who arrived at 2.3 0 p.m. or after, very many
       had been drinking at public houses or had brought drink
       from home or an off-licence.   I am satisfied on the
       evidence, however, that the great majority were not drunk,
       nor even the worse for drink.   The Police witnesses varied
       on this.  Some described the high proportion as drunk, as
       "lager louts" or even as "animals".   Others described a
       generally normal crowd with an unco-operative minority who
       had drunk too much.   In my view, some Officers, seeking to
       rationalise their loss of control, over-estimated the
       drunkal element in the crowds.   There certainly was such an
       element.  There were youngsters influenced by drink and
       bravado pushing impatiently at the rear of the crowd,
       thereby exacerbating the crush.   But the more convicing
       police witnesses, including especially Detective
       Superintendent McKay and Chief Inspector Creaser, as well
       as a number of responsible civilian witnesses, were in my
       view right in describing this element as a minority.    Those
       witnesses attributed the crush to the sheer numbers of fans
       all anxious to gain entry.   There was no criticism of the
       crowd by any of their witnesses in the period up to 2.3 0p.m.
       or even 2.3 5 p.m.  What happened then was not a sudden
        S.L. Popper Esq                    5                 29-Nov-90



        deterioration in the mood or sobriety of those assembled
        there. No doubt those coming behind would have had more to
        drink and would have included the unruly minority.  But the
        crisis developed because this very large crowd became packed
        into a confined turnstile area and its very density hampered
        its passage through the turnstiles."


B.   Lord Justice Taylor also heard much evidence as to the
"lateness" of Liverpool fans and the allegation that it was this
"lateness" which caused or at least contributed to the caotic scenes
outside Hillsborough.     In this regard he concluded at paragraph
192:-



        "Whether those who arrived between 2.3 0 p.m. and 2.4 0 p.m.
        were "late" was much debated.  The ticket simply requested
        its holder "to take up (his) position 15 minutes before
        kick-off". That may have been intended to pursuade those with
        stand tickets to take their seats, but it would not be
        unreasonable for a standing spectator to arrive at the
        turnstiles between 2.30 p.m. and 2.40 p.m.   Whether they were
        "late" or not, however, there was certainly a large
        concentration of Liverpool fans arriving at about 2.3 0 p.m.
        and after."


C.   Substantial evidence at the Public Inquiry was brought to
allege disgraceful behaviour on the part of Liverpool fans, both in
and around the ground and further afield.      In this regard, Lord
Justice Taylor concluded at paragraph 197:-



        "Superintendent Marshall and other Officers criticised the
        crowd as uncoperative because Police exortations to stop
        pushing into his back were not heeded.  How could they be?
        In that crush most people had no control over their
        movements at all.  Two incidents involving police horses
        illustrate the point.  One horse was found afterwards to
        have cigarette burns on its rump.  Clearly that was the
        despicable work of a hooligan whether in drink or not.
        However, there were also eye witness accounts of a horse
        being physically lifted off its feet by the crowss.  That
        occurred, as the police accepted, without malice or intent
        but as an involuntary consequence of crowd pressure which
        those by the horses flanks could not resist any more than the
        horse itself."
       S .L . Popper Esq                 6                29-Nov-9 0



Further, at paragraph 199 Lord Justice Taylor went on:-

       "The result was that in the early stages Police Officers were
       pestered by fans for help as to where they should go.    Later,
       as the crowd became more dense, fans were presenting their
       tickets at the wrong turnstile.   There were also Liverpool
       supporters who had acquired tickets for The Kop end but
       sought entry at Leppings Lane.  They caused delay in the
       turnstile operation when entry was refused, and after a while
       the police instructed the operators to let them through.
       There was further delay because the crush made it difficult
       for fans to get into the turnstile entrances.   Once there,
       the pressure from behind was such as, on occasions, to jam
       them in the doorway or against the paddle of the turnstile.
       Finally, there were fans without tickets who sought to
       enter by offering payment, by seeking to go over or under
       the paddle or by sliding through with a ticket holder. All of
       these activities slowed down the turnstile rate which at the
       worse period was only about 600 per hour per turnstile.    The
       waiting crowd therefore expanded and as the minutes passed
       frustration grew.  Visitors who had paid for tickets and
       travelled from afar realised they were making little forward
       progress, frustration increased pressure and induced panic
       at the front.  Determination to get into the match was
       intensified by determination to get out of the crush."


Earlier in the Report, at paragraph 64, and in describing the
situation outside the turnstiles, Lord Justice Taylor stated:-



       "Superintendent Marshall was in the midst of the turmoil.
       He extracated himself and stood on a paraphet of the bridge
       to get a clear view.  A drunken fan tried to push him off;
       a beer can was thrown at a mounted officer.  But these were
       isolated acts by individuals; the menace came from the
       massive number single-mindedly determined to be in for the
       kick-off with time running out".


D.   At the Public Inquiry much play was made by the South Yorkshire
Police of an argument that thousands of Liverpool supporters arrived
at Hillsborough without tickets and that the presence of these
people without tickets in someway caused or contributed to the
disaster.   The Police also produced bundles of evidence to support a
      S.L. Popper Esq                     7                   29 - N O V - 90



"conspiracy theory" to the effect that the presence of many of the
Liverpool supporters without tickets was pre-planned as a means of
forcing the Police to allow them to enter the ground.       This
conspiracy theory was soundly rejected.       In concluding on this
aspect, Lord Justice Taylor said at paragraphs 201 - 202:-



      "200 - it has become a fact of football life that fans do
      turn up at all ticket matches without tickets.   It is not
      possible to give an accurate figure or even a reliable
      estimate of the number without tickets on 15th April.   Police
      estimates varied from about about 200 to about 2,000.   There
      was certainly frequent requests for tickets or "spares"
      during the hours before the build up.  Many of those warned
      off by the Police were seen to return to the area.   Some were
      hanging about on the bridge.  Again, however, the police
      witnesses who most impressed me did not consider the number
      of ticketless fans to be inordinately large.   This accords
      with two other sources of evidence.

      201 - First, there was a wide range of witnesses who observed
      inside the ground that the Liverpool end was at a late stage
      well below capacity save for pens 3 and 4.  The North Stand
      still had many empty seats and the wing pens were sparse,
      the match being a sell-out, there were clearly many ticket
      holders to come and they could account for the large crowd
      still outside the turnstiles.  Had the Liverpool
      accommodation been full by 2.40 p.m. one could have inferred
      that most or much of the large crowd outside lacked tickets.

      202- Secondly, such figures as are available from the Club's
      electronic monitoring system and from analysis by the HSE
      suggest that no great number entered without tickets and
      show that the number who passed through turnstiles A-G plus
      those who entered through gate C roughly equalled the terrace
      capacity figure of 10,100 for which tickets had been sold.
      The Club's records showed 7,03 8 passed through turnstiles
      A-G.  However, the counting mechanism on turnstile G was
      defective so the HSE did a study using the video film and
      projecting figures from the other turnstiles.   This gave
      an assessment of 7,494 with a maximum of 7,644 passing
      through A-G.  Again, using the video, the HSE assessed the
      number who entered the ground whilst gate C was open at
      2,240 with a maximum of 2,480.   Accordingly, the HSE's best
      estimate of the total entering through gate C and turnstiles
      A-G was 9,734 with a maximum of 10,124.   I recognise that
      these can only be rough checks because, for example, some
      with terraced tickets were allowed through turnstiles 1-16
      and there would be other similar factors which have not
      formed part of the assessment.   Nevertheless, the figures do
          S.L. Popper Esq                   8                 29-Nov-9 0



          suggest that there   was not a very significant body of
          ticketless fans in   the crowd which built up."

Lord Justice Taylor went on at paragraph 208:-

          "I have already found that there was not an abnormally large
          number of fans without tickets on this occasion.    With one
          or two exceptions,   the Police witnesses themselves did not
          subscribe to the "conspiracy" theory.   I am satisfied that
          the large concentration at Leppings Lane from 2.30 p.m. to
          2.50 p.m. did not arrive as a result of any concerted plans.
          There were, I accept, small groups without tickets who were
          willing to exploit any adventitious chance of getting into
          the ground.  They, together with a minority who had drunk
          too much, certainly had aggravated the problem faced by the
          Police. But that main problem was simply one of large numbers
          packed into the small area outside the turnstiles".




The purpose of our clients wishing up to make these points is
simple: our clients believe that the evidence which has been heard
at the Inquests and reported in the media has all been put before.
It has been challenged and its limitations have been found.


Our clients are quite prepared to accept that:-


i.    There were some Liverpool supporters who drank too much to the
extent that it affected their behaviour.


ii.   There were some Liverpool supporters who behaved quite
disgracefully.


iii. There were present some supporters without tickets who should
not have been there and who would have made life difficult for the
Police.


The extracts we have quoted from Lord Justice Taylor's report are,
to our mind,    fairly balanced and support the points which our
clients are prepared to accept.     However, and having said that, our
clients wish to say most forceably that;
        S.L. Popper Esq                     9                 2 9 - N O V - 90



i.    All of the above supporters were in a very small minority,


ii.   Their actions were not responsible for the death and injuries
which ensued and,


iii. Their actions,      in themselves, were perfectly capable of being
policed and were,    indeed,   foreseeable to a Police Authority having
a reasonable knowledge of the manner in which football crowds behave
and the tendencies which do, unfortunately,     appear to manifest
themselves.


Our clients accept that as the allegations referred to above are the
honestly held views and beliefs of witnesses whom it is perfectly
relevant to call,    it is quite proper for them to be heard at the
Inquests.     However,   our clients perceive two dangers:-


i.    That the allegations are passing seemingly unchallenged in the
absence of our clients and


ii.   The allegations are being reported as being fact by the media
who are obviously seeking only to attract readers, viewers or
listeners.


Both of these dangers may result in the allegations being accepted
as fact by the jurors or the public.      The allegations are not
accepted as fact by our clients.


As our clients cannot appear before you and make these points, they
felt that they had no other option but to write to you, through
ourselves, and attempt to redress the balance in the Jurors' minds.
Had our clients been present at the Inquests all of the above
points would have been made on our clients' behalf.


Finally, and in the light of the manner in which the evidence has so
         S.L. Popper Esq                    10                  29-Nov-9 0



far been reported in the media, our clients had asked us to write
an open letter in terms of the above to the Editors of all national
and relevant local newspapers and to       local radio stations in
Liverpool and Sheffield.      Our clients feel   that the allegations made
in the media must be answered.


We have considered with our clients the possibility that such a step
may be considered as an attempt by our clients to influence the
outcome of the Inquests, and in some way as being in contempt of
court.   We understand from those who have attended the Inquests that
you have requested parties not to speak to the press.


We have considered this point most carefully as it obviously causes
us concern.   The above letter is certainly an attempt by our clients
to influence the outcome of the Inquests: that is precisely what
each party at the Inquests sees as its aim.       Our clients were, quite
properly in our view,      invited by you to be such a party.   Our
clients are unable to attend personally before you, or through
Counsel or solicitors, to have their       views known.   This method is,
therefore, the only method of making those views known.


In our submission, therefore,      it must be proper for you to place
this letter before the Jurors, with an appropriate advice from
yourself as to the weight which the Jurors should attach to it.              If
that is correct, and we would submit it is, then the letter must
also be capable of reading by the media as the Inquests are open and
reportable by the media.


If you decline our invitation to place this letter before the
Jurors, then we still feel that our clients are entitled through the
media, to respond to the points made in the media reports of the
evidence given so far.      Our clients are merely repeating the views
which they have already made public on several occasions and the
line which they took through Counsel at the Public Inquiry.           They
are, as we have said, already a party to the Inquests.
       S.L. Popper Esq                  11                29-Nov-9 0



Consequently, and after much consideration we are of the view that
our clients would be at liberty to release this letter to the media
without they, or indeed ourselves, being in contempt of your court
or in anyway acting improperly.   However, before taking such a step
both we and our clients would welcome your views and comments.    If
you believe that our clients would be acting improperly in
releasing this letter to the media, please advise us as we know that
our clients will respect your views and consider carefully any
points you may wish to make.


We await your comments on the above as soon as feasible and if you
wish to discuss any element of the points we have made with us,
please do not hesitate to contact us as you should feel appropriate.


Yours faithfully


HILL DICKINSON DAVIS CAMPBELL
