                                        HILL D I C K I N S O N DA VIS C A MP BEL L
                                                       SOLICITORS
                                               Pearl Assurance House, Derby Square, Liverpool L2 9XL.
                   Telephone: 0 5 1 -2 3 6 5 4 0 0 D.X. 14 1 2 9 F a x :0 5 1 -2 3 6 2 1 7 5 Telex: 6 2 7 1 1 6 Cables: H illd ic k Liverpool


          Mias Sheila Spiers

          LIVERPOOL                                                                                     youPWJ.      1860-016
                                                                                                        O ur Ref:



                                                                                                                       i
                                                                                                            6th December 1990

          Dear Sheila

                                                             HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS

          I enclose herewith a copy of the reply I have received from the
          Coroner.             This is certainly not what we wanted to hear, but I do not
          think that we can now take any steps to go public with our views on
          the evidence so far reported.                                        I am still not convinced that the
          Coroner is right over the contempt issue but, quite frankly, I do
          not think that it is worth our while taking the risk.
                                                                                                                                                *■



          Obviously, we can discuss this further on Monday.


          Yours sincerely


          PETER JACKSON


          c.c.        Paul Kelly
                      Paul Hyland
                      Peter Garrett
                      Rogan Taylor




                                             Roy G. Hill (Chairm an) • W illiam B.C. Lister (Senior Partner)
   , Gordon E. Anderson • H eather A. Baucher ■ Jack C oulthurst ■ Anne M. Dobie • Elwyn E. Edwards ■ Anthony G ibbons • N. Roger Halton
Anthony J. A. Harding-Huber ■ M a rtin G. Hill • John R. H ulm es • PeterW . Jackson - M arcus C. Keppel-Palm er ■ Paul Large • M. Elizabeth M ackay
 M ichael J. M cKenna • Richard J. M artindale ■ M. John Maxwell ■ Allan R. M ow at • H. Donald B. M unro • M ichael J. Quinn ■ David R. Sw affieid
                  Jeremy R. T iffin ■ Paul W alton (M anagem ent Partner) • W. David W areing - Anthony E. W ilson ■ John G. Wolfe
                                                   C onsu ltant (Non - practising): G eoffrey T. F. Luya.

                                   IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS THIS FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY
n_ n u u o c .                       I C L ' U i - t i i v i - t O v -1
                      t




                                          OFFICE OF HM. CORONER FOR        MEOICCKJEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                           WATERY STREET
                                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                           (WcsDtorfeQ     SHEFFIELD
                                                                           S37ET
           STEFAN I - POPPER, LLB.. fcM t& .fci, ftM . I £ . MJi.c_a.F-,
                                                             CORONER

                                     Twesnon»:SHBsraixn974fi738m           -St-h—Beeea&e*1... 1990-


   SLP/JT.
   PWJ.KEL-


   Hill Dickinson Davis Campbell,
   Solicitors,
   Pearl Assurance House,
   Derby Square.
   Liverpool. L2 9XL.

   Dear Sirs,

   Hillsborough - Resumed Inquests

   Thank you for your letter of the 3rd of December.

   I hope that you will excuse the relative brevity and staccato style of this
   reply, but I am eure you will appreciate that I am rather pressed for time.
   Nevertheless I felt it right th&t I should respond to you as quickly as
   possible. May I make a few general observations first.                    »

   As you know, I have been perfectly willing to allow your clients to be
   treated as an interested party and to be represented at the inquest. The
   fact chat for whatever reason they are unable or unwilling to be present is
   regrettable, but not something that 1 can do anything about. I should
   perhaps add that they arc not unique in this situation, and indeed even in
   these inquests they are at present interested parties who no doubt would wish
   to be legally represented but who for various reasons are unable to be so.

   I note what you               say with regard to funding. Should your position change and
   should you feel               that you would wish to avail yourself of the opportunity for
   representation,               then I would not stand in your way. 'Whether such attendance
   would be useful               would   I think in the final analysis have to be for you to
   determine.

   You are of course quite right that this matter was investigated by Lord
   Justice Taylor and that he wrote a report.                *

   However, whether one likes it or not. the present .legal position is quite
   clear that notwithstanding a Public Inquiry (and this would apply whether the
   Public Inquiry was a statutory one or a departmental one) there is a duty on
   the coroner to hold an inquest (see R - v - H.H.Coroner for East Kent ex
   parte Peter Alan Spooner et el Queen’s Bench Division October the 6th 1987).
   Furthermore, if an inquest is to be held I took the view that this should be
   held with a Jury.

   It is perfectly plain that before the Jury can reach a verdict, they have to
   hear the evidence. The fact that some or all of the evidence may have been
   heard or considered by Lord Justice Taylor is neither here or there.
   It is the duty of the Jury to reach a verdict in accordance with the evidence
   which is presented to them Incourt. What verdict the Jury will reach is of
                          H   L   ' U   i   -r £   I ' v> J. 1 U
  ml   nuuoc.

                                                                   MEDICO LGL CNTER       @001
• 08/12 -90     13:46   FAX 0742 720247
                                                               2


        course a matter for them at the conclusion of the inquests.

        As a general point, you will I am sure appreciate that newspaper reports do
        not necessarily give a full account of vhat happens in proceedings and you
        may be interested to leairn that there are already hundreds of pages of
        transcripts of the evidence which has been heard to date.

        Perhaps 1 should also eay that it is anticipated that thell inquests will las'
        for several more weeks, and a great deal of additional evidence will be
        called.

        My position with regard to Lord Justice Taylor's report is the same as I had
        indicated earlier at & meeting which you in fact attended.

        I also draw your attention inter alia to Rule 37 and Rule 40 of the Coroners'
        Rules 1984.    '       '      '

        Dealing with the two specific points that need addressings -

              1.   It is not my intention to place the letter which you have
                   sent to me before the Jurors.

              2.   It is my elear understanding that publication of the letter
                   in the media vould constitute a serious contempt. I draw your
                   particular attention to Peacock and others re London Week-end
                   Television - Court of Appeal, November the 15th 1985.


        Yours faithfully,




                                                                                      n
