                  REPORT OF THE MERSEYSIDE BRANCH
              OF THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ' ASSOCIATION
   LIVERPOOL -V- SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY AT HILLSBOROUGH - 29.11.89


The Merseyside Branch of the FSA wished to mark the return of
Liverpool Football Club to Hillsborough on 29th November with some
sort of gesture in memory of the 95 Liverpool fans who died in
Sheffield on 15th April. The idea was formulated that a delegation
from the Branch Committee would attend the game at Hillsborough
with a delegation from the South Yorkshire Branch of the FSA and
that both delegations would stand side by side on The Kop at
Hillsborough, providing the authorities in Sheffield agreed.


The match had already been advertised on Merseyside as being an all
ticket affair, with Liverpool having been allocated only the seats
in the West Stand above the Leppings Lane Terrace. For that reason
the delegates believed that tickets would have to be obtained from
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, and it was decided that the task
of obtaining tickets would be dealt with by the South Yorkshire
Branch. Little progress was made, however, and the Merseyside
Branch decided to approach Liverpool Football Club for any
assistance that could be given. A copy of the letter sent in this
regard dated 1st November is enclosed herewith.


On 7th November Peter Robinson, the Chief Executive of Liverpool
Football Club, replied indicating that contrary to what was
believed in Liverpool this particular match would not be an all
ticket affair, and that it would be possible for the Merseyside
delegation to pay on the night and obtain entry to the Spion Kop.
A copy of Peter Robinson's letter is also enclosed.


Following on from receipt of that letter the position was discussed
with the Branch Committee and it was decided as follows:-


1. That the Branch Chairman, Peter Jackson, would contact Peter
Robinson at Liverpool F.C. to see whether the latter could in any
way influence the thinking of Sheffield Wednesday and the South
Yorkshire police in their preparations for this game.
                               -   2   -




2. That in any event a letter would be sent from the Branch
Committee to Sheffield Wednesday and the South Yorkshire Police
pointing out what the Branch felt to be the inadequacies of their
planning and preparation for this match.


3. That the information concerning the game not being all ticket
would be kept strictly confidential by the Committee members and
would not be relayed to the public or to members of the
organisation.

Briefly, the fears held by the Branch Committee concerning the
preparation of Sheffield Wednesday/South Yorkshire Police for this
match were as follows

(1)The allocation given by Sheffied Wednesday for this game to
Liverpool fans was too small in any event. Prior to April 1989,
Liverpool F.C. have been allocated, and have generally speaking
used, all the terraces and stands at the West/Leppings Lane end of
the ground. There was nothing in the circumstances surrounding
this match which would detract from its interest as a spectacle.
If anything, more people would wish to travel to Hillsborough on
this occasion for various reasons. Consequently, the allocation of
50% less than usually given to Liverpool Football Club would be
unlikely to be adequate. It is, of course, well known that for
games at the end of last season, against Middlesborough and West
Ham at which time Sheffield Wednesday Football Club could not use
the Leppings Lane end of the ground at all, an allocation of space
was given to visiting spectators in the North Stand. Had that
space been allocated to Liverpool fans on this occasions it is
likely that that, together with the West Stand, would have been
sufficient for Liverpool fans who wished to see the game.


(2)The Branch Committee felt that on the basis of its unofficial
enquiries, and on the basis of previous years records of supporters
visiting Hillsborough for Liverpool matches, it was quite feasible
that some 10,000-15,000 Liverpool supporters may travel to
Sheffield for the match.   Inevitably, many would not have tickets.
                               -   3   -




(3)The Police had not made it clear what was to be done to those
who did not travel without tickets. The fear of the FSA was that
if lage numbers did travel and were held outside the ground on what
would in any event have been an emotionally charged evening, then
there might have been a possibility of disorder.


(4)On a more general note, it has generally been accepted since
the disaster in April that supporters ought to be educated into
believing that it is not worth their while travelling to all ticket
matches without tickets for the simple reason that they just will
not be admitted. On this particular occasion it was inevitable
that fans would travel without tickets and inevitable that fans
would gain entry to the ground, despite the fact that the game was
being advertised on Merseyside as being all tickets. Such
circumstances do nothing to help the education processes.

On Tuesday 14th November the Branch Chairman, Peter Jackson,
spoke with Peter Robinson at Liverpool F.C. and expressed the
Association's views that the game should be all ticket with an
increased allocation to Liverpool F.C. Mr Robinson said that he
shared those views and agreed to speak immediately with Mr Graham
Mackrell, the Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, as
he, Mr Robinson, felt that the FSA's views ought to be made known.
On the following day Mr Robinson telephoned Mr Jackson and
indicated that the FSA's views had been passed on and that Mr
Mackrell was having a final preparatory meeting with the Police on
the following day, at which the FSA's views would be made known.
Mr Jackson was told that Mr Mackrell would telephone him after that
meeting to discuss matters.


No such telephone call was made by Mr Mackrell and on Tuesday 21st
November Mr Jackson telephoned Sheffield Wednesday to speak with Mr
Mackrell. Mr Mackrell was not available but did, however, return
the call later in the afternoon. Mr Jackson put the FSA's views to
Mr Mackrell as outlined above, but was effectively told that there
was nothing that Mr Mackrell could or would do to alter the the
arrangements.   Mr Mackrell made the following points.
                              -   4   -




1. The decision to make the game not all ticket, with a low ticket
allocation for Liverpool fans, was that of the South Yorkshire
police.

2. If there was any trouble, the police would deal with it.


3. In any event, he could see nothing wrong with the ticket
allocation as Liverpool only gave Sheffield Wednesday some 3,000
tickets for the latter's annual league game at Anfield.


Following on from that telephone call, the Merseyside Branch of
the FSA sent a letter to the Club with a copy being sent to the
Police. A copy of that letter is enclosed herewith. No reply, of
either a written or verbal nature, has been received to that
letter.

On 28th November Mr Jackson was interviewed live on the Breakfast
Time show for B.B.C. Radio Sheffield. During the course of the
interview he was asked by the presenter to comment on the fact that
tickets for the game were still on open general sale at
Hillsborough and would be so up unt.fj kick-off time. Further, the
gates would be open for paying customers on the night. Mr Jackson
tried to evade the question suggesting this information was
incorrect, but the presenter checked the information "on air" and
had it verified.


Later that day the Sheffield Star newspaper ran an article based on
comments made by Mr Jackson to a press agency on the previous
Monday. Mr Jackson spoke to the journalist who had produced that
article and was told:-


(a)Sheffield Wednesday were openly advertising the game as not
being all tickets.


(b)The National press had taken up that advertisement.
                              -   5   -




(c)that the Officer in charge of the police operation had only
found out that day that tickets were still on sale for the match.


The Merseyside branch of the FSA feels that the above outline of
circumstances leading up to the preparation for this game show the
following:-


(a)The inability of the South Yorkshire Police and Sheffield
Wednesday to safely organise a football match, as there could have
been severe organisational problems if fans has arrived without
tickets, following the advertisements made by Sheffield Wednesday
relating to the game not being all-ticket. The potential for these
problems could easily have been avoided by having the game as
all-ticket and sticking to that policy.


(b)The failure of both these organisations to heed the suggestions
made by a recognised supporter organisation.


On the night in question the match passed without incident,
although reports were received of supporters travelling without
tickets in various numbers. This P=i»ociation believes that the
fact that there was no organisational problems is due to either:-


1. The fact that Liverpool F.C. fans did not travel without
tickets or


2. That they did and did enter the ground but behaved in an
impeccable manner.


Either way, it is this Association's belief that the fact that no
problems ensued was due to the responsible attitude of football
fans rather than anything planned by the authorities in Sheffield.


The Merseyside Branch of the FSA would also like to comment on the
policing in Sheffield on 29th November. Prior to the match, great
                              -   6   -




play was made by the police of how they would be carrying out a low
key operation based on tact and diplomacy. Whilst the FSA does not
have access to the numbers of Police Officers on duty that night,
it does feel that substantially more officers were used than would
be for any other football operation at Hillsborough. The policy
was not low key and many spectators have complained to the FSA of
the presence of long lines of Police riot vans around the stadium
long before kick-off; of individuals being searched on entry to the
ground; and of individual officers being surly and aggressive. One
written complaint was received from an FSA member, and a copy of
       letter is also enclose herewith.

The purpose of this report was not to be overly critical but was
merely to show that all is still not well with the organisation of
football matches at Hillsborough. On this occasion responsible
supporters made the operation work, but the organisation was far
from satisfactory. Sheffield Wednesday seem to want safety but do
not wish to take the steps that will ensure it. The interim
Hillsborough report called for greater liaison with supporters. On
this occasion views were offered and suggestions put forward, but
supporters were ignored. The ultimate and relative success of this
Police oepration should not be an excuse for ignoring the input of
supporters in the future.
