/
         THE...FUNDING QF FIRST AID SERVICES AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

      The following report was compiled by the Anglian branch of the
    Football  Supporters Association and is based     on  information
    received from the British Red Cross Society and Norwich City FC.

      The branch first became aware of the lack of financial   support
    received by the First Aid services during a discussion with a
    local Red Cross official. This discussion took place      after a
    meeting on ground safety, held at Norwich City FC's Carrow Rd
    Ground.   The  official  concerned told us that  the  formula for
    remunerating First Aid services, at all     football  grounds,  is
    based on a rate of 70p per 1000 spectators; this information was
    subsequently confirmed by the Secretary of the Norfolk Red Cross.
    Since this meeting the branch has endeavoured to     increase the
    funds available to the local Red Cross in a variety of ways:    by
    writing to the Chairman of Norwich City requesting a greater
    financial   input from the club; offering to hold a collection at
    the football ground on a match—day; holding two      fund raising
    events and a local publicity campaign.

      Mr Chase, The Chairman of Norwich City, informed us that the
    club made an additional contribution to the Red Cross and that he
    would not allow a collection to be held at Carrow Rd.   After pn
    extensive  investigation by both the Anglian branch and a local
    journalist, it was established the clubs additional  contribution
    amounted to a few pounds a season. The local publicity campaign
    has led to a deterioration in our relations with the club
    Chairman,  but  a marked improvement in the way the    First Aid
    services are treated at Carrow Rd.

      Recently the St. John s Ambulance Brigade, the body responsible
    for negotiating overall financing, won an improved deal of £2 per
    1000 spectators.    This, totally inadequate amount,  was granted
    only after protracted negotiations with the Football        League.
    However,  even at the improved rate, the money received does not
    cover the travelling expenses of the First Aid personnel. All the
    medical equipment used by the First Aid services is paid for out
    of funds raised by the voluntary organisations          concerned;
    therefore   football clubs enjoy an enormously   subsidised   First
    Aid service.

       This   situation   is clearly unfair on     the   organisations
    concerned,   and could easily lead to a situation where vital
    medical equipment is not available because of a lack of funds. It
    is    worth   bearing   in mind,  that  if two or     three   more
    defibrillators had been available to the medical      services at
    Hillsborough,   several lives could have been saved. But when you
    consider that the St. John's probably received around £50      for
    their work that Saturday.afternoon, it's not hard to understand
    why they didn't have more equipment at hand.



                               1
  cont.

  The Anglian branch calls on the council of the   F.S.A. and all
other branches, to campaign for a more realistic level of funding
for the First Aid services at our football grounds.   The branch
believes that such a campaign will: engender the support of most
spectators;  provide us with a worthwhile crusade which we can
win; enhance our reputation as a concerned spectator movement and
help ensure that the best possible medical equipment is available
should you need First Aid at a football ground.



                                                 17.10.89
