I
I                                                    FT(93) 3rd Meeting


    MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH MEETING OF THE FOOTBALL TRUST HELD ON 24
    MAY 1993 AT WALKDEN HOUSE



    Present:        The Rt Hon Lord Aberdare KBE            Chairman
                    R 0 Faulkner               First Deputy Chairman
                    T Wharton OBE             Second Deputy Chairman
                    Y Craig
                    G Kelly
                    B Ludlam
                    W G McKeag
                    Sir Bert Millichip
                    Miss A Stewart         Observer for the Secretary
                                       of State for National Heritage

                    P A Lee
                    H Gould


    Apologies for absence
    1.   Apologies were received from Mr George, Mr Hughes, Mr Reames,
    Mr Taylor and Mr Thwaite.

    Minutes of the previous meeting
    2.   The minutes of the FT (93) 2nd meeting were approved.

    Matters arising
    National Lottery
    3.   Mr Faulkner expressed his thanks to the football authorities
    and their members for all the support they had provided during the
    Commons passage of the National Lottery Bill.       He said that
    although the question of equal opportunities on advertising was
    still a sticking point, the Pools companies were feeling more
    confident about the future.

    Police charges and stewarding
    4.   The Chairman informed the meeting that some clubs had been
    finding difficulty in getting the Local Authority to verify the
    standard of stewarding. He said that the FLA had offered to help
    to find a satisfactory way of resolving the problem but at this
    stage the Trust would continue with its policy of seeking Local
    Authority confirmation.

    Millwall: Senegal Fields
    5.   Mr Faulkner informed the meeting that the opening of Millwall
    Football Club's new ground had been arranged for 4 August and the

I   Club had invited the Leader of the Labour Party to perform the
    ceremony.   He said that an invitation would be extended to all
    Trust members.

I                                  -   1   -
Decision of the Trust
6.   The FT (93) second meeting Schedule of Decisions was noted.
Mr Faulkner clarified that the schedule did not show that Burnley
Football Club were to receive grant aid from tax paid income but
that this was the case.

Financial Report

7.    The report was noted.
Mr Wharton gave a verbal report on the eighteenth meeting of the
Professional   Football Committee held on 24 May

Major Projects
8.   The following recommendations were agreed:

      Charlton Athletic - a maximum errant of £1.4m net as 70%
      of approved costs up to a ceilincr of £2m for the new
      East Stand proiect.     Grant aid would not be made
      available in respect of additional costs for work to
      the North and South Stands in accordance with Iona
      established Trust procedures not to make payment on
      retrospective applications;
      Crystal Palace - a maximum errant of £lm net as 4 0% of
      approved costs up to a ceiling of £2.5m towards part of
      a new South Stand;
      Sheffield Wednesday - a maximum grant of £200,000 net
      as 40% of approved costs up to a ceiling of £520, 000
      towards seating the Ko p and the North West corner;

      Peterborough United - a maximum grant of £95,000 net as
      70% of approved costs up to a ceiling of £136, 000
      towards seating the front of the Main Stand;


      The following applications were deferred:

      Southend United - the application will be considered
      when full planning permission has been sought.

      Hartlepool - given that the application was incomplete
      and the tenders were considered to be out of date it
      was recommended that the Club retender their project
      and resubmit it with full financial details and a
      supplementary application for the safety work to the
      East Stand.
      Stockport County - the application will be considered
      at the next meeting when reports have been written.
     Dundee - the application will be considered when    full
     planning permission has been sought.


Stewarding

Scunthorpe United
10.   It was agreed that the Trust's original decision to make an
offer of grant aid towards a stewards' briefing room from the
Club's stewarding costs allocation should remain unchanged.

Preston North End
11.     It was agreed that given the cost effective nature of    the
purchase the Trust would extend 50% grant aid towards the       £900
cost    of a second hand Portakabin and that this would come    from
the Club's stewarding costs allocation.

Transport Grants

AFC Bournemouth
12.     It was agreed that should the increased costs for the   car
park    be more than 5% the Club would be asked to retender     the
project.
FA Contribution Account
    13.   Leisester City - it was agreed that grant aid of
    £200,000 be awarded as a contribution towards the provision
    of facilities for families and people with disabilities in
    the new West Stand.

The extension of RPBD
15.   The Chairman said that the Trust had received a letter from
the FA Premier League setting out their agreement, in principle,
to making a £2m annual donation to the Trust to be made available
in grant assistance to Premier League clubs. The meeting was
content to meet the points in Mr Parry's letter.        Given the
extension of RPBD funding, Government agreement would be required
for continued access for Premier League clubs.     On appropriate
representation, the meeting agreed that the Premier League should
be offered Observer status on the Trust. Miss Stewart welcomed
the contribution and the proposed Trust response. She added that
the Department would have welcomed the Premier League making money
available to clubs in the Football League.
16.   Mr McKeag reported that the Football League hoped to imposed
a 5% levy on transfer fees from the selling club and one of 10% on
the end of season "ladder" position money . The League would
retain the monies and distribute it to clubs as a contribution
towards work to be done in line with Taylor.
17.   Mr Lee announced that the Taylor Implementation study would
be submitted to the Department of National Heritage shortly.     He
referred to the excellent work completed by Rushton's Mr Foster.

Quality assurance and securing value for money

18.   Mr Lee drew the meeting's attention to the quality assurance
form designed to help Corderoy's to undertake the essential value
for money assessment of major project grant aid applications.

Any other business

Corinthian Casuals
19.    It was agreed that on receipt of details of the ground
redevelopment plans the Chairman would have the authority to allow
the   original offer of £15,000 to stand despite the Club having
been unable to assemble the necessary financial package to fund
all the work necessary to meet the requirements of the Diadora
Leagu'e.
Konica League meeting with the Secretary of State for Wales
20.   The note of the meeting held on 18 May between the Chairman,
Mr   Faulkner, Mr Wharton, Mr Lee and the Secretary of State for
Wales, the Football Association of Wales, the Sports Council for
Wales and the Konica League was noted. Any decision in respect of
grant aid towards the Konica League would be dependent on the
extension of RPBD money.

Date of the next meeting
21.   The next meeting was fixed for 10.30 on 30 June at   Walkden
House.




FT
14 June 1993
