                   THE FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST


MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD ON MONDAY 15TH MAY 1989 AT 160/ 166 BOROUGH HIGH
STREET, LONDON COMMENCING AT 10.00A.M.


      Present:   T. Wharton, O.B.E.   - In the Chair

                 B .A. Cook, J.D. Dent, T. Finney, O.B.E., J.P., C. Lloyd, O.B.E.,
                 P.D. Smithson and H.B. Sturgeon, B.A ., D.Phil., F.R.I.C.S.

                 Miss G. Firth - Secretary
                 W.H. Carter - Messrs. George Corderoy & Co.
                 C. Foster - Messrs Rushtons




922    APOLOGY FOR ABSENCE

      An apology for absence was received from Mr. S.W. Taylor.

923    MR. J.D. DENT

      The Chairman welcomed Mr. Dent to his first meeting.

924    MINUTES

     The Minutes of the last meeting held on 10th April, having
previously been circulated, were taken as read and signed by the Chairman
as a true record.

925    MATTERS ARISING OUT OF THE MINUTES

Minute 905 - Improvements - It was confirmed that Luton Town were
currently negotiating with their local council to lease back their ground
for a period of 7 years. Their application for improvement grant aid
had, therefore, been accepted.

926    FINANCE

     The Trustees received a financial statement showing a balance of
£3,016,851.17 as at 5th May subject to unpresented cheques.

     The Trustees agreed the draft accounts for the year ending 5th April
1989 and the revised Annual Statement included in those accounts.

     The meeting decided that the Annual Report should be further amended
to include a sentence indicating the Trust's commitment of £2.25 million
to 75 clubs for improvement work to be undertaken before or during the
coming close season. The sentence referring to the Football Spectators
Bill should also be amended as follows

      "... before Parliament, and have aimed to retain funds to enable..."

     Mr. Wharton and Mr. Finney were authorised to sign the final
accounts.


                                                               Continued/2.
     The account submitted by Messrs. Rushtons in the amount of £6,842.50
was accepted for payment.  On behalf of the Trustees, the Chairman
thanked Mr. Foster for the excellent service rendered to the Trust by
Rushtons and particularly Mr. Foster.

     A list of accounts paid since the last meeting was received and
noted.

     The following Resolution was passed in respect of Mr. J.D.Dent and
Barclays Bank:-

     "It was resolved that pursuant to the death of Mr. P.C. Dodds from
the office of Trustee, Barclays Bank PLC be and is hereby directed that
the authority of the above mentioned to bind the Customer pursuant to the
existing Mandate by the Customer to Barclays Bank PLC is terminated
provided that all Authorities, instructions, instruments and transactions
authenticated by the above mentioned pursuant to the Customer's said
Mandate to Barclays Bank PLC and purporting to have been gi v e n , m a d e ,
issued or entered into prior to receipt by Barclays Bank PLC of notice of
this resolution shall have the effect as between the Customer and
Barclays Bank PLC as though this resolution had never been passed.

     That Mr. J.D. Dent be appointed as Trustee and that Barclays Bank
PLC be and is hereby directed to honour his signature in the above office
pursuant to such mandate by the Customer to Barclays Bank PLC as may from
time to time have effect.

     Provided that all authorities, instructions, instruments and
transactions authenticated in accordance with the existing Mandate and
purporting to have been given, made or issued or entered into prior to
receipt by Barclays Bank PLC of notice of this resolution shall have
effect as between the Customer and Barclays Bank PLC as though this
resolution had never been passed."



927   HILLSBOROUGH

     The Chairman expressed sincere condolences to everyone who had
suffered either directly or indirectly at Hillsborough.

       The Chairman reported that the police acting on behalf of Justice
Taylor had visited St. Annes and spoken to the Secretary on the question
of grants made to Sheffield Wednesday.     They    had, in fact, taken allthe
Tru s t ’s files for their investigations.  The Chairman confirmed that
there had been no outstanding claims in respect of Sheffield Wednesday.

     The Chairman was to make an official statement, on behalf of the
Trust, to the police within the next few days.

     The Chairman reported on the public stance he had taken following
the disaster.  He had deliberately not issued an official press statement
but had expressed the view that the Trust would await the outcome of the
Inquiry before making any policy decision on seating.



                                                            Continued/3
928    SAFETY

     Mr. W.H. Carter reported that Corderoys were encountering problems
with two clubs but that a full report would be available for the next
meeting.

      It was reported that Aldershot F.C. had gone into liquidation and
this would be borne in mind when considering any applications from the
club.   Mr. Dent reported that the Football League had no legal standing
in these situations.

     The Trustees considered the question of perimeter fencing and the
fact that some clubs were indicating that they would be removing their
fencing following Hillsborough.  It was confirmed that clubs were being
advised to talk to their local authorities with a view to delaying this
decision until after the Hillsborough Inquiry.  Those clubs who had
removed their fencing without consultation with their local authorities
would not receive grant aid.  However, if the removal was a condition of
a club's safety certificate then it would be eligible for grant aid.
      A list of safety grants made since the last meeting was received and noted.

929    IMPROVEMENTS

     A list of improvement grants made since the last meeting was
received and noted.

     A full discussion took place on the question of seating and whether
Justice Taylor would make recommendations on this particular aspect of
League grounds.

     It was felt that the Trust should take the initiative and consider
whether to make grant aid available to clubs for seating in some form.
If it was decided that the Trust could, in fact, offer grant aid then
clubs should be informed and applications requested before any
recommendations came from Justice Taylor's Inquiry.  In this way it was
hoped that the Government would see that football was making an attempt
to put its house in order and allow clubs sufficient time for clubs to
undertake this work in an efficient and acceptable manner.

     It was felt that the cost of seats would be in the region of £35 per
seat.

     All Trustees agreed that the Trust could only consider grant aid in
respect of seating for those areas already covered.  The Trust did not
have funds to contemplate the possibility of also grant aiding covering
at grounds.

     The question of the funds available and the number of clubs able to
be supported was also considered.  It was suggested that the Trust should
consider only offering grant aid to either (a) clubs with an average
attendance over 10,000 or perhaps (b) only First Division clubs.

     With regard to funding it, was agreed that the Football Trust be
requested to make a minimum of £1 million available 'on loan' to FGIT
should the need arise.


                                                          Continued/4
     It was decided to refer this aspect to a meeting of the Joint
Liaison Committee of FGIT and the Football Trust for discussion.

     It was agreed that Messrs. Corderoy & Co. should prepare a report on
the number of seats already available at grounds and those covered areas
which could best be made into seated areas.

     The whole matter would be placed on the Agenda for the next meeting
in July.



930   ST. JOHNS AMBULANCE

      The Chairman reported that the St. Johns Ambulance had failed to put
forward any proposals for consideration by the Trust.   Also, due to the
tube strike that day they would not be attending the meeting to put their
cas e.

     Mr. Dent informed the meeting that the Football League were looking
at the question of medical facilities at League grounds.

     It was decided to discuss the matter further at the next meeting
when more details were known.  The Trustees agreed, in principle, to
offering grant aid for medical facilities.

931   SWINDON TOWN F.C.

     An appeal by Swindon Town in respect of the rejection-of an
application on a P.A. system due to non-compliance with the Trust's
procedures was refused.

932   PORT VALE F.C.

     It was decided to accept Corderoys recommendation that grant aid be
offered to the club in the amount of £40,000 gross for work to their
Bycars End.

933   HALIFAX TOWN F.C.

     The   Trustees considered an application from Halifax Town in the
light of   the fact that the local authority occupied the ground and the
club are   granted only priority usage for their games as required.  In
addition   the council were making direct approaches to the Trust for grant
aid.

     It was decided to defer consideration of this and any future
applications until such time as the club could obtain a long term lease
from the council. It was also agreed to write to the council informing
them that no further applications would be considered if forwarded direct
from the council. All correspondence should emanate from the club.




                                                           Continued/5
934    JOINT LIAISON COMMITTEE

     The Chairman reported that a meeting of the Joint Liaison Committee
of FGIT and the Football Trust would be held during the first week of
June.

     In response to a query from Mr. Smithson the Chairman reported that
the question of Maidstone United would be discussed at that meeting.

935    R.H.G. KELLY

      A letter of thanks from Mr.R.H.G. Kelly was received and noted.

936    ANY OTHER BUSINESS


     Mr. Cook and Mr. Sturgeon reported on their attendance at a Football
League Seminar the previous day to discuss family facilities at club
grounds.



937    NEXT MEETING

     The next meeting was confirmed for Monday 24th July 1989 at Chewton
Glen to commence at 10.00a.m.




     There being no further business the Chairman declared the meeting
closed.




                                             Chairitfan

                                                  Date
