                                                FT (92) 4th Meeting
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH MEETING OF THE FOOTBALL TRUST           HELD
ON 21 SEPTEMBER 1992 AT WALKDEN HOUSE




Present:    The Rt Hon Lord Aberdare KBE            Chairman
            R 0 Faulkner               First Deputy Chairman
            T Wharton OBE             Second Deputy Chairman
            Y Craig
            ACC M George
            M Hughes
            R H G Kelly
            B Ludlam
            W G McKeag
            Sir Bert Millichip
            G Taylor
            J C Thwaite
            Miss A Stewart      Observer for the Secretary of
                                  State for National Heritage
            P A Lee
            P J Dodd
            Mrs P A Finney


Financial Controller
1.   The Chairman   welcomed the newly appointed          Financial
Controller, Mr Patrick Dodd, to his first meeting.
Apologies for absence
2.   Apologies    were received from Mr Reames.
Minutes of the previous meeting
3.   The minutes of FT (92) third meeting were agreed subject
to the deletion of "the proposed Scottish Super League" from
the heading at the top of page 5.
Decisions of the Trust
4.   The   FT   (92)   third meeting Schedule   of   Decisions   was
noted.
Management Report
5.   The Chairman noted that the Cashflow forecast for the
Chairman's Committee indicated a low closing balance for the
period ended December 1992; this would increase following the
final payment in November 1992 to the National Football
Development and Community Scheme.    Mr Thwaite stressed the
need for caution in predictions of the Trust's future income.
The impact qf the National Lottery on the income of the pools
companies would be reflected in RPBD and STB contributions to
the Trust.

Minutes of the Chairman's Committee held on 4 September
New Regional Facilities Scheme
6.   The Chairman described the proposed Regional Facilities
Scheme to be set up in 1992/9 3 to encompass grant aid for the
provision of pitch and changing facilities owned by local
authorities,  non-League clubs, schools, voluntary bodies and
other organisations.   Under the new scheme, grants directed
at the facility,    rather than the organisation making the
application, would be recommended to the Trust following
discussions between regional Sports Councils, County FAs, the
PFA and other interested bodies.   It was agreed that proposed
allocations for the former grassroots initiatives covered by
the new scheme should be combined to provide £1,241,315 in
1992/93.   This sum should cover England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland and would be available for allocation on a
regional basis.
7.   Sir Bert Millichip said the scheme would have the full
support of the FA who were giving greater attention than ever
before to grassroots football.
8.   Mr Lee would be meeting the Sports Council      to     discuss
their future role in the new scheme.

1992/93 allocation
                               j
9.     The following allocations were agreed for 1992/93:


     Hard Surface Play Areas                                200,000

     New Regional Facilities Scheme:                      1,241,315
     LocalAuthority   89/90 uncommitted       £191,315
     Jt Use ofEducational Facilities          £200,000
     CPFA                                     £150,000
     Wales Sports Council                     £150,000
     NLI Improvements:        England         £200,000
                              Scotland        £150,000
                              N Ireland       £200,000
  Artificial Pitches in Scotland                           200,000
  Football     in the Community
                              Scotland                      75,000
                              Community Award Scheme       200,000
  Intermediate Treatment Fund                              100,000

  London Federation of Boys' Clubs                          25,000

  University of Leicester                                   52,000
  Chairman's Discretionary Fund                             50,000
  Prince's Trust                                            30,000
  Pyramid Safety                                           200,000
  YMCA                                                     100,000
                                          TOTAL         £2,473,315

Applications for grant aid
10.   The following recommendations were agreed:
Scottish     Professional Footballers' Association:    Educational
Trust
£ 10,000 towards the cost of courses for professional players
in Scotland, administered by the SPFA's Educational Trust.
Sutherland District Council: Football Development Plan
In the light of the Trust's commitment to the SFA's Community
Officer project,   it was considered more appropriate for
support for this scheme to be provided through the SFA.
Women's Football Association: UEFA campaign
£30,000 to assist with funding the WFA's participation in the
UEFA campaign. The Football Association would administer the
spending   of the grant.      Trustees welcomed Mr Reames'
suggestion that he and Mr Taylor should meet the WFA Officers
in an effort to help conclude the arrangements for bringing
the WFA under the auspices of the FA.

Sir Norman Chester Centre for Football Research

£52,000 in 1993 (payable in quarterly instalments of £13,000)
to Leicester University to cover the cost of employing John
Williams,   together with    associated administrative    and
res-earch expenses.  Subject to availability of resources the
grant to be repeated in 1994 and 1995 (this grant to replace
the grant of £80,000 awarded in July).
YMCA
The YMCA had submitted an ambitious proposal for grant aid
totalling almost £1M, which was intended to form the basis of
their 150th anniversary celebrations in 1994. An exchange of
correspondence between the YMCA's      Chairman,  Sir Harold
Haywood and Sir John Smith (a former Trustee) in support of
their appeal was tabled at the meeting.     Given the total
budget in 1992/93 of £3M for all schemes within the remit of
the Chairman's Committee, it was agreed that a maximum of
£100,000 should be awarded to the YMCA for grassroots
improvement schemes in Great Britain and Northern Ireland in
1992/93.
Intermediate Treatment Fund
£100,000 for the year 1992/93 to be allocated to the Football
Trust-IT Fund Joint Initiative.

Coventry City Council
£ 10,000 towards  the development of changing facilities at
Tile Hill, the grant (replacing the previous award of
£11,750) to comprise £5,000 towards the cost of materials and
£5,000 as a special merit award in recognition of Mount Nod
Highway JFC's contribution.
Beaconsfield United FC
£17,500 towards the cost of refitting the changing facilities
destroyed in a fire, subject to competitive tendering and an
indication by the Club of how the remaining balance was to be
funded.
Clapton FC
£25,000 towards the two phases of approved work to the
existing stand and boundary fencing required to re-open the
old Spotted Dog ground, subject to competitive tendering.
Association of Football Statisticians
£500 to match the Football Association's contribution towards
the cost of a new computer and printer for the Association.

Scottish Women's Football Association
£10,800 to the Scottish Football Association towards the cost
of the SWFA's two coaching education courses for women to be
run in April and August 1993.
                            - 4 -
Minutes of the LALC 13th and 14th meetings
11.      Safety grant regime
  (1)    Stewards' jackets and two-way radios
In noting the new safety grant regime taking effect from 1
October placing the emphasis on capital items rather than
revenue,  it was agreed that stewards' jackets and two-way
radios should continue to be eligible for grant aid, but that
any grant awarded should count against clubs' stewarding
budget.

  (2)    CCTV
It was further agreed that CCTV should in future be treated
as a safety item under the safety grant regime. Grant aid
would therefore be available at a rate of 4 0% for FA Premier
League clubs (see paragraph 14) and 75% for Football League
clubs up to a ceiling of £25,000 for the renewal of equipment
at intervals no more frequent than three yearly.


12.     Premier League:
  (1)    Access to RPBD funds
It was agreed that a letter should be sent to the FA Premier
League clubs emphasising the substantial tax advantages which
would arise from the concession made in the Finance Act 1990
if a proportion of their income were to be passed to the
Trust to be recycled in grant aid.
13.   Sir Bert undertook to raise the issue of the Premier
League's financial contribution to the Trust at their regular
monthly meetings with the FA.

  (2) Access to STB funds
14.   The increasing pressure on STB funds - some individual
club applications were     approaching the    £1M mark - was
discussed in the context of the discussions with the FA
Premier League about the possibility of their making funds
available to the Trust      to be used to    grant aid ground
redevelopment and safety work. The Chairman said that there
was an argument for a marked reduction in, or even the
withdrawal of, safety grant support for Premier League clubs
and suggested that areduction to       40%support would be
appropriate.   Mr   Kelly argued that 50%would be a    fairer
figure.   It was agreed that the appropriate level of grant
aid under the safety regime for FA Premier League clubs
should be 40%. This new percentage ceiling would apply to
all applications made after 1 October. Miss Stewart said
that while a matter for the Trust the Government well
understood the policy change which was regarded as consistent
with the approach being taken to access to RPBD funds.
15.   Sir Bert Millichip asked what consideration had been
given   to    the appointment of     a   FA   Premier   League
representative on the Trust. The Chairman explained that to
make a new appointment of this sort would require the
dissolution of the present Trust.   It was however open to the
existing nominating bodies and in this context the FA was the
relevant body, which may wish to utilise one of their
nominations to provide for the representation of the Premier
League.    Mr Lee added that, at the meeting between the Trust
and the Chairman and Chief Executive of the FA Premier
League, the Trust had offered to set up a dedicated committee
to which the Premier League could appoint representatives.
It had been suggested that Sir John Quinton and Mr Parry
might wish to serve on any such committee.
Safety
16.      Stadium control boxes
It was agreed that there would be advantage in referring to
police control boxes as stadium control boxes, which more
accurately reflected their purpose,     particularly in the
context of the move towards the greater use of effective
stewarding   at football grounds. Some concern was  expressed
at the escalating cost of police requirements for   equipment
and furnishing of stadium control boxes.

Administration
17.   From October 1 all work concerning the grant schemes
administered by the Licensing Authority Liaison Committee
major project, safety and improvements - would be transferred
from Lytham to Walkden House with Ms O'Brien and Miss Gould
becoming Secretary and Administrative Assistant dealing with
correspondence and enquiries from this date.
18.   Mr Wharton recorded the outstanding service that Miss
Firth and the      Football League had provided for both LALC and
FGIT over thepast fifteen years and it was agreed that the
Trust would wish to mark her contribution with a farewell
gift.
Proposed Scottish Super League

19. It was agreed that the Trust was unable to deal with any
proposed Super League in advance of it being properly
constituted and recognised by the SFA and SFL.


                                 - 6 -
Major projects
20. The closing date for Major Project applications for work
intended for next close season of 18 January 1993, was noted.
21. The following recommendations were agreed:
Millwall
  (1)   Major project application
Given   the  Trust's commitment totalling almost       E2.75M
(including the FA contribution), the Club's request for an
additional £1M by way of grant or unsecured loan was
considered,  but in the absence of any firm commitment to the
extension of the life of the RPBD concession, it could not be
agreed at this time.
  (2)   Community Sports Stand
Taking account of (1) it was agreed that no offer of    grant
aid could be made towards the project.

Middlesbrough
75% of approved expenditure up to a maximum of £8,716 gross
(£6,537 net) towards additional seating in the East Terrace.

Port Vale
75% of approved expenditure up to a maximum of £368,377 gross
(£202,608 net) towards cover to the Hamil Road End Terrace
and the reconstruction at Vale Park of the        Main Stand
purchased from Chester City.
Stoke City
75% of approved expenditure up to a maximum of £210,000 gross
(£157,500 net) towards replacement seating in the Butler
Street Stand, within the Trust ceiling of £70 per seat.

Chester City
The Chairman reported on his visit to Chester City and the
impressive development of the Deva Stadium.       The original
grant offer of £500,000 should be allowed against the overall
reduced cost of E2.9M.     It would be made clear to the Club
that any scheduled work deferred would be       ineligible for
grant aid at a later date.

Hartlepool United
  (1)   East Stand
The offer of £225,000 for the East Stand development to be
withdrawn, following the abandonment of the project, taking
account of the £4,877 already paid to the Club.
  (2)    Rink End Stand
The grant of 75% of approved expenditure up to a maximum of
£21,600 gross (£16,200 net) towards the installation of 760
seats in the Rink End Stand, to be discounted by the 95 seats
set aside for directors and sponsors.
Sheffield Wednesday
60% of approved expenditure up to a maximum of £138,505 gross
(83,103 net) towards replacing existing wooden seating in the
South Stand.

Torquay United
An additional £30,000,    10% of the grant award,     towards
professional fees for the new stand at the Ellacombe End.

Huddersfield Town
Given the excellent working relationship between the Club,
Huddersfield Rugby Club and Kirklees Metropolitan Borough
Council,  it was agreed following lengthy discussion, that a
seating capacity of 20,000 could be considered eligible for
grant aid. Mr Lee was invited to set up a meeting with the
Foundation for Sport and the Arts to discuss common criteria
for a joint recommendation on grant aid and would report back
to the Trust. Account would be taken of the type of project
and the Trust's wish to be seen to support it, along with the
likelihood that the final decision would be seen as a
benchmark by other applicants.      It was agreed that the
Trust's Policy Committee would need to address the issue of
raising the major project ceiling for those Second and Third
Division clubs whose average attendance was above 5,000, but
that this could not be       considered in advance of the
Government's   decision   on the    extension of the     RPBD
concession.

Safety Applications
22.     The following recommendations were agreed:

Arsenal and Queens Park Rangers
In the light of present pressures on Trust funds the
applications would need to be closely scrutinised. All work
which was Taylor-related should be funded from RPBD funds and
the rest from STB funds.    If as a result a substantial sum
needed to be found from STB funds, then grant aid may need to
be spread out to meet cash flow requirements.
                              -   8   -
Aston Villa
The recent application for safety grant aid, previously
rejected under the major project heading, was not eligible
for grant aid unless a genuine safety element was involved.
FLA advice on excessive local authority demands
The FLA's offer of advice on the validity of any seemingly
unreasonable local authority demand was welcomed and the
Trust's role (if its intervention became necessary)     in
helping clubs withstand such pressures was underlined.

Portsmouth
The Club's request for grant aid towards an electronic
information board was rejected.      Such boards were not
eligible because they were capable of attracting commercial
sponsorship.
Hartlepool
No consideration could be given to the Club's outstanding
claim for some £19,600 until the pending court case had been
resolved.

Colchester United
It was confirmed that the application for safety work
required to regain entry to the Football League would be
eligible for grant aid.

Maidstone United
In view of the Club's recent demise and consequent withdrawal
from the Football League, the Trust would register a claim
for repayment of the amount of safety grant paid - £12,652.

Charlton Athletic
Given the substantial work still needed at the Valley, the
Club would be requested to discuss the position with the
Regional Representatives before further consideration could
be given to the additional application for increased safety
grant aid.
Major projects
23.   Decisions on the following applications were deferred:

Portsmouth
Consideration    would   be   given   to   the   level   of   funding
available for the Club's project up to the maximum of £2M,
subject to the possible refund of any grant made towards a
major project at Fratton Park.
Sheffield United
Given that only 30% of seats in the Bramall Lane Terrace
would be under cover the application would be referred back
to the Club for reconsideration.
Transport grants
24.   The      following   recommendations were agreed:
Walsall
(1) Extension of car parking facilities:   20% of approved
costs of £110,338 gross (£22,067 net) towards the extension
of car parking facilities.
(2) CCTV link between Bescot Station and the Stadium control
room:   this application was rejected on the grounds that it
would establish a precedent for a facility that was not based
at a football stadium.
Bradford City: traffic directional signs

Given the change in grant aid policy from 1 October, no grant
aid could be offered.
Dundee:     construction of a new car park.

When the Club's intentions and the shared use of the facility
with Dundee United was confirmed, a recommendation on grant
aid, if appropriate, could be made.
Charlton Athletic: crowd control at BR station
Network SouthEast and the Metropolitan Police should be asked
to provide costings for the proposed special arrangements.
Southend United:     proposed new car park
The Trust's Regional Representatives were invited to contact
the Club to arrange a discussion of the application.
25. Regional Representatives
(1)   The   resignation of    Arthur Sandford as    regional
representative for the Midlands region was noted.        The
meeting expressed its thanks to Mr Sandford for the service
he had given to the Trust. The Policy Committee would be
considering the appointment of his successor.
                              - 10 -
(2)   Attendance at Football League regional meetings
It was agreed that regional representatives     should   attend
Football League regional meetings.
Surveyors' Fees
26.   It was confirmed that visits by Corderoy's would in
future be limited to one per club. Trustees reserved the
right to charge for additional visits requested by clubs and
any payments would be deducted from grants paid.

FSADC: Future Funding
27. The future of the FSADC was discussed at length. The FA
had provided sufficient additional funds to enable the
Council to meet its running costs until October.  The FA was
considering its contribution in the longer term in the light
of the proposals concerning the setting up of a stadia
development unit, possibly in conjunction with Loughborough.
Mr McKeag confirmed that the Football League, in view of
their doubts about the value and cost effectiveness of the
role of the Council, would not, following the original grant
of £100,000, be making any further contributions to the
Council.

28.   The meeting considered that the Council had produced
valuable material in publications and guidelines and that it
was appropriate that Trust grant aid should be extended to
this activity.  In this context work paid for by the Trust on
facilities for people with disabilities and the proposed
study on safe terracing commissioned by the FLA, were noted.
Mr Lee explained that it was possible the completion of the
former study would require further funding since a great deal
more work than was anticipated was involved.   It was agreed
that the Chairman and the Chief Executive should deal with
any request from the Council for additional funds.
29.   The proposed work on safe terracing was of crucial
importance to the FLA, the FA and the Trust - Miss Stewart
echoed the importance of this work.   The FLA had agreed to
meet the cost of the project and it was agreed that the FA
and the Trust should ensure that sufficient funds were made
available to meet the running costs to ensure that the
Council could complete this task.
30.   It was agreed that further discussions should be held
with the FSADC with the objective of paring down their
present proposals and concentrating on what the Council could
provide for football. The nature and extent of the Trust's
future support for the Council would be determined in the
light of the outcome of these discussions.
Safety Officer Training
31.   Mr George said that ACPO would support Trust-funding of
safety officer training. Given that it was not possible to
make additional money available for this purpose,     it was
agreed that clubs not reaching the ceiling on stewarding
costs would be allowed to claim the shortfall towards the
cost of approved safety officer training.
Any other business
Extension of RPBD concession
32. The importance of securing confirmation of the extension
of the life of the reduction in the pool betting duty
concession was discussed.   The FSADC work on safe terracing
would be a key factor.   In agreeing this, Miss Stewart made
the point that the Trust's agreement with the Government
about the use of RPBD funds would need to be amended if grant
aid was to be made available for standing accommodation.  The
Trust was continuing to make efforts to secure contributions
from the FA Premier League and the Football League to be used
for ground redevelopment and safety work.

Date of next meeting
33.   The next meeting was confirmed for 10.30 am on       16
December at Cowley House, 9 Little College Street, SW1.


FT
20 October 1992




                               12
