       FOOTBALL TRUST 1990 L I CENSING AUTHORITY LIAISON COMMITTEE


MINUTES OF THE FIRST MEET I N G HELD ON TUESDAY, 15TH MAY 1990 AT
W A L K D E N HOUSE, LONDON, C OMMENCING AT 11.00 A.M.



Present:              T. Wharton,    O.B.E.    -      in the Chair

                      The R t . Hon. Lord Aberdare,        K.B.G.,    G.C.St.J.
                      R.O. Faulkner

                      W.H. Carter
                      Y. Craig
                      J.D. Dent .■
                      G. Endicott
                      T. Finney, O . B . E . , J.P.
                      W . Fox
                      C. Foster
                      M. George
                      R.H.G. Kelly, F.C.I.S.
                      P. Lee
                      F.A. Millichip
                      Sir John Smith, C.B.E.,          J.P.,   D.L.
                      H.B. Sturgeon
                      G. Taylor
                      S.W. Taylor
                      C. Thwaite

                      Miss G. Firth
                      Mrs. P. Finney




90/1     WELCOME

           The Chairman w e l c o m e d members to the first meeting of the
L i c ensi ng A u t h o r i t y Liaison Committee.

         All members were introduced.


90/2     APOLOGY FOR ABSENCE

       An apology for absence was received from Mr. J. Steedman
(Scottish Football League) and Mr. Y. Craig attended in his stead.


90/3     MR.   T.M.   LAUCHLAN

          The Chairman reported the death of Mr. T.M. Lauchlan and the
meet i n g wished their condolences to be passed to the family.  A
floral tribute was to be sent b y The Football Trust.




                                       - 1 -
90/4   REM IT OF THE L I C E N S I N G A U T H O R I T Y L I A I S O N C O M M I T T E E

       The Chairman confirmed that the remit of the Committee was
to make recommendations to The Football Trust 1990 regarding
applications for grant aid under the two groups of funding
currently available and further funds if they became available in
due course.


90/5   SAFETY

       The following policy decisions made by The Football Trust
1990 at a meeting on 27th April were noted:-

a)     The maximum gross ceiling allowable for safety grant aid was
       raised to £1.25 million per club. These grants would
       continue to be grant aided at 75% of approved costs. Offers
       of grant aid would be withdrawn if the work was not
       completed within two years of the date of offer.

b)     Floodlights - the ceiling was raised to 75% of £75,000
        (included in the safety ceiling) on a five year roll over
        basis,

c)     Seating would be grant aided as safety at 75% up to a
        maximum of £35 per seat. This is outwith the safety ceiling
        as stated in (a) above.

       Mr. Fox asked that the ceiling figure be discussed under
       a later agenda item 16 and this was agreed.

       Subject to the approval of The Football Trust 1990 it was
       agreed that, with the exception of (c)  above, these grants
       would be paid out of the income received from Spotting the
       Ball.

       Seating applications could be funded from the income derived
       from,the reduction in the Pool Betting Duty. Safety
       including floodlights would be funded from the Spotting
       the Ball donations.


90/6   IMPROVEMENTS

       The following policy decision made by The Football Trust
1990 at a meeting on 27th April was noted:-

       That the following improvement categories would continue to
be grant aided at 70% of approved costs;  (a) toilet facilities;
(b) facilities for the disabled, and (c) family enclosures. These
will be funded from the Spotting the Ball donations.


90/7   AREA REPRESENTATIVES

       It was noted that the following area representatives had
been allocated:



                                             -   2   -




                                                         ,.
            England South      R.O. Faulkner & S.W. Taylor
            Midlands           J.C. Thwaite & A. Sandford
            England North      J.D. Dent & T. Finney
            Scotland           T. Wharton & H.B. Sturgeon


        A list of clubs in each area was received and noted.  This
 would change shortly due to Darlington re-entering the Football
 League.

        The Chairman had produced a draft standard form of report
 which area representatives would be asked to complete and submit to
 the Secretary after visiting a club.  The Chairman felt that this
 Report Form was essential to provide a record of such meetings.
 The Report Form would be confidential to the Committee and would be
 copied to relevant area representatives.

        This draft Report Form was agreed by the meeting.    Copies
 would be circulated to members as quickly as possible.

        Members were informed to expect that clubs would seek
 meetings to ask for guidance as to acceptable areas of work.  It
 would be desirable for both area representatives to be present at
 the meeting if at all possible.  It was stressed that area
 representatives can only offer advice to clubs and that all
 applications must be submitted via the Secretariat.  Area
 representatives cannot make commitments for grant aid.  All
 applications would be considered by the Committee in accordance
 with agreed procedures.

         It was agreed that under no circumstances will the Committee
• or individual members discuss possible grant aid available to
  parties who were attempting to take over a club.  The Committee
  would deal with club officials only.

         The Chairman indicated that clubs may need to be reminded
. that the Football Trust was a discretionary Trust.

        It was stressed that the Football Trust 1990 and,
 consequently, this Committee, did not set safety standards.  These
 are to be laid down by the local authority or the F.L.A., when set
 up.  The Football Trust 1990 considers proposals and assesses their
 eligibility for grant aid.

        It was agreed that it could be necessary to look at the
 question of the Football Trust 1990 being able to reclaim grants
 made if the assets were sold for financial gain.  This would be a
 matter for the full Trust to decide.


 90/8   GRANT PROCEDURES

        The meeting approved in principle the preparation of a new
 Book along the lines of F.G.I.T.’s "Blue Booklet" to lay down, in
 general terms, the criteria which would be adopted for grant aid.
 The Chairman was authorised the pursue this as quickly as possible
 with the Secretary, Professional Advisers and Mr. R. Faulkner.



                                 - 3 -
       It was agreed that proposal and claim forms be prepared and
be included in the new Book.  The Chairman indicated that certain
clubs felt that the Club Secretary should be allowed to sign forms
in place of a director.  This question was left until after advice
from professional advisers later on the agenda.

       The Chairman reported on the policy of F.G.I.T. with regard
to grant aid offered to Northern Ireland clubs.  F.G.I.T. had taken
the view that the issue was so complex it was best administered by
the Irish Football League.  Grants had been made on an annual or
biannual basis to the Irish Football League, who reported to
F.G.I.T. proposals on the way the grant should be distributed. The
Irish Football League had, in fact, used the services of a
Government Surveyor to assess schemes.  At present a grant of
£150,000 was due to be paid to the Irish Football League in October
1990, being the final payment of a £300,000 grant made over two
years.

       It was pointed out that Linfield F.C. would not be eligible
for grant aid under this heading as Windsor Park would be dealt
with separately from the reduction in Pool Betting Duty as a
National Stadium.  Any grants to the other Irish Football League
clubs would come from the Spotting the Ball income.

       It was agreed to RECOMMEND to the Football Trust 1990 that
this practice be continued and claims from individual Irish clubs
not be considered.


90/9   MESSRS. GEORGE CORDEROY & CO.     -   NOMINATED SURVEYORS

       The Chairman reported that Messrs. George Corderoy & Co. had
been appointed nominated Surveyors at a meeting of the Football
Trust held on 27th April 1990.

       Mr. W.H. Carter thanked the Football Trust for their
continued confidence in Messrs. George Corderoy & Co.  He indicated
that the existing brief with F.G.I.T. needed minor revisions for
this Committee and he would report in detail to the next meeting.
He stated that Corderoys would continue with the present daily rate
charged to the Football Trust 1979 and F.G.I.T. until the end of
this year.  Corderoys would wish to review this figure at the end
of this year.

       Mr. Carter did   request that Corderoy & Co. change the way
the Trust was charged   for his personal time involved with Trust
work.  It is proposed   that the Trust be charged on an hourly basis
at the going rate for   Mr. Carter's time.

       Mr. Carter would wish to discuss procedures with Colin
Foster in order that any recommendations could be discussed with
the Chairman for inclusion in the new "Blue Booklet".

       It was agreed to RECOMMEND to the Football Trust 1990
acceptance of Mr. Carter's proposal that his personal time can be
charged separately and that the daily charges can be reviewed at
the end of the year.  Mr. Carter would let the Chairman have a
revised brief within the next few d a y s .


                                 - 4 -
90/10   MESSRS.   RUSHTONS    -   REPORTING ACCOUNTANTS

       The Chairman reported that Messrs. Rushtons had been
appointed Reporting Accountants at a m e e t i n g of the F o o t b a l l Trust
held on 2 7th April 1990.

       Mr. C. Foster stressed that Rushtons were Reporting
Accountants, not auditors, nor tax advisers.

          He ha d met with the Football Trust     1990 auditors and a good
work i n g relationship had been founded.

          Mr. Foster indicated that, as R e p orting Accountant, he had a
role w h i c h needed to be defined b y the Trust in a letter of
engagement.        It was also nec e s s a r y to define their relationship
wi t h re g a r d to other professional parties, i.e. clubs' auditors.
As Cha r t e r e d Accountants, Messrs. Rushtons could not m e r e l y wal k
into a club and demand that they be allowed to inspect a club's
accounts.        Clubs, however, needed to be aware that Rushtons would
be r e q uired to look into c l u b s ' finances on behalf of the Trust in
respect of applications.

           Mr. G. Endicott stressed that it was essential that Rushtons
be p r o v i d e d with all relevant financial information in order to
co m p l y wit h the agreement made wit h Government.

          Mr. Faulkner indicated that the terms of the Football Trust
1990 w ere quite clear in that the Trust had absolute discretion
w i t h regard to grants.     If clubs did not provide all information,
they w o u l d jeopardise p o s s i b l e grant aid.

        Mr. Foster felt it essential that he be allowed to establish
a good w o r k i n g relationship w ith clubs' advisers. The Chairman
stressed that under no circumstances could standards be reduced.
Member s felt that most clubs w ould be prepa r e d to provide all
relevant information.

           It was agreed that a d eclaration should be signed by the
C h a ir man and Secretary of each club to the effect that they would
provid e all information requested by the Trust.      This w o u l d be
inclu ded w i t h each individual application.

       It was agreed that Rushtons should continue to provide
budget forecasts of funds and commitments.        He w o u l d liaise wit h
Mr. Faulkner, Mr. Carter and the Sec r e t a r y to obtain n e cessary
information.

           The meet i n g then discussed the procedures in respect of the
submission of an Auditor's C ertificate b y the club.             It was agreed
that the new "Blue Booklet"         will  contain a w a r n i n g that action
w o u l d be taken against clubs who a t tempted to defraud the Trust.

       Mr. Carter poin t e d out that it was inevitable that the
increased controls on grants w ould lead to a slowing down of the
process.  It was generally accepted that clubs would have to accept
this point.  Corderoys were asked to m i n imise time taken to respond
to payment applications.
        It was agreed that Mr. Foster submit a detailed brief to the
 Chairman, who would consult with Lord Aberdare and Mr. Faulkner.


 90/11   POLICE CHARGES

      Mr. Faulkner outlined the history of funds being allocated
towards the cost of police charges.  The current contribution was
£1.6 million paid at 35%, with a maximum ceiling of £76,000 imposed
on the First Division.  A sum of £320,000 was set aside for
Scottish clubs, which had covered 35% being paid to these clubs.

       There was now a feeling that this contribution should be
reviewed in the light of (a) Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
- was the contribution to the police charges an effective means of
helping clubs? - and, (b) the feeling that the existing fund had
merely contributed to increased costs.

        The Chairman pointed out the police charges were now to be
 paid out of the 75% Spotting the Ball income allocated to this
 Committee.  Payments were made out of taxed income, to the fullest
possible extent. The Chairman felt that clubs appreciated the
distribution and many had already made budget forecasts on the
assumption that they would receive this money next season.

       Mr. Fox reported that negotiations were currently taking
place with ACPO concerning the different level of charges.  Police
charges were a great strain on clubs' resources and it would be a
disappointment to clubs if this was ceased.  He felt that the
contribution should not cease until a pricing policy had been
agreed with ACPO.

          Mr. Craig reported that the smaller Scottish clubs in
particular were grateful for the contribution and if it had to
cease it should be phased out over a period.

       Sir John Smith expressed the view that the contribution was
never intended to carry on ad infinitum and that the emphasis had
changed dramatically since Hillsborough.  Safety was now of
paramount importance.

       Mr. George reported that ACPO were trying to expedite the
question of a common pricing policy.

       It was agreed to RECOMMEND to the Football Trust that the
contribution be phased out as follows

       An allocation of £1.6 million for Season.1990/91; £1.3
million for Season 1991/92 and £1 million for Season 1992/93.   The
35% be maintained with a ceiling for the First Division of £80,000
for Season 1990/91; £70,000 for Season 1991/92 and  £60,000 for
Season 1992/93.  One fifth of the total to be set aside for
Scottish clubs.

       This recommendation to be subject to review   pending the
outcome of ongoing deliberations with ACPO.




                                -   6 -
90/12    C.C.T.V.

         The Chairman reported that Mrs. P. Finney had been invited
and had agreed to continue to administer the allocation of funds
for C C T V .

          The meeting received and noted a report prepared by
Mrs.    Finney on the CCTV funds.

       Mr. George reported on the current procedures adopted by the
Working Group on CCTV.

       A query was raised regarding maintenance agreements and it
was agreed that it be stressed to clubs that maintenance agreements
should be carried out.

       Mr. George indicated a possible likely budget of £2 million
would be needed over 18 to 24 months.

       It was agreed to RECOMMEND to the Football Trust 1990 that
an allocation of £2 million over a two year period be made from the
Spotting the Ball income for CCTV.


90/13     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT

       The Chairman reported that he understood that the F.L.A. was
expected to be set up in a month's time and a new Green Guide
published in August.  Two areas contained in Lord Justice Taylor's
Report for which clubs were now requesting grant aid were
computerised turnstiles and fencing.

       It was agreed that computerised turnstiles would be grant
aided from the income accrued from the reduction in Pool Betting
Duty.

       A discussion took place on the question of grant aid for the
taking down of fencing and whether this should be grant aided.
Other clubs now faced the problem of,having chosen to take  fencing
down, being instructed to put it back in place.

       Mr. Carter reported that clubs failed to understand that an
instruction from their Local Authority, police or fire authorities
was not the same as the club indicating that they would like to
undertake certain works and the Local   Authority agreeing it was a
good thing.  Clubs have to be reminded that the work had to be a
specific instruction in writing.  It was agreed to clarify this
area in the new "Blue Booklet".

       It was agreed to RECOMMEND to the Football Trust 1990 that
grant aid be offered for the taking down of fences if it was a
specific instruction from the Local Authority.  However, grant aid
would not be offered on fences which were put back after having
been taken down arbitrarily by the club.

       Mr. Lee pointed out that, in discussions with Government,
the primary purpose of the income from the reduction in Pool
Betting Duty was for major projects which the Chancellor could


                                  -   7   -
point to and say where the money had been spent.  To this end it
had not been envisaged that this income be used to pay for the
other safety recommendations made by Lord Justice Taylor.  These
would be grant aided out of the income from Spotting the Ball.

       Mr. Fox pointed out that time was of the essence if clubs
were to put work in hand for the coming close season.  Decisions
had to be taken by this Committee to enable clubs to start work.
The Chairman accepted this point, which was one reason why F.G.I.T.
had remained in existence, to establish that clubs still had an
organisation to which to submit applications this close season.
This would ensure a smooth hand over between the two bodies-.


90/14   MAJOR PROJECTS/NEW STADIA

       The meeting discussed the principles of grant aid for major
improvement developments and the relocation of clubs to new stadia.

       It was agreed that a club's resources would be taken into
account when considering such projects.  Mr. Foster's
investigations into a club's finances would be crucial.

       If a club was relocating it would be essential that they
prove what other sources of income had been explored and were
available.  The Football Trust would merely be a contributor and
not the major funder of such projects.

       It was agreed that an application of this nature should be
considered on its merits in relation to the funds available and the
resources of the club involved.


90/15   FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST

       The Chairman reported that the F.G.I.T. Trustees had agreed
in principle to accept the proposed draft resolution put to them
for the winding up of F.G.I.T.  However, they were unable to put a
date on the winding up in order to make sure that clubs could still
submit claims during the current close season.  The Trustees who
served on this Committee were empowered to set a date following
this first meeting.  Final Accounts would then be drawn up.  It was
estimated that F.G.I.T. would have an unallocated budget of
£| million to £1 million.  This amount was, however, being drawn
upon all the time during the hand over period.

        Mr. Foster would incorporate the amount into his budget
forecas t .


90/16   FUNDING

       The Chairman reported that no funds were yet available from
the reduction in Pool Betting Duty.  However, it was envisaged that
this would produce between £18 and £19 million per annum.

       The flow of funds was dependent on a variation agreement
being drawn up between the Football League and the Pool Promoters
Association.  This had been done and was now only awaiting
signature by Vernons Pools.

       Mr. J. Dent reported on a meeting he had attended with the
All Party Committee on Football at which they had expressed
surprise that the supply of funds had not started and that the
money would not be back-dated.  They would be asking relevant
questions in the House.

       Mr. Lee expressed the view that it was unlikely that
Government would back-date the funds.

       It was confirmed, therefore, that the only funds available
at the present time were the income from the Spotting the Ball,
which would amount to approximately £7.5 million per annum.  Out of
this income the following had already been allocated:-

(a)     £1.6 million for police charges for 1990/91; and

(b)     50% of anticipated CCTV costs - £2 million over two years.

        Mr. R.H.G. Kelly and Mr. Fox both indicated that the
Football League and the Football Association were looking into the
possibility of further funding being made available through their
r esources.

       It was agreed that the principle be established that, if
funding from other sources became available, this would be dealt
with in accordance with the wishes of the benefactor.

       Mr. Foster outlined the tax implications if such funding was
made available.

       It was noted that the Scottish Football League were not
anticipating making any funding available from its own resources.


90/17   SEATING

       A lengthy debate took place on applications received under
F.G.I.T.'s 1990 initiative in respect of the installation of
additional seating.

       Twenty-five applications had been received, amounting to
approximately £3.6 million gross.  It was essential that these
clubs be given some indication as to the extent of grant aid
available in order that work could commence this close season.(attached)

       Mr. Fox felt that £35 per seat was not sufficient in view of
all the associated works to terracing.  The time factor was also
most important.

       Mr. Lee indicated that it was the Government's view that
seating was the most important recommendation contained in Lord
Justice Taylor's Report.  It was essential that clubs be encouraged
to provide a good quality seat and associated works.
       After much discussion it was agreed to RECOMMEND that grant
aid be offered at 75% of approved costs up to a maximum of £70 per
seat.  Offers would, of course, relate to average seated
attendances.  The cost of £70 would cover all related works for the
installation of seating.

       It was agreed to RECOMMEND that grant aid be offered only on
seats under cover at this stage.


90/18   INSURANCE

       It was agreed to RECOMMEND that insurance be taken out to
cover all members and the Secretary in respect of (a) Personal
Accident, and (b) Professional Indemnity.


90/19   EXPENSES

       Expense forms were circulated to all members.  It was
confirmed that the Secretary receive the same expenses whilst on
Committee business.  These forms are to be submitted to
Mrs. P. Finney at Walkden House for payment.


90/20   ANY OTHER BUSINESS


(a )    F.F.E.   & V.T.S.   Community Programme

        Mr. Kelly raised the possibility of the Committee
        contributing towards the costs of the F.F.E. & V.T.S.
        Community Programme.  The Football Trust 1990 had agreed in
        principle to a grant of £2 million subject to consideration
        of this grant being split 75/25 between the Chairman's
        Working Party and the Licensing Authority Liaison Committee.

        As this scheme benefited the professional game as well as
        the grass roots, it was agreed to RECOMMEND to split the
        grants 75/25 between the two Committees.


(b)     It was agreed that the Secretary and Chairman organise
        stationery for the Committee.


(c)     Mr. J.D. Dent requested permission to speak with the
        Chairman concerning the management fee paid to the Football
        League.  This was agreed and the Chairman would consult with
        Lord Aberdare and Mr. Faulkner on the matter.


90/21   NEXT MEETING

       It was agreed that the next meeting be held on Monday,
16th July 1990 at Walkden House, London, to commence at 11.00 a.m.




                                   -   10   -
       There being no further business,                    the Chairman declared the
meeting closed at 2.35 p.m.




                      Chairma             ^   ■ 'O '   ^    v


                                                                ii

                          Date




                                 -   11       -
SEATING APPLICATIONS TO DATE


CLUB               NUMBER OF SEATS   AMOUNT                 REMARKS



EVERTON                 3.000        200,000           Initial report prepared
   I




HEARTS                    900          12,000


HIBERNIAN               5,172        254,113


PORT VALE               4,871        280,000

PORTSMOUTH              9.000        180,000

•BftlSqPOL ROVERS— — i— ^ r          - -gprotro-
                                                   -                  - - a -V o




PLYMOUTH                3,860        164.000           Initial report prepared


DUNFERMLINE             1,665          24,000


DERBY COUNTY            3,284        118,748


CRYSTAL PALACE          4,968        560.000


BLACKBURN ROVERS        4,200        380.000

ROCHDALE                                               Complete new stand - no
                                                       plans to date

LEEDS                     7          300,000           Further investigation required


MIDDLESBROUGH'          3,082          51,043          Initial report prepared


ST. MIRREN                                             No adequate details

RANGERS                 5,500        192.500           Further investigation required


ASTON VILLA             3,000        177.500


SOUTHAMPTON             2,200          81,350

ABERDEEN                3,800          77.000          Initial report prepared


WEST HAM                  ?            28.000          Further investigation required
CLUB            NUMBER OF SEATS    AMOUNT               REMARKS



HULL CITY            1,650         492,000    Further investigation required

IPSWICH TOWN         2,000          87,650          M             ft            I!




MOTHERWELL           1,100          16,060    Initial report prepared

DUNDEE UNITED       4,800         1,600,000   F u r t h e r i n v e stigation
                                              r e q uired


SWINDON TOWN        2,000           24,000    F u r t h e r i n v e stigation
                                              required




                                              George Corderoy & Co.

                                              May 1990
