                  THE FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST (1979)


MINUTES OF A MEETING OF TRUSTEES HELD ON WEDNESDAY 11TH JANUARY,! 1984 AT 16 S T .
MARTINS-LE-GRAND, LONDON COMMENCING AT 10.30A.M.




     Present:      C.H. Barclay, F.C.A. (in the Chair)
                   W.B. Davidson
                   B.C. Dodds
                 • T. Finney, O.B.E., J.P.
                   H.B. Sturgeon, F.R.I.C.S.
                   S.W. Taylor
                   T. Wharton
                   Miss G. Firth                          j 1
                   W.H. Carter (Messrs. George Corderoy     Co.)
                   J . Maud




436. APOLOGIES

     Apologies for absence were received from Mr. P.D. Smithson and Mr.
C. Lloyd. Mr. Lloyd was in hospital and it was reported that flowers had
been sent on behalf of the Trustees.
                                                                )

437. MINUTES

     The Minutes of the last meeting held on 2nd November, 1983 were taken
as read and signed by the Chairman as a correct record.

438. ADMINISTRATION

     The Trustees discussed at considerable length the question of a central
administration and the appointment of an Executive/Consultant.

     It was decided that the Football League be requested if they would
consent for Miss Firth to be 'seconded* to work in London for F.G.I.T.
It was felt that 'secondment* would be in the best interests of the Trust
and Miss Firth in that she would still be employed by the Football League
should the Trust cease operation for any reason whatsoever.  It was agreed that
Mr. Kelly be formally requested to resign as Secretary to the Trust and Miss
Firth be appointed in his place. The Chairman was given authority to settle
the Terms of Reference for Miss Firth's secondment.

     Mr. Davidson reported upon discussions with Mr. Stephen Barclay concerning
office and living accommodation in London. A flat was available at 43 ;
Upper Berkeley Street, London W.l. at a rent of £2,600 per quarter which
included rates and service charge.  It was agreed that the flat should be
occupied in the name of Mr. Clifford Barclay with the Trust guaranteeing payment.
Mr. Davidson was authorised to draw up a letter of acceptance of the terms and
finalise the matter with Mr. S. Barclay.  It was decided, however, that the
Trust could not enter into an agreement for more than a twelve month period
with the possibility for renewal quarterly.
Continued/2.


438. ADMINISTRATION (Continued)


     The Chairman reported upon discussions with Mr. J. Maud concerning the
position of Executive/Consultant and after the Trustees had had an opportunity
of raising any queries they wished it was agreed that Mr. Maud be appointed
Executive.

     The Trust would pay Mr. Maud a salary of £5,000 per annum and would
purchase his car from him. The Trust would be responsible for running costs
and wear and tear of the car due to working for the Trust and would pay all
expenses incurred whilst undertaking work for the Trust. The Trustees would
also consider replacing Mr. Maud's car after September 1984, and on closing
the engagement would have an option to purchase the car on terms agreed.

     Mr. Maud was admitted to the meeting at this point and informed of the
Trustees' decision. It was stressed to Mr. Maud that, like that of the
Trustees themselves, his position was of a tenuous nature and could be terminated
at short notice. It was agreed that both Mr. Maud and Miss Firth would be
responsible to the Chairman.

     It was agreed that Mr. Maud should visit as many clubs as possible in
the near future.

     The Chairman reported that he had assured the P.P.A. that administration
costs would be kept to a minimum and would not rise substantially, if at all,
as a result of the new administration.

439. PUBLIC RELATIONS

     The Trustees had considered a proposal put forward by Mr. Richard Faulkner
on possible ways of projecting the Trust more widely to the football community
and all those involved in it. All Trustees agreed that this was necessary,
but agreed to defer the question until such time as the new Ad Hoc policy was
well under way and the improvements policy had been decided upon and working.

     It was noted that Mr. Faulkner had advised the Chairman that he could
not undertake the suggested appointment.

440. POLICY

     The Chairman reported upon a meeting with Mr. Cyril Morton of Littlewoods.
Mr. Morton had made it clear that the P.P.A. were against the delegation of the
management of the investment of the Trust funds to a third party. In the
light of this and the opinion received from the Trust's solicitors stating
that the Trust Deed did not provide for delegation it was decided not to proceed
any further with the discussions with Whittingdales.

     The Chairman reported that he had been advised by Mr. Colin Foster,
the Auditor,that the F.G.I.T. funds for 1983 had not been fully invested
and as the Trustees believed they had. It was understood that all funds
were automatically transferred to Deposit Account but this had not been done.
The result was that it was estimated that approximately £80,000 had been lost
in interest. It was agreed that Mr. Davidson and Mr. Maud should take the matter
up with the National Westminster Bank and report back. It was suggested that
the Bank might consider making an ex-gratia payment in lieu of the interest.
Continued/3.


440. POLICY (Continued)

     It was agreed that a full financial statement should be placed on the Agenda
at future meetings and that the auditors should be called in six monthly
and not yearly.

     The Chairman also reported that the P.P.A. were not prepared to change
their views on the question of loans.

     With regard to the implementation of the Ad Hoc policy it was agreed
that Mr. Maud and Mr. Carter should meet to discuss the matter and put forward
a paper on proposed procedures to be adopted which would be to the satisfaction
of everyone particularly concerning the role of the regional Trustees.
It was decided that in cases of emergency the regional Trustees would continue
to use their discretion.

     The Chairman reported that Mr. Morton had appreciated the Trustees being
a lot more involved as a result of the new policy and it was agreed that the
situation should be kept under careful consideration.

441. IMPROVEMENTS

     An interim report from the TRRU was before the Trustees. However,
as this had only been received the day before it was agreed that the Trustees
should consider the report and forward any comments they wished to make to
the Chairman. The Chairman hoped to be able to visit the unit, together
with Mr. Maud, in the near future to discuss the project.

     The Trustees agreed the formal letter of contract suggested by the TRRU
with the following amendment


     Paragraph 4 - final payment - delete and insert the following

     "4.   £9,500 on the Trustees’ acceptance of the final report."


     The Chairman would sign the amended contract and forward two copies
to the TRRU for their signature.

     It was agreed that the conditions for grant, forwarded by the Sports
Council, should be considered at the next meeting in order to discuss the
possibility of their being used in some form when making improvements grants.

442. SPORTS GROUNDS CONSULTANTS

     It was reported that no further information had been received from the
West Midlands Police concerning the possible prosecution of clubs connected
with Sports Grounds Consultants. The Trustees agreed that they could only
wait for the Police to take action before making any decision.

     Mr. Carter reported that he had been unofficially informed that the
Police would be prosecuting Shrewsbury Town and Port Vale. Further doubts
had also been raised concerning Aston Villa and this was being investigated.

     Mr. Carter reported that the procedures for claims had been explained
to the satisfaction of Price Waterhouse and no problems had arisen.
Continued/4


442. SPOBTS GROUNDS CONSULTANTS (Continued)

     The Trustees agreed to pay an additional account of £580.11 to Price
Waterhouse in respect of the issuing of a revised report and a meeting
with Messrs. Corderoy & Co.

443. RETROSPECTIVE CLAIMS

     It was reported that all nine clubs had now received payment of the
monies due in respect of the difference in the percentages as agreed by the
Trustees.

     Letters of thanks had been received from the clubs.

444. FOOTBALL AND THE COMMUNITY

     The Chairman reported that he had been approached by the Minister for
Sport concerning a contribution from F.G.I.T. to a proposed new Community
project. This would involve Designated Clubs only and be administered
through local authorities. The Football Trust would also be asked to
contribute.

     However, there now appeared to be some confusion over the scheme and it
might not affect F.G.I.T. in any way. It was agreed to await developments.

445. SPORTS COUNCIL/OLDHAM ATHLETIC

     It was reported that the Sports Council had now received a very complex
proposal from Oldham Athletic for the repayment of their grant. Solicitors
were looking at the proposal but the club had informed the Sports Council
that, if the grant was repaid, the club would be forced to stop trading.
The Sports Council would keep the Trust informed of progress.

     The Chairman suggested that when more information was available, and if
the Trust could not get satisfaction from Oldham, it might be appropriate
to approach the Football League Management Committee and request that they
take action oh behalf of the Trust.

446. HAMPDEN PARK

     It was agreed that Lord Wheatley be invited to join the Trustees for lunch
when next in London. Mr. Wharton would contact Lord Wheatley to ascertain
some available dates,

447. NORTHERN IRELAND

     The Trustees had before them the proposals for grant aid from the Irish
Football League.

     It was agreed to defer this matter until the information   providedhad
been looked at in more detail. It appeared that the dates of the work
for which grant was requested had already been covered in the previous grant
to Northern Ireland.

     The matter would be discussed again when further information was
available.
Continued/5



448. FOOTBALL LEAGUE WORKING PARTY ON CLUB FINANCES

     The Chairman reported that he had met the League's Working Party on club
finances. They had made a request to meet a sub-committee of Trustees to
discuss the possible overlap of enquiries.

     It was agreed that a sub-committee would be formed of those London
Trustees available when a meeting was requested.

449. FULHAM F.C.

     The Chairman reported on a visit by himself and Messrs. Davidson
and Smithson to Fulham to discuss their recent claim in respect of work to
increase the capacity of their ground. The three Trustees felt that a
better understanding had been achieved with the club and a further letter
was no awaited from them setting out the details of their application.

450. WATFORD F.C.

     After considering correspondence with accountants in respect of £800
claimed by Watford for fencing work the Trustees decided that this claim
be rejected on the grounds that it was improvement work.

451. BRADFORD CITY F.C.

     The Trustees had before them a letter from the liquidator of Bradford
City confirming that the ex-gratia payment received from the insurance
company had been paid to the 1983 company for floodlighting work.

     It was agreed that the club were entitled to receive 60% of the
difference between the actual cost of the work and the payment of £20,000
received from the insurance company.

     It was decided that no increase in the percentage could be agreed.

452. CRYSTAL PALACE F.C.

     After carefully considering the correspondence in respect of Crystal
Palace's claim for work undertaken on their Whitehorse Lane Terrace the
Trustees decided to accept Corderoy's assessment of the notional value of
the work at £63,300. The club were, therefore, entitled to 60% of this figure.

     The Trustees then considered a letter from the club asking that any
monies due to the club be paid direct to the Inland Revenue. It was agreed
that the Trust could not become involved in any dispute between the club and
the Inland Revenue and that all monies should be paid direct to the club.
However, it was further agreed that Mr. Davidson should personally hand
the cheque to Mr. R. Noades, in order to offer any advice possible in the
banking of the cheque.
Continued/6

453. ST. MIRREN F.C.

     The Trustees considered further correspondence in respect of the possible
appeal by St. Mirren.   The Trustees were a little concerned over the terms
of reference given to solicitors by St. Mirren and were also concerned over
the time lapse of the procedures for appeal. It was decided, therefore,
that the best course of action at this time would be to meet with the club
and their solicitors to discuss the matter in detail. Mr. Wharton undertook
to arrange a meeting in Scotland at which the Chairman would attend.

454. LEICESTER CITY F.C.

     A claim from Leicester City in respect of work to erect a fence
outside their ground to control unruly spectators was considered.

     It was decided to reject this claim since the work, being outside the
ground, did not come within the Trust's terms of reference.

455. QUEENS PARK RANGERS F.C.

     A claim from Queens Park Rangers in respect of work to extend four
crush barriers in their West Terrace was rejected by the Trustees as this
was not a direct instruction from the Local Authority but was work initiated
by the club to increase their capacity.

     The club were to be informed that if they could provide definite
instructions from the local authority for this work the claim could be
considered again.

456. SAFETY

    The following safety grants made by regional Trustees were ratified:-

Designated Clubs                                               £.

  /^Barnsley                                                19,,791
                                                                838
   /'Birmingham City                                         2, 450
   ■/ Brighton & Hove Albion                                 9,,838
  /'Carlisle United                                         12,,600
  y Grimsby Town                                             1,,260
   /Huddersfield Town                                        9,,000
     JJotts. County                                          7,,902
  /^Portsmouth                                              24,,235
  '[/Queens Park Rangers                                     1,,136
   ^Sheffield Wednesday                                     66,,533
   <*■                                                       5,,460
       Sunderland                                               983
                                                             3,,293
  ^/ West Ham United                                         7,,351


     Airdrieonians                                          26,142
 /^Celtic                                                  106,534
  _/Dundee United                                             ■ 274
  S Heart of Midlothian                                      5,100
    .Kilmarnock                                                 330
   _,,St. Johnstone                                         30,000
  S St. Mirren                                                  840
Continued/7.


456. SAFETY (Continued)


Non-Designated Clubs                                       £

  /'Bury                                                 3,708
    /Oxford United                                       2,316
    ^Plymouth Argyle                                     6,516


     Raith Rovers                                        3,583



457. ACCOUNTS

     The following accounts were passed for payment


     C.H. Barclay                                       71.00
                                                        71.10
                                                       204.00
                                                        87.00
                                                        25.00
     W.B. Davidson                                      28,00
                                                        25.00
     C. Lloyd                                           88.45
     P. Dodds                                           27.80
     H.B. Sturgeon                                     273.00
     T. Finney                                         217.50
                                                       125,50
                                                        31,50
     T. Wharton                                         29.00
                                                       253.00
                                                       253.00
                                                        37.00
                                                        35.00
                                                        33.00
                                                        37.00
     S.W. Taylor                                        31.00
                                                        25.00
     P.D. Smithson                                      28.00

Football League Limited                               4,025.00
Blackpool Printers                                      110.40
Insurance Policy - S.W. Taylor & Co.                  1,000,00
Gravetye Manor Hotel                                    401.29
S.W. Taylor & Co.                                       100.00
Miles & Miles Limited                                    19.87
Continued/8



458.   AMY OTHER BUSINESS

     The Chairman reported that the Football League Management Committee
had approved the re-election of Messrs. Lloyd, Smithson and Sturgeon
for a further period of five years.

     The appointment of Mr. Dodds had been approved by the Management Committee
at an earlier meeting.

459. NEXT MEETING

     It was decided to defer the.question of the date of the next meeting
until such time as Mr. Maud had visited as many clubs as possible and met
Mr. Carter on procedures to be adopted.




                                             Chairman

                                                 Date
