                 Minutes of the fourth meeting of
                      The Football Trust 1990
                 held at Walkden House London NW1
                      on Tuesday 31 July 1990

Present:           The Rt Hon Lord Aberdare KBE GCStJ (Chairman)
                   R 0 Faulkner Esq (First Deputy Chairman)
                   T Wharton Esq OBE (Second Deputy Chairman)
                   G Endicott Esq
                   W Fox Esq
                   R H G Kelly Esq
                   Cllr H McDonald
                   F A Millichip Esq
                   Sir John Smith CBE
                   D McDonald Esq -Department of the Environment
                   P A Lee Esq
                   Mrs P Finney (Secretary)
1.         Apologies for absence
Apologies were received from      Assistant Chief         Constable
George, Mr Steedman, Mr Taylor and Mr Thwaite.
2.         Appointment of Secretary and Minister's new Observer
The Chairman and Trustees welcomed the appointment of Mr Lee
as Secretary.    The Chairman welcomed Mr McDonald, Under
Secretary   at the Department of the      Environment   with
responsibility for sport, to his first meeting as
the Minister for Sport's Observer.
3.         Minutes of the last meeting
Mr Fox requested that paragraph 4, Minute 7.9 be amended         to
read:
"First and Second Division Clubs of the Football League, the
Premier Division of the Scottish Football League and national
stadia were required by Lord Justice Taylor's report to be
all-seated by the start of the 1994-95 season and the lower
divisions by the start of the 1999-2000 season."
Subject to this agreed amendment the     minutes     of the
previous meeting were then accepted.
4.         Matters arising
4.1        Reporting Accountants - Messrs Rushtons
Mr Endicott observed that Rushton's detailed brief of 17 May
addressed to the Second Deputy Chairman was drafted in such a
way as to indicate that they were appointed by and reported
                                                            2
to   the Licensing Authority     Liaison   Committee.    This
misapprehension was resolved by their letter of 20 July,
stating that they were appointed by and would report to the
Football Trust 1990, through LALC whose recommendations would
pass to the Trust for decision.
5.      Finance
5.1     Projected Cash Flow and Summary of Allocations
The   First Deputy Chairman     explained that   difficulties
encountered in arriving at a common method of accounting for
the assets and commitments of the former Trusts and the
transfer to one common computerised system, based at Malvern,
had now been overcome.
Tabled at the meeting were Balance of Allocation schedules at
30 June 1990 and projected cash flow forecasts to 31 March
1993 for the Chairman's Committee and LALC, and a paper by
the First Deputy Chairman which had been sent to Rushtons:
they had confirmed the accuracy of the figures it contained.
                  «


The combined assets of The Football Trust 1990 and FGIT
derived from Spotting-the-Ball at 30 June 1990 totalled
£9,329,321, of which £5,750,321 was available for LALC and
£3,579,000 for the Chairmans Committee
Funds accumulated from the reduction in pool betting duty at
30 June stand at £3,945,200.
The cash flow predictions were not cast in stone but were
intended to give an indication thus far of the monies already
committed and available for allocation.
The apparent over-commitment of funds by the Chairman's
Committee was likely to be resolved within the allocation
periods by the time lapse of grants being taken up by the
recipients.
It was agreed that LALC should allocate a budget of £5.9M for
safety, £1.8M for improvements (toilets, facilities for
people with disabilities, family enclosures), and E5.75M for
seating.
5.2     Report and Financial Statements
The Report and Financial Statements to April 1990, prepared
by the Trust's auditors, Coopers & Lybrand Deloitte were
received.   The auditors' expression of satisfaction with the
accounting arrangements undertaken at the Data Processing
Centre was noted.
                                                           3
5.3     Retrospective payment of Pool Betting Duty reduction
Back   payment to the beginning of the financial year had now
been   made increasing the Trust's funds by some additional
£3M.
The Chairman, on behalf of Trustees, expressed gratitude   to
the Government for this decision.
6.      Minutes of the Chairman's Committee
6.1     Welcome to new member
The Chairman expressed members' pleasure at the nomination of
Mr Bill Dickie, First Vice-President of the Scottish Football
Association, who had attended his first meeting.
The following recommendations were agreed:
6.2     Chairman's Discretionary Fund
To complete arrangements with Scoreline to proceed with the
supply of full kits at a price of £199 each to future
applicants for the Chairman's Discretionary Fund on a three
months' trial, to commence immediately.
To allocate an additional £10,000 to the Fund.
6.3     National Association of Bovs' Clubs
To offer a grant of £1,700 to assist with the residential
Football Managers' Course to be run this summer at Keele
University.
6.4     Special Olympics
To offer a grant of       £5,000 for 1990-91 only.(Future
applications for any of the organisations dealing with
support for people with a disability would be channelled
through the British Paralympic Association.)
6.5     FA Advanced Licence Coaching Course
To offer a grant of £1,000, on a once-and-for- all basis, to
assist toward fees for four women coaches taking the FA
course   at Lilleshall.    The FA would give      sympathetic
consideration to funding the balance of the cost.
6.6     Department of Education, Northern Ireland
         Derry City Council - Synthetic Pitch
To offer grant aid of      £100,000 in 1993 when present
commitments had been honoured, provided funds were available
at that time.
                                                           4
6.7    British Sports Trust - CCPR Community Sports Leaders'
        Award Scheme
To offer a once-and-for all grant of £10,000    towards   the
CCPR Community Sports Leaders' Award Scheme.
6.8    The Football Association/English Schools' Football
        Association
To offer a grant of £25,000 to match the FA's contribution
towards a variety of ESFA projects, to be recommended by the
FA's Finance and Investment Sub-Committee.
6.9    Storm damage: allocation to match further FA
        contribution
To allocate a further sum of £12,000 to match the FA's
contribution towards uninsurable damage caused by the January
1990 storm damage at non-League grounds.
6.10   Floodlighting of grass pitches - Sports Council
        report and recommendations
Following acceptance of Mr Patton's report it was agreed to
continue the Trust's policy of not grant-aiding floodlighting
of main grass pitches (except in cases of increased match
play and creation of new teams).
6.11   The Trust's Second Community Award Scheme
Discussions would shortly be taking place on a combined award
scheme, intended to take account of the centenary of the
Scottish and Irish Football Leagues. The next meeting of the
Trust would consider an allocation of funds to meet the prize
winners' awards.
6.12   Prince's Trust
A further allocation of £10,000 be made to this scheme
following discussions between the First Deputy Chairman and
the Administration Director of the Pirince's Trust.       The
allocation would be reviewed further at the next meeting of
Trustees when the Trust was advised of the degree of
attribution intended in recognition of the Trust's continuing
funding.
6.13   Digest of Football Statistics 1989-90
To allocate a sum of £2,900 to cover computer consultancy
charges and £3,792 for printing, both costs incurred by
Leicester University in production of the latest Digest on
the Trust's behalf.
                                                              5
6.14    University of Oxford - Centre for Criminological
        Research
Cllr McDonald enquired whether the report produced by David
Robins (classed as a Home Office Document) was in the public
domain.   The distribution arrangements will be investigated
and reported to Trustees.
6.15   World Cup 1990
Trustees paid tribute to the contribution made by          many
organisations to the success of arrangements in Italy.
A memento in the form of an illuminated manuscript would be
commissioned   for presentation to 20 people nominated by Mr
Endicott, the FA, the SFA and others involved in the World
Cup organisation, to be presented at the first suitable
occasion (possibly Easter 1991).
7.     Minutes of LALC
7.1    Safety, Seating   and Major Development Policy
The   Second Deputy Chairman    reported that     substantial
applications  for seating would    be funded from the funds
produced by the reduction of pool betting duty and that each
substantial application would require a financial report by
Rushtons.
Rushtons sought the Trust's approval to investigate all major
applications   for safety as well as seating and substantial
project proposals.
The Second Deputy Chairman proposed that funding for current
seating applications, including      those to which FGIT had
committed   funds,   should    initially    come    from  the
Spotting-the-Ball monies.    He reiterated that whilst clubs
were free to accept the second lowest tender, grant aid would
only be offered for the lowest tender.
7.2    Seating - late applications
It was agreed that the following applications be accepted for
grant aid and be paid in due course from Spotting-the Ball
sources.
Manchester United (seating of United Road Paddock) up to a
maximum of £132,500 net. (Gross £176,666.66)
Scunthorpe United (seating of South End Terrace) up to
maximum of £25,875 net. (Gross £34,500)
Hull City (1,652 seats) up to a maximum of £86,7 30 net.
(Gross £115,640)
The Second Deputy Chairman said that the £100 million
available over the next five years for major items would be
applied to clubs in the Football League and the Scottish
Football League.     It was not yet possible to determine the
maximum level of grant for major applications, but it was
likely that some clubs' expectations would be disappointed.
It was agreed that no League Club would be excluded from
receiving grant aid.
7.3     Corderoy's report to the Football League on
        The Likely Cost and Methodology of Implementing
        Lord Justice Taylor's Reguirements.
The report prepared by George Corderoy & Co. was circulated.
Its conclusions were that implementation of Lord Justice
Taylor's report could amount to some E600M.
Mr Fox said that the Football League would be looking at the
possibility of introducing minimum criteria for each division
and would take Corderoy's report as a basis for further
discussion.

7.4    Police Charges
Mr Fox reported on the Football League's recent discussions.
It was agreed that a further £400,000 would be allocated to
the police charges scheme for the 1989-90 season.
The Football League and ACPO were currently discussing police
charges at League clubs, after which the League would put a
proposal through LALC to the Trustees that the allocation of
funds for police charges should be reconsidered. See also
Minute 8.4.
7.5    CCTV
Mrs Finney had prepared a note to clubs in the English League
on the administrative procedures the Trust would be adopting
for the allocation of the £2M to assist with Public Safety at
Football Grounds by procurement of additional CCTV.
7.6    Transport Improvements
It was agreed that schemes benefiting League Clubs would pass
to LALC for recommendation to the full Trust, coming from the
LALC   budget.    Other   non-League transport    improvement
proposals would be the responsibility of the Chairman's
Committee and fall within that budget.
                                                            7
7.7     Administration charges
It was agreed to pay the sum of £28,000 to the Football
League for one year to cover the costs of administration,
staffing,telephones, postage and   fax charges  for work
undertaken on behalf of the Trust.
7.8    Heart of Midlothian/Hibernian Football   Clubs
No offer   of grant would be made until acommitment had been
given by    both clubs as to the future location     of their
respective grounds.
7.9    Hartlepool United Football Club
It was agreed to consider the club's proposal for a new stand
without prejudice and based on the reporting accountant's
investigation of the financial validity of their claim and
links between past and present directors.
7.10    Chester City/Macclesfield Town Football Clubs
It was agreed that Chester City would be responsible for any
expenses in upgrading the ground rented from Macclesfield
Town (whose claim was not      eligible under the Trust's
Non-League Safety Scheme).
7.11   Eligibility of feasibility studies for grant aid
       under the Trust's Safety grant scheme for League
       Clubs
It was agreed that applications to fundfeasibility studies
for major projects, in advance of the Trust's commitment to
fund the scheme, should not be accepted for grant aid.
7.12   Football Licensing Authority
The Secretary would prepare a letter for the Chairman's
signature, congratulating Norman Jacobs on his appointment as
Chairman of the FLA. He would invite him to appoint an
observer to attend meetings of LALC.

8.     Police Charges
8.1    Home Office reguest
Trustees considered the application from the Home Office for
a contribution to the NFIU's function as TREVI correspondent,
and to fund a computer system. The application was refused
because the Trust is already making a major contribution
towards clubs' cost of policing.
It was agreed that a contribution of £10,000 could be made to
the World Cup British police liaison team.
8.2   Home Office Circular on Charges for   policing   football
      matches
The circular was received and noted.
8.3     Home Affairs Committee Inguiry
It was not considered appropriate for the Trust to submit a
Memorandum or written evidence, as requested in the letter of
12 July 1990 from the Home Office, as the Trust does not get
involved in debates on policing policy.
8.4     Report on 1989-90 season and review of future policy
The First Deputy Chairman reported on the charges      for   the
1989/1990 season.
The Metropolitan Police District showed the highest increases
and the overall rise in charges was 36% over the previous
season, with those in the Football League first and second
divisions exceeding 45%.
At the next meeting of LALC members would consider the First
Deputy Chairman's paper which proposed major changes to the
grant scheme. Enquiries would be made to ascertain whether a
waiver could be given from the Treasury permitting the use of
investment income from the pool betting duty reduction monies
to be applied to the police charges grant scheme.
9.     Community Award Scheme 1991 progress report
Discussions had already taken place with Leicester University
on the logistics for them to undertake the administration and
further discussions would follow shortly with the Irish and
Scottish Football Leagues in respect of their participation.
10.        Blue Book
The printed version of the Blue Book was tabled and the
Chairman expressed Trustees' appreciation of the speed with
which the publication had been produced. The First Deputy
Chairman thanked those Trustees who had suggested helpful
amendments to his first draft.
11.     Correspondence with the Chairman of the All-Party
        Football Committee
Mr Endicott reported on the exchange of correspondence
between Mr Pendry and the Trust following the Chancellor's
announcement 1of the reduction of pool betting duty and the
                                                               9
establishment of the new Trust.
It was agreed that it was not appropriate to release the full
minutes of Trust meetings to the House of Commons Library,
but that a schedule of decisions could be supplied.       The
annual   Report and Financial     Statements could also be
released, together with publications such as the Blue Book,
and the Digest of Football Statistics.
12.    FT90 Publicity
The First Deputy Chairman's proposal that a public relations
working party be formed under his chairmanship was agreed.
The Second Deputy Chairman, Mr Endicott, the Secretary and Mr
Patton would comprise its membership.
13.    Any Other Business
13.1 Mr Endicott reported that the solicitors for FGIT,
Herbert Smith, were advising on the transfer of FGIT's funds
to the Football Trust 1990.
The correspondence had been referred to the Trust's solicitor
and Mr Endicott expressed confidence that a satisfactory
solution could be found.
The final meeting of FGIT would take place in Scotland on 21
August.
13.2   Trustees' Personal   Accident and Indemnity Insurance
Mrs Finney reported that quotations received indicated that
personal accident insurance whilst     travelling on Trust
business would cost £950 per annum for all Trustees, area
representatives, the Secretary, Miss Firth and herself.  It
was agreed to proceed with this.
The possibility of indemnity insurance was considered and
would be referred to the Trust's solicitors for guidance.
Several Trustees doubted its desirability.
13.3    Additional representation at Trust meetings
The    First Deputy Chairman reported that he had received a
request from Littlewoods that Vernons be invited to appoint
an observer to the Trust. This was agreed.
13.4   Regency Press proposal
The    First Deputy Chairman reported on a proposal put by
Regency Press Corporation for the Trust to be involved in the
production of a book on football. The suggestion was that
the    Trust would be associated with the production and have
the right to approve the text. Proceeds from the sale of the
I
I
                                                                       10
    book would then be donated to The Football Trust. It was
    agreed that the offer be accepted, subject to sight                of
    proposed copy.
    14.        Dates of meetings for the remainder of 1990
    Meetings     arranged   for   the remainder of the   year   were   as
    follows:
    Mon    20 August    1990 - 10.30 a.m        LALC
                                                RAC Club, Glasgow
    Tues   25 Sept      1990 - 10.30 a.m        Chairman's Cttee
                                                Walkden House
    Wed    26 Sept      1990 - 10.30 a.m.       LALC
                                                Walkden House
    Mon    8 Oct        1990 - 10.30 a.m        Trust
                                                Walkden House


    Mon    19 Nov       1990 - 10.30 a.m        LALC
                                                Walkden House
    Tue    4 Dec        1990 - 9.30 a.m         Chairman's Cttee
                                                Savoy Hotel
    Wed    12 Dec       1990 - 10.30 a.m        Trust
                                                Walkden House




I
I
