                  THE FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST

MINUTES OF A MEETING OF TRUSTEES HELD ON MONDAY 16TH OCTOBER
1989 AT 160/166 BOROUGH HIGH STREET, LONDON.


       Present:    T. Wharton, O.B.E. - In the Chair

                   B.A. Cook, J.D. Dent, T. Finney, O.B.E., J.P.,
                   C. Lloyd, O.B.E., P.D. Smithson and
                   H.B. Sturgeon, B.A., D. Phil., F.R.I.C.S.

                   Miss G. Firth - Secretary
                   W.H. Carter - Messrs. George Corderoy & Co.
                   C. Foster - Messrs. Rushtons



9 56    APOLOGY FOR ABSENCE

       An apology for absence was received from Mr. S.W. Taylor.

957     MINUTES

     The Minutes of the last meeting held on 24th July 1989,
having previously been circulated, were taken as read and signed
by the Chairman as a true record.

958     MR. CECIL MOORES

     The Chairman reported the sudden death of Mr. Cecil Moores
on 29th July 1989 aged 86. The funeral was held on 4th August
and had been attended by the Chairman on behalf of the Trust.   A
Memorial Service took place on Friday 13th October at the
Liverpool Anglican Cathedral and had been attended by the
Chairman and Mr. C. Lloyd on behalf of the Trust.

     The Trustees paid tribute to the support Mr. Moores had
given the Trust over many years and expressed their gratitude
for the support of the Pool Promoters' Association.

959     FINANCE

     The Trustees received a financial statement showing a
balance of £4,704,220.74 as at 6th October 1989, subject to
unpresented cheques.

     Mr. C. Foster indicated that, although there did not appear
to be any immediate sign of heavy demands being made on the
Trust's funds, Messrs. Corderoy & Co. stood by their recent
budget forecast and felt that it was merely a matter of a few
months before substantial funds would be needed.

     Mr. Foster also indicated that high interest rates and the
increase in contributions had boosted funds and increased the
projected £3.9 million at this time to £4.7 million.

     The Trustees decided that clubs should be encouraged to
take grants out of the Trust's Income Account wherever possible
particularly in marginal applications.  The Trust would also
consider making a 'loan' to clubs in respect of the Income Tax
recoverable until such time as this was received from the Inland
Revenue.

     A list of accounts paid since the last meeting was received
and noted.

     An interim account from Messrs. Rushtons in the amount of
£2,300 was accepted for payment.

960   SAFETY

     Mr. W.H. Carter reported that, although there were no
immediate problems with current safety claims, he did feel that
substantial funds would be needed to meet increased safety
demands being made by local authorities following Justice
Taylor's Report.  Clubs were once again facing onerous demands
with local authorities making varied interpretations of Justice
Taylor's recommendations.

     The main areas of work seemed to be computerised turnstile
equipment, upgrading of public address systems and internal
communications generally.

      In response to a query from Mr. Sturgeon, the Secretary
indicated that it was not possible to quantify these claims as
they had only begun to be submitted in any number over the past
two w e e k s .

     Mr. Finney reported that Preston North End had been
successful in their fight against onerous demands by the local
authority and it was felt that more clubs should be advised to
resist such demands.

     It was agreed that Corderoys fees be increased to £195 per
surveyor day as from 1st January 1990.  Mr. W.H. Carter
indicated that Corderoys hoped to maintain this level until
December 19 91.

     The Trustees appreciated Corderoys two year commitment as
this helped to budget the Trust's finances.

     A list of safety grants made since the last meeting was
received and noted.
961   JUSTICE TAYLOR INQUIRY

     The meeting had a general discussion on Lord Justice
Taylor's Interim Report and its effect on clubs.     The most
significant effect seemed to be the fact that local authorities
were i mp l ementing.the recommendations rigorously but with
varying, and sometimes irrational, interpretations.     The time
factor for completion of the work was also a problem to clubs.
The Trustees felt, that more and more clubs would need support to
resist some of these demands.

     Mr. Dent reported that few clubs had actually been issued
with a revised safety certificate and were encountering problems
completing written agreements with their local police.

     The general feeling of the meeting was that, once
published, possibly in late January or early February 1990, the
Final Report of Justice Taylor would make more stringent demands
upon clubs.

     The Chairman reported that a Government Committee had been
set up to examine the current Green Guide and that Mr. Carter
had been invited to sit on that Committee.  The Trustees felt
that Mr. Carter's experience of working with the Trust over the
past ten years would prove invaluable to the new Committee.

962   MEDICAL FACILITIES

     Letters of thanks received from the St. John Ambulance,    the
Football League, the Scottish Football League and the Irish
Football League in respect of the recent grants for medical
equipment were received and noted.

     Lord Aberdare had personally spoken to the Chairman and
conveyed the sincere gratitude of everyone for the initiative
taken by the Trust.

     The Chairman reported that the Scottish Football League had
added to the Trust's contribution and Mr. Dent indicated that
discussions were taking place for the Football League to augment
the contribution.
963    SEATING

     The Chairman reported receipt of a letter from the Football
Trust declining F.G.I.T.'s request to set aside £2 million on
reserve for F.G.I.T. in respect of their seating initiative. The
reason given was that the Trust's funds were already totally
commi tt e d.

     The Chairman indicated that the Football Trust were also
reluctant to make more money available to League clubs in view
of the fact that these clubs already received three quarters of
the P.P.A.'s contributions.

     The Secretary reported that, to date, six firm proposals
had been received in respect of seating together with
approximately six verbal enquiries.  It was very much evident,
however, that clubs were delaying formulating their proposals
until after the publication of Justice Taylor's Final ‘Report.

     The Chairman reported that one of the firm proposals had
been received from Liverpool Football Club, who he had visited
the previous week.  In the aftermath of the Hillsborough tragedy
the club had decided to take i mmediate.action and had converted
their standing area for visiting fans into a seated area.
Although the work had already been completed it was agreed that
the Trust should support Liverpool Football Club and it was
decided that the application should be dealt with by the local
Trustees.

     The Trustees also recognised that   in some cases the
criteria in respect of the areas being   already covered would be
marginal and it was decided that cases   should be dealt with on
merit but sympathetically by the local   Trustees.

     The Trustees also discussed the question of clubs who were
marginal cases in respect of average attendances and Blackburn
Rovers was cited as a good example.  The club's current average
attendance was below 10,000 but had, in fact, exceeded that
figure for most of the previous season.  The club were also once
again fighting for promotion.  It was agreed that these marginal
clubs be asked to submit proposals which could be considered in
the event of the £4 million not being fully allocated.

     In general discussion the Trustees felt that more and more
clubs would now be seriously considering re-locating to new
stadiums.  It was agreed that this would have to be borne in
mind when considering future policy.

      A copy of an article from FIFA News was received and noted.
     The Chairman reported on the press conference held to
launch the Trust's 1990 Initiatives.  It was agreed that the
press response had been excellent and the timing had proved to
be good.  The Trustees expressed their thanks to the Secretary
and to Mr. A.G. Williamson of the Football League for their
efforts in organising the conference.  It was, however, re ­
iterated that the Trustees wished to continue their policy of
keeping a low press profile.

964    WALSALL FOOTBALL CLUB

     The Trustees considered an application from Walsall
Football Club in respect of the installation of a computerised
turnstile counting system and electronic exit gate locking
system at their new stadium.

     Although the equipment had not been a specific instruction
its installation was supported by the local authority.
Moreover, work of this nature was also being demanded by Justice
Taylor.

       In view of the fact that this requirement had been as a
result of legislation instigated after the club's plans had been
drawn up it was decided to support the club's application.     Any
offer of grant aid would, however, be subject to the following
c on ditions:-

1)    competitive tenders being submitted;
2)    the installation would be compatible with any
       recommendations made in Justice Taylor's Final Report;
3)    the grant being paid out of the Trust's Income Account.

     The Trustees acknowledged that safety/building standards
changed consistently during planning stages and that this type
of application would occur more frequently as more clubs re­
located .

965    MIDDLESBROUGH FOOTBALL CLUB

     The Chairman and Secretary reported attending the official
opening of the Sports Complex at Middlesbrough Football Club.

     After discussion it was agreed that the matter had been
satisfactorily resolved and it was decided to release the safety
monies being withheld from the club.

966    TRUST LOGO

     Mr. Neil Collins of C.S.S. Promotions attended the meeting
and the Trustees considered several designs submitted by Mr.
Collins.

     The matter was deferred for further consideration at the
next meeting.
967    FOOTBALL TRUST

     The Chairman reported on the following Football Trust
meetings

1)    P.R. and Publicity Working Party held on 11th September;
2)    Chairman's Working Party held on 11th September;
3)    Football Trust meeting held on 9th October.   The Chairman
       referred to correspondence between himself and Mrs. Finney
       regarding the Minutes of the previous Football Trust
      meeting which had been circulated to all Trustees.
       The Trustees unanimously agreed with the Chairman's actions
       and felt the need to protect F.G.I.T.'s right to make its
       own decisions.


968    NEXT MEETING

      The next meeting was confirmed for Thursday 14th December
1989 at 10.00a.m.   It was noted that England were playing a
friendly international match the previous night and it was
agreed that the Trustees may wish to make up a party to attend
the g a m e .

     The Chairman reported that the Minister for Sport had
accepted the T r u s t e e s ' invitation to join them for lunch
following the next meeting.

969    ANY OTHER BUSINESS

1.    Halifax Town Football Club  - With reference to Minute 933
      the Secretary reported that Calderdale Metropolitan Council
      had indicated their willingness to enter into an agreement
      with the Trust for the repayment of any monies granted to
      Halifax Town by F.G.I.T. should the club cease to play
      football at the Shay Ground through no fault of their own.

      The Trustees felt this to be acceptable and instructed the
      Secretary to progress matters.


2.    Gillingham Football Club - the Secretary reported that the
      case of Gillingham's defrauding the Trust would not now be
      taken to Court as the former Secretary had pleaded guilty
      to the charges.  However, little information was available
      due to the fact that a further case, involving the former
      Chairman and his wife, in respect of charges connected with
      the club alone, were being heard in a separate court case.

      The former Secretary would not be sentenced until this
      further case had been heard.  The police would not,
      therefore, release any information on the case.

      Developments were awaited.
     There being no further business the Chairman declared the
meeting closed.




                            Chairman


                                        Iff   •. .          ..I?
