                 THE FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST

MINUTES OF A MEETING OF TRUSTEES HELD ON TUESDAY 27TH FEBRUARY
1990 AT 160/166 BOROUGH HIGH STREET, LONDON COMMENCING AT
10.00A.M.
      Present:    T. Wharton, O.B.E. - in the Chair

                  B.A. Cook, J.D. Dent, T. Finney, O.B.E., J.P.,
                  C. Lloyd, O.B.E., P.D. Smithson, S.W. Taylor and
                  H.B. Sturgeon, B.A., D.Phil., F.R.I.C.S.

                  Miss G. Firth - Secretary
                  W.H. Carter - Messrs. George Corderoy & Co.
                  C. Foster - Messrs. Rushtons



989   MINUTES

     The Minutes of the last meeting held on 14th December 1989,
having previously been circulated, were taken as read and signed
by the Chairman as a true record.

990   MATTERS ARISING OUT OF THE MINUTES

Minute 979 - Mr. Taylor reported that the local Trustees were
discussing this matter with Corderoys but hoped to settle the
matter shortly.

991   EXETER CITY FOOTBALL CLUB

     The Chairman referred to Minute 976 which had been regarded
as concluded by the Trustees at the last meeting. However, the
Chairman reported that a complication had arisen when Exeter
City lodged their 1988 accounts with the Football League.

     It was noted that the accountants had made a qualification
to the accounts which related to this very matter. The
explanation in the accounts did not, however, coincide with the
information provided to the Trustees.

     The Chairman reported that he had written to the club
following the submission of these accounts.




                                  -   1-
     Mr. C. Foster then reported that he had taken the matter up
with the club's accountants. Apparently, the accountants had
become aware of the anonymous letter sent the Football
Association and had received legal advice to the effect that, to
protect themselves, they should make a strong qualification in
the accounts. The club's accountants agreed that their letter
to the Trust, stating that the overclaim related to a
sponsorship agreement, had perhaps been ambigious but they felt
that the letter implied there had been an agreement. They
stated that there had been no intention on their part to mislead
the Trustees on the matter.

     The Trustees considered whether, in the light of this new
information, they should review their previous decision. The
Trust depended on information provided to them and they had been
provided with a statement from the accountants which was quite
different from the qualification to the accounts.

     The Trustees noted that the accounts had been approved by
the Shareholders of the club.

     After considerable debate the Trustees decided that the
previous decision should stand and that no further action could
be taken against the club.  It was felt that any further action
may cause more unwanted publicity which the P.P.A. wished to
avoid. The Trustees also appreciated that they had no
disciplinary powers over the club but decided against writing to
the Football League on the matter.

     Mr. Sturgeon queried whether action should be taken against
the club's accountants for providing wrong information.  It was
decided not to pursue this avenue.


991   FINANCE

     The Trustees received a financial statement showing a
balance of £4,960,960.41 as at 16th February 1990, subject to
unpresented cheques.

     Mr. Foster reported that approximately £750,000 had been
earned in interest.

     A list of accounts paid since the last meeting was received
and noted.


992   SAFETY

     Mr. Carter reported that there were no serious problems
with safety claims at the present time.
                                 -   3-


     M r . Carter reported that the level of activity had not
dropped and produced the following figures for the Trustees'
information:-

Expenditure:

1987 - Safety £2,794,355
       Improvements £1,028,160

1988 - Safety £2,366,787
       Improvements £1,066,247

1989 - Safety £2,317,101
       Improvements £736,993


       The claims processed were as follows:-

1987   - 326 claims processed and 212 payments made

1988   - 329 claims processed and 173 payments made

1989   - 352 claims processed and 214 payments made

       Mr. Carter stated that the trend for 1990 already indicated
that    this level would rise.

     A list of safety grants made since the last meeting was
received and noted.

9 93    IMPROVEMENTS

     The Trustees received and noted a list of applications
received to date in respect of the Trust's 1990 seating
initiative.  It was recognised by the Trustees that clubs were
still deferring submitting applications in order to ascertain
exactly what would be required under Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations. Lord Justice Taylor had not, for instance,
defined what type of seating should be installed - bench, pre­
formed or tip-up seats?

     The Trustees reaffirmed that they were not in a position to
consider grant aiding cover at grounds.

     All applications for seating would be considered in detail
at the next meeting.

     A list of commitments made in respect of family and
disabled areas and toilet facilities was received and noted.

     A list of Improvement Grants made since the last meeting
was received and noted.
                                -   4-


994     IRISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE

     A report of a meeting held with the Office Bearers of the
Irish Football League on 19th December 1989 was received and
noted.

995    LOGO

     The Secretary reported that the logo agreed upon at the
last meeting was now being printed and it was hoped to supply
Trustees with a copy of the new letter head etc. in the near
future.

9 96   ANNIVERSARY BROCHURE

     The Secretary reported that a meeting of the Sub-Committee
set up to produce an Anniversary Brochure was to meet after the
Trustees meeting that day.

99 7    FOOTBALL TRUST

     The Chairman reported that there had been no meetings of
the Football Trust since the 14th December 1989. A meeting of
the Football Trust's Chairmans Working Party scheduled for 14th
March had been cancelled. The Chairman also reported that the
Football Trust had failed to agree to a date for a meeting of
the Joint Liaison Committee and had indicated that they felt a
meeting was 'premature'.

     The Chairman reported upon a request received by George
Corderoy & Co. from Mr. Richard Faulkner to provide statistical
information which was directly related to the work of F.G.I.T.
The Chairman reported that he had refused permission to Corderoy
& Co. to supply this information as he felt that any such
request should have more properly come through himself or the
Secretary.

       The Trustees unanimously approved of this action.


998    FOOTBALL LEAGUE MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

     The Chairman reported that a meeting with the Football
League Management Committee had been arranged for Friday 23rd
March 1990 in London. A venue would be advised as soon as
possible. Trustees were asked to advise the Secretary if they
would be available to attend the meeting.
                               -   5-


999   LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR

     The Trustees discussed at length the recommendations of
Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report and the Chairman drew the
attention of Trustees to the clauses in the Report which
referred directly to F.G.I.T. The Trustees appreciated the fact
that Lord Justice Taylor had acknowledged F.G.I.T's independence
and the work done over the years.

      The Chairman reported that he had instructed Messrs.
Rushtons to prepare statistical information on the actual usage
of capacity at clubs in relation to seating and standing
spectators. The Chairman had felt it would be beneficial to the
Trustees to have before them sufficient information to know
whether or not the existing covered accommodation was being
used.

     The Government were looking to F.G.I.T. to provide as much
information as possible on the whole question of seating.

     The Trustees ratified the Chairman's decision to instruct
Messrs. Rushtons to undertake this research.

     Mr. Foster then explained the basis on which he had
prepared samples of this information for two individual clubs in
order that the Trustees could consider whether this was the
format in which they wished this information presented.

     aThe Trustees recognised that the money required for seating
could be greater than the funds available and that safety
requirements should take priority.

     At this point the Chairman reported that the P.P.A. had
reiterated that they were unable to guarantee a continuing
supply of funds to the Trust.

     The Trustees considered the above facts and came to the
conclusion that a form of 'rationing' could be necessary. It
was, therefore, felt to be essential that the Trust build up a
data base on each club.

     Mr. Dent reported on the actions taken by the Football
League and informed the Trustees that even clubs in the lower
divisions may have to comply with the seating recommendations by
1993 if they were to comply with the FIFA resolution regarding
the capacity for away supporters.

     Mr. Dent also reported that the Football League had
appointed Corderoys to undertake a detailed survey of club's
requirements on their behalf.
      The Trustees discussed all these implications at length
^including the question of clubs relocating and the possibility
 of grant aid for new stadia and ground sharing. The Trustees
 agreed that the Trust and the Football League should work
^together to produce as much detailed information as possible on
 the whole matter.  It was noted that the Football League will be
 looking to the Trust to make a financial contribution to the
 survey being undertaken by Corderoys.

      The Trustees then decided that there was insufficient
^information available at the present time to make any policy
 changes. It was agreed that Messrs. Rushtons and Corderoys
 should jointly prepare a report on 20 sample clubs in time for
 the meeting with the Football League Management Committee on
 23rd March.

     It was agreed that both   Messrs. Rushtons and Corderoys
should submit their fees for   the above report separately from
their normal fees.

     It was decided that, with regard to the 1990 seating
initiative, the Trust would accept seating applications from
clubs who were prepared to finance themselves the construction
of new covering over the areas to be seated.

     The Chairman reported that he would be meeting with Mr. Ian
Stott and Mr. Arthur Sandford of the Football League the
following week to discuss the Trust's role and possible policy
decisions.

     The Trustees received and noted a letter from Tranmere
Rovers indicating their plans to develop an all seater stadium
at Prenton Park and requesting grant aid at a level of £3
million per annum over five years. This was an example of the
false hopes raised for certain clubs by press statements.

     The Trustees instructed the Secretary to reply to the club
that any application made within the present laid down
parameters would, of course, be considered.

     The Trustees noted with concern the press comments
emanating from Mr. Richard Faulkner following the publication of
the Final Report. The comment that £75 million would be
available to clubs had caused confusion.  Clubs were under the
impression that this was new money coming into the game.

     The Chairman reported that he had invited Lord Aberdare to
join the Trustees for lunch after the meeting but he had been
unable to accept. However, the Chairman intended to meet Lord
Aberdare later that day at the House of Lords to discuss the
matter.
                                7


     The Trustees felt that the press reports following the
announcement had been misleading and harmful to the balanced
view taken by F.G.I.T.

     The Trustees were then informed by the Chairman of several
things which were happening which caused him worry as to the
future of F.G.I.T. The Trustees were unanimous in expressing
their disappointment and extreme concern at the way matters were
developing.

1000   SCOTTISH AND IRISH CENTENARIES

     It was agreed that# the Secretary be authorised to purchase
suitable gifts to present to the Scottish and Irish Football
Leagues to commemorate their Centenaries later in the year.

1001   NEXT MEETING

     The next meeting was confirmed for Monday 30th April 1990
at 160/166 Borough High Street, London to commence at 10.00a.m.



     There being no further business the Chairman declared the
meeting closed.



                                        Chairman
