                                                           LALC(91)3RD

                        FOOTBALL TRUST .
            LICENSING AUTHORITY LIAISON COMMITTEE

MINUTES OF THE NINTH MEETING HELD ON MONDAY 29 JULY 1991 AT
WALKDEN HOUSE, LONDON, COMMENCING AT 10.30 A.M.

     Present:     T. Wharton, OBE            - Chairman

                  Lord Aberdare
                  R. 0. Faulkner

                  J.   D. Dent
                  T.   Finney
                  A.   Sandford
                  H.   B. Sturgeon
                  S.   W. Taylor

                  Miss G. L. Firth           - Secretary



APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

1.   Apologies for absence were received from Mr C. Thwaite,
Mr P. A. Lee and Mr A. Baden.

MINUTES

2.   The Minutes of LALC(91)2ND meeting, having previously
been circulated, were approved and signed by the Chairman as
a correct record.

MATTERS ARISING OUT OF THE MINUTES

3.  In response to a query from Mr A. Sandford, the
Secretary reported that progress was being made on the
question of the lease conditions appertaining to Charlton
Athletic's offer of grant aid on their new West Stand.

MINUTES/REPORTS

4.   The following Minutes were noted

     a) Football Trust - 18 April and 26 June
     b) Chairman's Committee - 10 June
     c) P.R. Sub-Committee - 10 June

5. Mr   Faulkner   thanked the Football League    for the
continued co-operation of clubs in providing programme copy
for the Trust.




                                -    1   -
6.   Mr Sandford indicated that the Football League may wish
to produce an Annual Report in future years which would
utilise statistics already published in the Digest of
Statistics. He would keep Mr Lee informed.

FINANCE

7.   The Chairman explained a proposal to pay a          small
proportion of major grant out of taxed income. This was to
maximise the taxed income of the Trust.   Clubs would be able
to   recover the   35% tax from the Inland      Revenue.   The
percentage would of     necessity have to be   reviewed on a
regular basis    in order to ensure the optimum use of
investment income.

8.   It was agreed to RECOMMEND that this course of action be
taken subject to confirmation from Messrs. Coopers & Lybrand
Deloitte that this was acceptable to the Inland Revenue and
advice as to the position of those profitable clubs who would
not be in a position to reclaim the tax.

9.   The meetingconsidered a draft letter      to those clubs
receiving grant aid on major developments informing them that
a proportion of their major grant would be distributed as
taxed interest, such proportion being fixed at 5% of the
ceiling offered. Income Tax would then be deducted at 35%.

FOOTBALL LEAGUE ADMINISTRATION FEE

10. It was agreed to RECOMMEND that the Football League
administration fee be £30,000 exclusive of VAT, for the next
12 month period.

GRANTS

11. A list of Safety and Improvement grants    approvedsince
the last meeting was received and noted.

FINANCIAL REPORTING

12. The Chairman informed the meeting that a detailed
financial report would be available for the next meeting of
the full Trust in September.

MAJOR PROJECTS

13.  The meeting received and noted a schedule of the    up to
date position on club approaches.

14.   The meeting received and noted a schedule of progress on
major projects already accepted.    It was noted that Torquay
United had withdrawn their proposal and that Coventry City,
Newcastle   United   and   Tottenham   Hotspur   had   delayed
commencement of the work.
15. Mr Sandford reported to the meeting that Football League
First Division clubs were contemplating forming a Super
League.   The Minister for Sport had indicated in a recent
statement that these clubs could not assume that they would
receive money from the Football Trust available from the
Reduction in Pool Betting Duty.

16. Mr Sandford     felt  that  an   issue  could arise,  if
resignations were received prior to 17 August, as to a cut
off date for those clubs submitting applications. He put the
opinion that the Trust would be required to honour those
offers already made and this could result in First Division
clubs submitting large proposals within the next few months
in order to preserve their position.

17. The Chairman indicated that if the proposals for a Super
League were to happen the question of grant aid for those
clubs was entirely a matter for the Government and the P.P.A.
to decide upon.    Clarification would be sought from both
bodies as soon as possible.

18. The Chairman also reported that it was expected that the
Football Association would be submitting proposals for the
distribution of their £3.5 million contribution in the near
future.

19.    The meeting received and noted a letter which had been
sent    to all clubs setting a deadline of 13 January 1992 for
the    submission of applications for major developments for
next   close season.

20. The Secretary reported that applications for major
projects had been received from Manchester City, Manchester
United, Brighton & Hove Albion, Nottingham Forest and Queens
Park Rangers.   Reports were being prepared for consideration
at the next meeting.

PLCs

21. A report was received from Mr Foster on the question of
the treatment of grant aiding pics.   Mr Foster advised that
there was no difference between clubs which were pics and a
private limited company for grant aid purposes so long as the
company continued to perform its function as at the time of
the offer.   If this changed in any way then the Trust could
seek to recover the grant paid.

22. Offers of grant aid were at the discretion of the Trust
and all monies were paid direct to the Football club. Trust
policy also ensured that the club had an adequate lease in
place, normally seven years.

23. It was agreed to      submit   this   report   to   the   Football
Trust on 24 September.
LEASING

24. Mr Sandford reported on League proposals for a leasing
facility for clubs, the primary object of which was to
facilitate the acquisition of seats but which could be
expanded for other uses.   This matter had been referred back
to LALC by the full Trust for further discussions.

25. The Chairman indicated that Trustees showed great
concern that    the proposals would be a breach of the
established principle of only offering grant aid to a club as
the title owner of such assets.

26. Mr Sandford reported that the League's agreement would
be with Barclays Mercantile to obtain a finance facility at
premium rates.   The title of the property would remain with
the finance house and the League would have a back to back
arrangement with clubs participating in the scheme in order
to deduct any outstanding payments from clubs.

27.  At the end of a ten year period it would be possible to
make a single payment enabling the club to lease the seats in
perpetuity which would mean that, for all practical purposes,
the club would be the owner.     The point was made that the
Trust does not have a guarantee of funding for this period.

28. A discussion took place on the principle of the scheme
in relation to grant aid from the Trust, it being recognised
that a seat forms only a minor part of work undertaken on the
installation.

29.   It was agreed to refer the matter  to the full Trust on
24 September.    In the meantime Mr Sandford was invited    to
submit any further relevant papers supporting his proposal.


FOOTBALL LEAGUE SERVICES DIVISION

30. The meeting considered a proposal from Mr Sandford that
the Trust should have a minimum standard for seats which
could be grant aided.   His concern was that the Trust could
find itself in a position of grant aiding seats which would
be found in a few years' time to be inadequate.   Clubs would
also be discouraged from installing the cheapest seats rather
than better quality seats.

31. The meeting agreed that the Trust was a funding body and
did   not  make policy   decisions  setting   standards  and
specifications. This is a matter for the FLA.

32. Mr Sandford went on to report on the setting up of the
Football League Services Division which was a joint venture
to provide common services to clubs.        This company was
offering bulk purchasing facilities to clubs.




                            _   4   _
33. Part of their remit was to obtain prices with major
manufacturers at lower rates than clubs.        Mr Sandford
requested that the Services Division be allowed to register
with the Trust the prices negotiated on a standard document
with each application    to prove    that each   tender was
compatible, thus eliminating the need for the club to supply
three quotations.

34.    It was agreed to RECOMMEND acceptance of this principle.

SCOTTISH F.A. SECURITY SQUAD

35. The meeting considered a request from the Scottish F.A.
for financial assistance towards the costs of employing a
squad of security officers to attend matches where there is a
possibility of illegal entry causing overcrowding and danger.

36. This request was made in the light of recent demands
from the Strathclyde Regional Council that capacities at
Scottish grounds be severely restricted.

37. It was agreed to RECOMMEND a contribution of £20,000
(50% of £40,000) towards this project on the understanding
that this was a once and for all payment and the matter could
not be considered beyond this commitment.

FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION OF WALES

38. A letter from the F.A.             of Wales concerning League
grounds in Wales was received.         The Chairman reported that a
meeting of the National Stadia         sub-Committee was to be held
on 30 August at which the F.A.         of Wales were to advise the
Trust as to their intentions            for a Welsh International
ground.

39. It was agreed that League clubs in Wales were eligible
to apply for the major grant level relevant to their
division.   They could not be treated on the same basis as
First Division clubs.

SAFETY

40.     The meeting discussed the situation where some clubs
were    increasing their standing capacities at a time when the
move    should be towards conversion to all seated stadia.   It
was    agreed that   this was unacceptable and applications of
this   nature would not be considered.

41. Appeals from Leicester City, Leeds United, Ipswich Town
and Birmingham City against rejection of claims due to non-
compliance with procedures were dismissed.

42. It was agreed that clubs needed to be reminded once
again that applications would not be considered if they had
not complied with procedures. A circular letter will be sent




                               -   5   -
to all clubs    and chairmen   stressing the need   to adhere to
procedures.

43. Concern was expressed at the amounts being claimed on
police   control     rooms   and   the  sometimes excessive
requirements demanded by police in this area.

44. A suggestion by Mr Faulkner that club stewards' jackets
should bear the Trust logo if grant aided failed to find
favour.

WALSALL F.C.

45. The meeting considered further submissions from Walsall
F.C. requesting grant aid on their new stadium.    A report
from Messrs. Corderoy & Co on the club's submission was
received.

46.  It was agreed to RECOMMEND that grant aid be offered on
£15,000 gross in respect of the. extension of the P.A. System
and the painting of passage and walkways.

SUNDERLAND

47. The meeting considered an application for grant aid by
Sunderland F.C. in respect of safety work which would take
them some £650,000 over the safety ceiling.

48. Concern was expressed at the extent of the work and the
fact that the club did not appear to have resisted the
demands of the local authority.   The fact that the club were
still considering relocating was also discussed.

49. Discussion took place on the principle of raising the
safety ceiling from its present level of £1.5 million gross.

50. It    was agreed to arrange a meeting with the club to
discuss   the matter and to make a detailed report to the next
meeting   of the full Trust.  Mr Sandford undertook to contact
the FLA   on this issue.

TRANSPORT GRANTS

51.   It was agreed to RECOMMEND the following

      Charlton Athletic Car Park - a grant of £46,000 for 230
      spectator parking facilities (i.e. £200 per parking
      place);

      Tottenham Hotspur - White Hart Lane Station - a grant of
      50% of £15,193 towards safety work on the station and
      50% of £4,339.20 towards the provision of crowd control
      barriers outside the station.




                               -   6   -
SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C.

52. A request was considered from the Hillsborough Community
Development Trust for financial support towards the ongoing
provision of toilet facilities some 200 yards away from
Hillsborough.   This project was not in fact a joint venture
with Sheffield Wednesday F.C. as stated.

53. It was agreed that this request was outwith the remit of
LALC.    It was mentioned that perhaps the Hillsborough
Disaster Fund could be a possible avenue of funding if
available.

STEWARDS

54. The meeting recognised the need for clubs to move
towards greater use of stewards within grounds rather than
police and agreed to RECOMMEND in principle that grant aid be
offered towards the total cost of stewarding and police
charges at grounds within the grant aid ceiling of the police
charges allocation.   A combination of police and stewarding
costs was acceptable and indeed was envisaged.

NEXT MEETING

55. It was agreed that the next meeting be held on Monday 9
December 1991 at Walkden House to commence at 10.30 am.


     There being no   further business    the Chairman declared
the meeting closed.




                                         DATE                     mi




                            -   7   -
