                               FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST

MINUTES OF A MEETING OF TRUSTEES HELD ON FRIDAY, 3QTH JANUARY, 1987 AT 16 ST. MARTIN'-
LE-GRAND, LONDON COMMENCING AT 1Q.3QA.M.


Present:          T. Wharton, O.B.E.   (in the Chair),

                  P.C. Dodds; R.H.G. Kelly; C. Lloyd, O.B.E.; P.D. Smithson; H.B. Sturgeon;
                  S.W. Taylor;

                  Miss G.L. Firth (Secretary),
                  W.H. Carter (George Corderoy & Co.),
                  C. Foster (Pomfret Rushton).




707-    APOLOGY FOR ABSENCE

        An apology for absence was received from Mr. T. Finney.


708.    MINUTES

      The Minutes of the last meeting held on 26thSeptember,        1986 were    taken asread
and signed by the Chairman as a correct record.


709.    CHAIRMANS'S REMARKS

      The Chairman informed the meeting that amounts inexcess of £14million           had been
distributed during the last 24 months.

      He looked forward to his third year as Chairman and thanked       everyone - Trustees
and administrative staff - for their hard work and efforts during       the past year. The
work of the Trust was receiving increasing recognition and it was       pleasing to note
an increase in attendances which could, in part, be attributed to       better facilities
provided by clubs with the help of the Trust.


710.    SIR NORMAN CHESTER

      The Chairman reported that the Trust had been represented at Sir Norman's Memorial
Service by himself, Mr. Kelly and the Secretary.  There had been a large turnout for
the service by both the academic and sporting worlds.


711.   SECRETARY'S REPORT

        The Secretary reported that, with the exception of items covered elsewhere        on
the    agenda, there were no problems at the present time.

      The Secretary reported the decision made by Football League Clubs at anE.G.M.,
the previous day, when a three year moratorium had been placed        on     any further
installations of artificial surfaces.



                                               -   1   -                        Contlnued/2
                                            - 2 -

      The Trustees were informed that Miss P. Barrington had joined the Secretary in
working for the Trust and could be contacted at any time.


713.   FINANCE

      The Chairman reported that since the last meeting the budget forecast had been
substantially exceeded with the result that, as at 12th January, the Trust's funds
were at a balance of £506,000.

      The budget forecast had predicted that funds would be at an all time low in
December, 1986 with a balance of£1.4 million. This figure had, in fact, gone as low
as 0.7 million and safety claims had increased since December rather than decreased.
Corderoys estimated that the Trust had safety grants approaching £1.5 million to be
paid when approved work had been completed by clubs.

       Mr. Carter of Corderoys stressed that the estimates given were on the black side
but claims had not decreased as envisaged and were, in fact, increasing substantially
particularly in relation to the installation of fire warning and public address systems.

      The Chairman pointed out that substantial claims could be expected from the clubs
newly promoted at the end of the current season.

      A lengthy discussion took place on the current financial situation and the action
required to be taken.

      The Chairman informed the meeting that the offer of a £1 million loan from the
Football Trust remained on offer until the end of June, 1987 -

      Mr. S.W. Taylor put forward a suggestion that the Football Trust be requested
to make the £1 million an outright grant rather than a loan to cover the safety payments.
He felt that the P.P.A., would approve the action.

      Mr. C. Foster at the request of the Chairman indicated that an additional source
of funds was the income tax paid by the Trust and put forward a suggestion that grants
could be made 56% out of capital and 44$ out of income. This would enable the Trust
to distribute approximately £ 3 0 0 , 0 0 0 out of income.

      Mr. Strugeon expressed concern that the Trust might find itself in the position
of not being able to meet safety claims.

       After each Trustee   had given his viewpoint the following consensus was reached:-

(a)    That while there were indications that the peak of demand had been reached it
       was desirable that the £1 million loan on offer from the Football Trust would
       continue for the foreseeable future.   It was felt that the Football Trust would
       appreciate that we were now involved in several areas where an admirable scheme
       from the Football Trust involved F.C.I.T.   in funding consequential safety work.

(b)    Stricter enforcement of procedures will be established with particular regard
       to the provision of competitive tenders from contractors of proven status for
       work from which grant aid is claimed. Approval of the cost to be sought before
       work commences.

(c)    The ceiling for safety grants will remain at the current level but that the
       Trustees forthwith withdraw the discretionary 10% ad hoc from the ceiling levels.



                                                                         Continued/3
                                                         - 3 -


713- FINANCE (CONTINUED)


(d)     A sentence will be added to all letters of offer stating that payment of safety
        claims could be delayed or payment spread over an extended period.

(e)     For safety/improvement work of obvious political implications e.g., Family
        Enclosures, approved applications will be paid out of Taxed income. Pomfret
        Rushton will advise clubs on procedure upon request. Trustees were concerned
        that this route be exploited where possible to maximise the amount available for
        distribution.


714.   MIRROR GROUP FUND

      Correspondence in respect of a contribution from the Mirror Group Fund was received
and noted.

          Mr. S m it h so n c o n c u r r e d wi t h the advise given by H e r b e r t S m i th & C o ., that there
w o u l d be no p r o b l e m w i t h C a p i t a l T r a n s f e r Tax.

      The Chairman, however, raised the attitude of the P.P.A. towards such a
contribution.  The P.P.A. were extremely generous benefactors and might not wish outside
parties to become involved.

       After discussion, it was agreed that the Secretary instruct Herbert Smith & Co.,
to respond to the Mirror Group Fund to the effect that, although recognising the
generosity of such a contribution, the Trustees felt that it might be more appropriate
that the contribution be made to a specific project in the Bradford area.   The Sports
Council might be a more appropriate body to deal with the contribution.   Any
contribution to the Trust's funds could not be made to a specific project and
would, merely be added to the Trust's funds for distribution to clubs.


715-    SAFETY

      Mr. Sturgeon circulated notes on the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sports
Bill which he felt could lead to a substantial increase in demands on the Trust's
resources.

      The Chairman thanked Mr. Sturgeon for his comprehensive notes and confirmed that
the Bill and the demands on clubs would be borne in mind when making future policy
decisions .

    I Mr. Carter reported that, with the exception of a few problem clubs, safety and
improvement claims were progressing well.  However, he did state that the difference
between the safety and improvement elements of claims were becoming more and more
blurred.

       In response to a query from Mr. Dodds it was confirmed that all new projects,
i.e.,. the Watford Stand, had to comply with all Safety and Fire regulations.

      Mr. Carter reported that the paperwork being submitted by clubs in support of
their claims was becoming more unsatisfactory.  It was hoped that a general tightening
up as stated in Minute 713 would help this situation.

        A list of grants made since the last meeting was received and noted.


                                                                                                Continued/4
                                              - 4 -


716.   IMPROVEMENTS

       The   Chairman tableda letter of thanks from Newcastle United Football Club.

      Mr. Carter reported that there were serious doubts that the proposed stand a£
Newcastle United Football Club would now go ahead and that a new scheme was being
considered. The Chairman confirmed that the Trustees would wish to re-consider their
position vis-a-vis an improvement grant if a new scheme was adopted.

      The Trustees decided, in the light of the current financial position, that no
new improvement claims could be accepted for payment during 1987- However, it was
agreed that clubs should not be discouraged from undertaking improvement work but that
it should be made quite clear that any applications approved by the Trust could not
be paid until the Trust's funds allowed payment which would be 1988 at the earliest.
The Trust would also utilise the £300,000 income tax available for making improvement
grants.

       The following applications were then considered in conjunction with the above:-

Forfar:-     a proposal for a new grandstand - it was agreed that the club be informed
             that no funds were available until 1988 and that a proposal would be
             considered when a more detailed presentation was submitted.

Heart of Midlothian:-      proposal for covering to Gorgie Street and McLoud Street Stands
                           and new toilets - it was agreed that no funds were available
                           for I987 but that consideration would be given for a grant
                           in 1988 if the club submitted more detailed plans.

Stirling Albion:-      proposal in respect of replacement seating, new Stand and toilet
                       improvements - it was agreed that no funds were available for 1987
                       but consideration would be given as and when applications were
                       looked at for 1 9 8 8 .

Dundee:-     proposal for pitch improvements, toilets and catering facilities - it was
             agreed thatmoney was not available for 1987 but the club could, If they
             wished, seek approval for payment in 1988.

Aston Villa:- • a request for grant aid in respect of an elevator to club rooms was
                rejected.

Hartlepool United:-      a request for an Increase in grant aid on covering to terraces
                         from 5 0 % to 70?<i was refused.

Sheffield Wednesday:-      a claim in respect of the installation of a public address
                           system in the Spion Kop was refused as the Trust’s offer of
                           grant aid on the Kop had been a once only payment and was
                           expected to have included all necessary safety work.

Norwich City:-      a request that the Trustees re-consider their position 011 grant aiding
                    the new Main Stand was received. The Trustees decided they could
                    not alter their decision not to offer grant aid.

Oxford United:-       an application in respect of a new refreshment bar was acccpted
                      subject to the club providing satisfactory tenders.

Leicester City:-       the Trustees' accepted an application for a club room for juvenile
                      members of a family enclosure.

Carlisle United:-      it was agreed to accept a proposal in respect of pitch improvements
                       subject to the club accepting the grant out of the Trust's income.

                                                                           Continued/5
                                             - 5 -

  Wigan Athletic:-    it was agreed to accept a proposal in respect of a covering to a
                      terraced area subject to the grant being made out of income.  The
                      grant was also subject to Messrs. Corderoy & Co., being satisfied
                      as to competitive tenders for the work.

  Everton:-    a proposal in respect of a family area attached to the Main Stand was
               accepted subject to the grant being made out of the Trust's Income Account.

         A list of improvement grants made since the last meeting were noted.



  717-   NORTHERN IRELAND

        A list containing the distribution figures in respect of the Trust's latest grant
  of £80,000 was received and noted.

        After considering correspondence from the Northern Ireland Education Department
  in respect of further assistance to Northern Ireland clubs it was agreed to arrange
  a meeting for 1st April in Belfast.  This would give the Trustees an opportunity of
  discussing the problems facing Northern Ireland.

        It was agreed to make a grant of £20,000 towards the cost of a C.C.T.V. control
  centre at Linfield Football Club.


  718.   FOOTBALL TRUST

         The Chairman reported on meetings of the Football Trust held on 29th October,
  and l8 th December, 198 6 when the following points had been raised:-

  a)     the £1 million loan to F.G.I.T. would be reviewed at the end of June, 1987;
■ b)     a further £250,000 be allocated to C.C.T.V.;
  c)     Mr. Wharton was appointed to sit on a Committee to meet the Football League
         Management Committee;
  d)     Mr. Wharton had informed the Football Trust that F.G.I.T. was expending
          substantial amounts in respect of control rooms for C.C.T.V.;
  e)     Mr. Wharton had warned that the new fire regulations could involve F.G.I.T. in
          increased demands on its resources.



  719-   CRYSTAL PALACE FOOTBALL CLUB

        The Trustees considered a letter from Mr. Noades suggesting that the Trust should
  employ the services of another firm of Surveyors.

        Mr. Carter reported briefly on the background to the complaint and acknowledged
  that, in this instance, his own office had been partially at fault but this had been
  due to the fact that Mr. Noades was once again trying to bend the rules to his club's
  advantage.

        After discussion it was agreed that the Secretary write to Mr. Noades stating
  that the Trust was more than satisfied with the work of George Corderoy & C o . , who
  had the complete support of the Trust.

        Further correspondence from Crystal Palace in respect of fencing to their Arthur
  Waite stand was considered.  It was agreed that Corderoy & Co. should prepare a report
  on the labour costs involved but that a claim in respect of the actual fencing costs
  be accepted on Corderoys recommendation.


                                                                           Continued/6
                                           - 6 -



720.   ABERDEEN FOOTBALL CLUB

      It was agreed to accept a claim from Aberdeen Football Club despite the fact
that they did not receive prior approval for many items in accordance with procedures.
Mr. Sturgeon explained that this had been due to a change in personnel at the club
after the death of the director responsible for ground safety.

      The secretary was instructed to inform the club that any future claims would
not be accepted if they did not comply with procedures.



721.   ARSENAL FOOTBALL CLUB

a)     Smoke Detection Installation - it was agreed to accept a claim in respect of
        the installation of a smoke detection and fire alarm system for all parts of
        the ground not just spectator areas;

b)     A claim in respect of repairs to the North Terrace Roof caused by storm damage
        was refused.



722.   YORK CITY FOOTBALL CLUB

      An appeal by York City Football Club in respect of the rejection of a claim for
an extension of a no-go area in the Bootham Crescent Terrace was considered.

       The Trustees decided that they could not accept the work for grant aid.



723-   CHESTERFIELD FOOTBALL CLUB

      Mr. Dodds reported that, once again, a claim from Chesterfield Football Club
had had to be rejected because of non-compliance with procedures.  The club had been
reprimanded several times and still failed to observe the rules.



724.   QUEEN'S PARK RANGERS

      Correspondence from Q.P.R. in respect of the installation of a new public address
system, the costs of which were excessive, was considered.

      Mr. Carter informed the meeting that the London Fire Services could be instructing
all London Clubs to put in similar systems.  These systems were of a far higher standard
than previously and were expensive.  Mr. Carter expressed concern that other fire
services would demand similar systems. The Trust would not be able to cope with a
demand of this nature.

      It was agreed that the club be informed that their claim was felt to be excessive
and therefore not acceptable.  If the fire service still demanded the system the club
should be encouraged to appeal against the instruction.



725-   MIDDLESBROUGH FOOTBALL CLUB

      The secretary reported that a meeting arranged for 12th February to discuss the
Sports Hall at Middlesbrough had been cancelled.  A new date was awaited.




                                                                         Continued/7
                                           - 7 -


726.   EXPENSES

      It was agreed to increase the expenses as follows In line with the Football League
Management Committee

       Hotel allowance - £65.00 (from £50.00)
       Mileage - 30p (from 27p)


727■   PRESENTATIONS

      The Chairman reported on successful cheque presentations held at Hamilton
Academical and Celtic.  The Trust had also been represented at Che official openings
of the new stand at Watford, the covered enclosure at Sheffield Wednesday and the re­
opening of Valley Parade, Bradford.

       Further presentations were to be arranged.


728.   AUTUMN MEETING

      It was agreed that, if possible, an autumn meeting be held at Glen Eagles,
Scotland on the weekend of 18th September.  The Chairman agreed to contact the hotel.


729-   NEXT MEETING

      The next meeting was arranged for Friday, 3rd April at 10.30a.m. at 16 St.
Martin's-le-Grand, London.

       Mr. Dodds tendered his apologies for that meeting.

      It was agreed to invite representatives from Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters
to join the Trustees for lunch at the next meeting.


ANY OTHER BUSINESS


730-   LUTON TOWN FOOTBALL CLUB

      Mr. Taylor reported on a potential problem at Luton Town with regard to claims
submitted which had not received the prior approval of the Trust.  It was agreed that
Mr. Taylor visit the club together with Mr. Carter and the Secretary.

      A claim from Luton Town in respect of their membership scheme was to be referred
to a meeting of the Liaison Committee for discussion.

       There being no further business the C'    '---   ’- _1   ’ '’


                                                Chairman
