5t.\i   by;                        lu- a-92 ;   16:16 ; The Football Trim-*      0253 724786:; 2/ 7




                                                                    LALC(92) 3rd Meeting
              FOOTBALL TRUST:       LICENSING AUTHORITY LIAISON COMMITTEE
              MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH MEETING HELD ON 20 JULY 1992 AT THE
              FOOTBALL LEAGUE'S OFFICES, OLD HARYLEBONE ROAD


              Prtiaeut:     T   Wharton OBE             Chairman
                            T   Finney CBE
                            W   G McKeag
                            A   Sandford
                            H   B Sturgeon
                            S   W Taylor
                            P   A Lee                   Chief Executive
                            A Baden                     Observer for the Secretary of
                                                        State for National Heritage
                            J de Quidt                  FLA Observer
                            C Foster                    Rushtons
                            W Carter                    Corderoy & Co
                            M Ross
                            Mrs P Finney
                            Miss G Firth                Secretary
                            Ms S O'Btien

              FIFA Award
              1.    Led    by   Mr Sturgeon, the meeting congratulated the
              Chairman     on   being honoured by the FIFA Order of Merit in
              Gold.
              Apologies for absence
              2. Apologies were received from Lord Aberdare, Mr Faulkner,
              Mr Dent and Mr Thwaite.
              Minutes
              3. The    minutes of LALC (92) 2nd meeting were approved               and
              signed by the Chairman.
              Matters arising
              Chester City
              4. Mr    Sandford reported that he intended to visit Chester
              City, to discuss the progress made with the new stadium.
              Football Trust and Chairman's Committee Meetings
              5.   The ltiinutes of the Trust meetings of 1 April and 11 May,
              and the   Chairman's Committee of 11 March and 9 June were
              noted.   The Chairman reported that the recommendations made
              by LALC at the meeting on 13 April on major project proposals
              had been approved.
                                                  -   1 ~
\1   01                   iu-   o-az   ;   ibU b   ;   m e t - oo i ba i i   Tr ust       0253 724766;




          football Trust Meeting: 6 July
          6.   The Chairman reported on decisions taken by the Trust
          which affected the future operation of the LALC.      On the
          proposal   to fund the     artificial pitch and associated
          community work at Bescot Stadium from RPBD monies the meeting
          fait that this might not be appropriate and that Trustees
          should be invited to review the matter.
          7. Given the Trustees' decision that the safety grant regime
          should be recast to benefit capital projects only, and that
          certain items of expenditure should no longer be eligible for
          grant aid from 1 October; the meeting considered which items
          they should be. The Chairman suggested that possible items
          could includes    fees for    safety certificates, building
          regulations,   FLA licences (all of which       are   already
          ineligible), stewards jackets and coats, roadway matchdav
          signs, two-way radios and associated telephones, internal
          signs, and traffic directional signs. Members were invited
          to put forward for consideration by the Trustees any other
          items they felt should be included. It was recommended that
          the new policy should apply from 1 October.
          8. Mr de Quidt pointed out that a number of items related to
          the needs of stewards, and that they could perhaps count
          against the policing and stewarding budget.
          9.   Mr Sandford expressed concern at the escalating cost of
          police control boxes The meeting felt that, in some cases,
          the police were placing too great a demand on clubs       for
          equipment and furnishings in control boxes. The Trust should
          be invited to consider this concern at its next meeting.
          10.   Following the Trust's decision to reduce the percentage
          of professional fees element of grant support from 10% to 5%
          it was recommended that the lower ceiling should apply from 1
          October.
          Management Report
          11.   There was no report since the meeting fell                            inside   the
          first weeks of a new quarter.
          Premier League : access to RPBD funds
          12. Mr Baden referred to the Secretary of State for National
          Heritage's letter of 22 June to Lord Aberdare concerning
          Premier League clubs access to RPBD funds.      it had been
          agreed that those Premier League clubs which had not yet
          applied for major project grant aid should, in principle, be
          allowed access to reduction in Pool Betting Duty monies. No
          further applications for works funded form RPBD monies would
          be contemplated from those clubs who had already applied for
          grant aid except, in exceptional circumstances. These would
          be where the works concerned were necessary ancillary works
          to a previous major project and the overall cost would not
          exceed the grant ceiling of £2 million.
                                      - 2 -
13.   In  considering future applications for major project
grants from Premier League clubs, the Governmentwould expect
the Trust to apply its needs and resources         test with
particular stringency, taking     full account of the income
being generated by the Premier League including that from
television and other commercial contracts. Mr Baden said
that the Government hoped that Premier League clubs would
make a financial contribution to t.he Trust from their new
income.

14.   Mr Foster said that he would need access to Premier
League financial information in order to apply the needs and
resources test for his reports on Premier League clubs.
Administration

15.    The   Chairman reported on the      arrangements   for
transferring the administration of LALC to Walkden House. Ms
O'Brien^ would be the Secretary      and Mrs Finney     would
relinquish her CCTV responsibilities to concentrate on her
role as Secretary of the Chairman's Committee.
16.    Mr Baden said that the Department of National Heritage
was pleased to note the administrative changes the Trust was
undertakingtnotably the appointment of a financial controller
and the bringing together of grant administration at Walkden
House.     Given   the Trust's    responsibilities   and  its
accountability both developments were to be welcomed.     The
Chairman underlined that the changes did not question the
quality of the present service. The Trust had received a
high standard of administration and extensive support of the
Football League for many years but it was accepted that there
was now a need to centralize the Trust's administration. The
Chairman recorded the outstanding service that Miss Firth had
provided in administration for both LALC and FGIT ovet the
past fifteen years. The Trust would doubtless wish to mark
her excellent contribution.
Scottish Football League

17.   The Chairman and Mr Faulkner would meet representatives
of the proposed Scottish Super League on 21 July and would
underline the Trust's position on grant aid for clubs in any
such League, The Trust could not deal with the organisation
in advance of it being properly constituted and recoqnised by
the SPA and SPL.
Major Projects

18.   The following three applications had been considered by
the Trust on 6 Julys-
   Manchester United
   Given the.tr membership of thePremier League,      tho
   Stretford End grant     offer of £1.4m,the additional
   seating grantof £132,230 and the modest cost involved,
   the application for     grant aidfor 67   seats in the
                           - 3 -
                    iu - o-a2 ;   its;!/ ;        m e to o tb a i i irus:-»   U 2d 3 / 2 4 / o t i i # of l




    infill beneath the new Police control room at                               Old
    Trafford had been rejected on the basis of needs                            and
    resources.
    Hartlepool United
    75% of approved expenditure up to a maximum of £21.600
    gross I £16.200 net) towards the installation of 760
    Seats in the Rink End Stand, subject t.o satisfactory
    progress having been made on the major project grant
    awarded in 1991.
    Sheffield Wednesday
    60% of approved expenditure up to a maximum of £138.505
    gross (£83.103 net) towards replacing*existing wooden
    seating in the South Stand.
19.   West Ham United's letter, informing the Trust that it
would not, be taking up the major project offer, was noted.
20. The following applications were consideredt-
    6'heffield United - seating in the Bramall Lane Terrace.
    £iven that only 30% of seats would be under cover and
    would therefore not meet with the approval of the FLA ,
    the application should be referred back to the Club for
    reconsideration.
    Huddersfield Town - a meeting between the Chairman, the
    Club and its advisers was to be arranged. The Chairman
    had offered    two dates in July but neither had been
    suitable for the Club.

    Port Vale - the revised application centring on the
    purchase of    the Main Stand from Chester City's old
    ground and its reconstruction at Hamil Road        was
    discussed.   The proposal made economic sense and had
    the support o£ the FLA. A recommendation would be made
    in the light of Corderoy's report.
    Torquay United - the new stand at the Ellacombe End; it
    was   noted that the Club      had not    allowed   for
    professional fees, further grant aid of £30,000, 10% of
    the grant award, was recommended.
21.   Major project applications from Middlesbrough, Grimsby
Town and Stoke City were being processed. A list of major
project grants, setting out allocations and expenditure, was
tabled.
Transport: Grants

22. The following applications were considered:-
    Charlton Athletic - special arrangements for crowd
    control n.t Charlton Station.     It was agreed that
    Network SouthEast and the Metropolitan Police should be
    asked to provide costings.
                                      -   4   -
D I                     j.u- a-az .   io-io ;       m e rootDail irusi^   U253 724700




          Walsall - a CCTV link between the Bescot Station and
          the stadium police contiol room, to be referred to the
          Trust without, recommendation.
             Dundee - the construction of the new car park, a
             recommendation to be made once full costs were known
             and planning permission granted.
      23. It was noted that applications from Cambridge United and
      West Ham United were pending, and that one from Norwich City
      had been withdrawn.
      Stewarding
      24.   Mr de Quidt spoke on the note from an FLA inspector
      about the method of assessment to be used when judging
      applications for stewarding costs. He was anxious that the
      Trust cjrant aid should encourage clubs to move towards more
      stewarding, but that this had to be effective. The Chairman
      underlined that the approval of local police was an essential
      element in the process of grant aiding stewarding costs. At
      Mr de Quidt'$ suggestion it was agreed that the approval of
      the local safety committee should be sought in this area.
      The FLA note encapsulated those developments the Trust had
      stated that it wished to see in place when dispensing grant
      aid (for st.**warding. The method o£ assessing claims would be
      clarified in due course.
      CCTV
      25.   Mrs Finney reported that Chesterfield had received an
      offer of £16,100, and that the pending applications from Hull
      City, Grimsby Town and Scunthorpe       would be close     to
      exhausting the remaining budget balance of £116,454.      The
      next meeting of the Trust would consider a further budget
      allocation.
      26.   Mrde Quidt said  that the application from Scunthorpe
      appeared to be far in excess of the needs of the Club.
      Colchester United
      27.   The principle of clubs making application for grant aid
      towards works necessary to gain promotion to the Football
      League would be referred to the next meeting of the Trust.
      Southend United
      28.   Tt   was decided that it would be    inappropriate for
      representatives of Corderoy's and Rushtons' to visit the Club
      in order    to assist in resolving their   confused finances
      relatingto    grant     claims.     The   Club   could    send
      representatives to the Corderoy's officc, if they wished.


                                        - 5     -
                 in- a - u 2   ;   id-io ;   m e rootDaii lrust-*        U^Oli /2.^ i Ott t r r // 7




Claims

29.   A   list of claims accepted since the last                    meeting    was
noted.
Any other business

30.   The closing date for Major Project applications, for
work intend for next closed season, was set for the 18
January 1993, _ Clubs should be encouraged to submit fully
documented applications as soon as possible*
31.   Mr de Quidt expressed concern about the safety work
being undertaken at Bury. The Chairman said that the project
should be monitored to ensure that work was carried out as
described in the application. Corderoy's were instructed to
make an early site visit to ensure that work was consistent
with the grant offer.
Millwall Community Sports Stand
30.   Given the grant offer already made towards the new
stadium, the maximum offer from the FA Contribution Account
and the enormous pressures on STB funds for both LALC and the
Chairman's Committee, it was reluctantly recommended that no
offer of grant aid should be made towards the project.
Next meeting
31. The next meeting was fixed for 10.30am on 7 September at
Walkden House.




FT
7 August 1992                                6
