                     THE FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST

MINUTES OF A MEETING OF TRUSTEES HELD ON MONDAY 21ST APRIL 1986 AT 16 ST.
MARTINS-LE-GRAND, LONDON COMMENCING AT 10.30A.M.


       Present:   T. Wharton (in the Chair)
                  P.C. Dodds
                  T. Finney, O.B.E., J.P.
                  R.H.G. Kelly, F.C.I.S.
                  C. Lloyd, O.B.E.
                  P.D. Smithson
                  H.B. Sturgeon
                  S.W. Taylor

                  Miss G.L. Firth (Secretary)
                  W.H. Carter (Messrs. G. Corderoy &. Co.)
                  C. Foster (Messrs. Pomfret Rushton)



656. MINUTES

     The Minutes of the last meeting held on 15th January 1986 were taken
as read and signed by the Chairman as a correct record.

657.    SECRETARY* REPORT

     The Secretary reported that, at the present time, there were no problems
being encountered with safety claims.

658. FINANCE

     A copy of the current financial statement showing a balance of £2,668,919-34
was received and noted.

     The draft accounts for the 15 months ending 5th April 1986 were received
together with budget estimates.

      It was agreed that the distinction in the accounts between Designated
arid“'Non^Des:^iated Clubs be abolished.

     Mr. Foster raised the question of the £2.6 million provisionally reserved
at 31st December 1984 for improvement grants. Mr. Foster felt that it
was more advisable to write into the account the amount actually spent
on improvements. However, after consideration the Trustees felt that a
reserve for applications accepted in principle should always be written
into the accounts.

     Mr. Foster stated that administration costs for 1985 had been £26,000
compared with £44,878 for 1984.

       In all other aspects the draft accounts were agreed.

     Mr. H.B. Sturgeon expressed concern that the budget forecast at the
end of December 1986 was as low as £.3 million. He expressed a view that
the Trustees should call upon the offer of a £1 million loan from the Football
Trust.

       After discussion it was agreed that the Chairman should inform the
658.   FINANCE (Continued)

Football Trust that, although the Trustees had not called upon the Trust's
offer, it was likely that they would need to do so in 1987/88 and that
the Trustees would appreciate the offer remaining or if the Football Trust
felt they needed to utilise the money themselves then adequate warning
be given.

     The Chairman had advised the Football Trust that the F.G.I.T. Trustees
felt that the Elm on offer would allow F.G.I.T. to approve further safety
work to that amount. This was a necessity to protect the Trustees of F.G.I.T.
who could not commit themselves beyond their known funds.


     It was agreed that the annual report of the Trustees should contain
some mention of the high increase in claims met by the Trust during the
past 15 months.

       The Trustees agreed Pomfret Rushton's account of £2,850 plus V.A.T.

       A list of accounts paid since the last meeting was received and noted.

     A letter from solicitors confirming that any contribution from the
Mirror Group Fund established after the Bradford City fire would not attract
Capital Transfer Tax was received. The Trust was the ultimate beneficiary
of the Fund if any balance was left after distribution to the victims'
familites etc.

     The Chairman expressed the opinion that the Trust's benefactors would
not welcome contributions being made from other sources.

     It was agreed that the matter be considered more fully as and when
a contribution was made.

     An administration fee of £12,000 (inclusive of V.A.T.) was agreed
for 1986 at the suggestion of Mr. Kelly.

     It was agreed that.the mileage allowance be increased to 27p in line
with the Football League Management Committee.

659•    SAFETY

     The Chairman reported that 382 claims had been dealt with in 1985
compared with 207 in 1984. A total of £4,399,380 had been paid out in
grants in 1985 compared with £769,278 in 1984. In the light of these figures
the Chairman felt that the Trustees were carrying out the wishes of the
Management Committee in that money was being distributed efficiently to
clubs.

     Mr. Carter stated that, although he had expressed concern at the last
meeting that the level of activity had not dropped off, this had now happened.
Over the last two months the Trust had in fact only expended £400,000.

     Mr. Carter stated that Corderoy & Co. expected the local authorities
to press clubs a little harder this close season but, in response to a
query from Mr. Sturgeon, he did not envisage a major upsurge in demands.

       A list of grants made since the last meeting was received and noted.

      A discussion ensued on the question of clubs undertaking to build
a new stand rather than upgrade an old stand to a safety level at excessive
cost. In particular the Trustees considered an application from Lincoln
City.
659-    SAFETY (Continued)

     After hearing the background to the claim and various visits from
Mr. Dodds the following was agreed:-

a)     The Trust would grant aid demolition works relating to the Railway
        Terrace, South Park Stand and St. Andrews Stand,

b)     The Trust would not grant aid the making good of the club house under
        the South Park Stand,

c)     The Trustees agreed in principle to grant aid at 50% of approved expenditure
        the replacement of spectator facilities only on the site of the present
        St. Andrews Stand to a maximum fo £290,000 gross which was the estimated
        cost at present.

     This offer was, of course, subject to the Trust being satisfied that
the club could meet their 50$ of the costs.

     Mr. T. Finney raised the question of work to Blackburn Rovers' stand
and it was agreed that the two local Trustees should visit the club, together
with Corderoys, and report to the next meeting.

     Mr. Taylor and Mr. Smithson raised a point concerning items such as
fire detection systems in public places not normally grant aided such as
executive boxes, trophy rooms etc. It was agreed that the Trust's current
policy remain in that grant aid was not available for parts of the ground
where general spectators were not present. Clubs must protect areas such
as executive boxes themselves.

     It was generally agreed that claims from clubs for such items as new
stands would have to be dealt with on an individual merit basis.

660.    IMPROVEMENTS

     The Chairman reported on the final meeting of the Minister's Working
Group. It had been made clear that no finance would be forthcoming from
the Government.

     A list of improvement grants made since the last meeting was received
and noted.

     It was decided that a request from Queens Park Rangers for a retrospective
grant on improvements to their artificial surface could not be accepted.

     The Trustees decided that they were not in a position to give further
grant aid to Newcastle United on the re-development of their West Stand
costing in the region of £4.2 million. The offer of £250,000 previously
made in respect of improvement work would be held for a further six months
towards the costs if the club wished to avail themselves of this offer.

     Mr. Carter was requested to provide detailed figures in relation to
the additional £50,000 aid being requested by Sheffield Wednesday in connection
with the covering of their Penistone Road End.
660.    IMPROVEMENTS (Continued)

       The following applications were accepted for grant aid:-

     Arsenal - undersoil heating
     Chelsea - drainage to pitch and disabled facilities
     Everton - extension to cover
     Manchester United - toilets
     Northampton Town - provision of additional seating in semi permanent stand
     Aston Villa - undersoil heating
     Albion Rovers - toilets and covering
     Hamilton Academical - toilets and covered accommodation (modified scheme)
     Heart of Midlothian - Undersoil heating
     Applications from Watford, Norwich City and Wigan Athletic would be
considered when detailed figures were available. The Trustees noted that
an application from Watford had been made last October but plans had had
to be changed recently which had resulted in detailed figures not now being
available.

     In view of the contribution being made by the local authority it was
decided that grant aid could not be offered to Bradford City in respect
of their new stand. Safety work would obviously be dealt with in the normal
manner.

     It was decided to defer applications from Oldham Athletic, Torquay
United and Stirling Albion in respect of artificial surfaces until the
views of the Football League and Scottish Football League Management Committees
could be obtained in the light of current uncertainties surrounding these
pitches, particularly in England.

     It was agreed that future improvement applications should be dealt
with on a continuous basis rather than being discussed once a year as had
happened over the past three years. The Secretary did not feel that this
policy worked well and it meant frustration for a lot of clubs if a decision
was deferred from one meeting to the next. New applications could be considered
by the Trustees at a meeting in conjunction with budget forecasts.

661.   FOOTBALL LEAGUE AND SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE

     The Chairman reported that the Scottish situation of a possible breakaway
had now been resolved amicably.

     Mr. Smithson expressed the opinion, on studying the Trust Deed, that
if clubs left the Football League to form a Super League they would cease
to be beneficiaries of the Trust.

     In response to a query from Mr. Sturgeon, Mr. Smithson confirmed that
it was the clubs who were beneficiaries and not the grounds.

662.   GROUND SHARING

     The Trustees had before them a claim from Charlton Athletic in respect
of work undertaken at their ground prior to the club moving to Selhurst
Park (Claim No. 9)-

     As the work had been undertaken on instructions and money had been
expended it was agreed that this final claim from Charlton Athletic be
accepted.

     However, the Trustees acknowledged the fact that ground sharing was
an option open to clubs which would be more widely taken up in the future
and the situation would need to be borne in mind for future discussion.
663•   PLYMOUTH ARGYLE

     It was decided that the Trust could not accept the principle of grant
aiding clubs for the training of stewards and accordingly Plymouth Argyle's
claim.No. 6 was refused.

664.   BRADFORD CITY

     The Trustees had before them a request from Bradford City for grant
aid on an interim account in respect of architects fees in advance of the
work being commenced.

     It was agreed that Corderoy & co. analyse the account and ascertain
the costs attributable to a) safety, b) improvements and c) V.A.T.

     The Trust would make a payment on that part of the costs attributable
to safety only once the tender had been let subject, of course, to receipt
of a normal auditors certificate.

665.   FOOTBALL TRUST

     The Chairman reported on the meeting of the Football Trust held on
12th March and the arrangements for grant aiding non-League clubs for safety
work.

666. NORTHERN IRELAND

     After considering a request from the Irish Football League for a further
grant towards safety expenditure incurred by clubs it was agreed that the
Secretary should write to the Irish Football League stating that the Trustees
would be prepared to offer a grant of £80,000. However, the Trustees felt
that some claims stated in their letter were excessive in relation to attendances
at matches and further that the claim from Glentoran should be accepted
in full in view of the ground being used as the second international ground
in the country. The offer would, of course, be subject to all the works
being for safety and the Irish Football League undertaking to distribute
the grant on behalf of the Trustees.

      It was also agreed that the Secretary should write to the Irish Football
Association requesting details of the funding of further works at Windsor
Park and stating that the Trust were prepared to consider a grant of up
to £ 50,000 towards safety work at the ground.

667.   PUBLICITY

     The Secretary reported an incident concerning a firm of PR Consultants,
Messrs. Scott & Jones, who had approached clubs without her knowledge requesting
co-operation in certain cheque presentations.

     It had transpired that the firm had been requested by Mr. R. Faulkner
to undertake a feasibility study on publicising the work of the Trust.

     As it was likely to cost a great deal of money to employ this firm
the Trustees endorsed the Chairman's decision to notify Mr. R. Faulkner
that the Trust did not wish to pursue this course.
668. ALBION ROVERS

     The Trustees considered   an application from.Albion Rovers in respect
of a rather grandiose scheme   at their ground in relation to their average
attendance.

     It was agreed that work to emergency lighting be accepted but that
the club be requested to submit a more modest application with a greatly
reduced capacity and within a much reduced amount for the remaining work.

669-   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY

     The Trustees rejected an appeal from Sheffield Wednesday in respect
of work to the tforth Stand roof which had not been accepted for grant aid.

670.   MILLWALL

     It was decided to refuse Millwall's application in respect of the
inspection of gas installations at the ground.

     The Trustees felt that this was the responsibility of the club.     A
good insurance policy covered such items as annual inspections.

671-   FALKIRK

     The Trustees accepted a modified scheme from Falkirk in respect of
a replacement cover to the East Terrace at their ground. This was a safety
application.


672-   NEXT MEETING

     It was decided that the next meeting be held on Friday 18th July 1986
at 16 St. Martins-Le-Grand, London to commence at 10.30a.m.

     The Chairman suggested that, in future, it may be necessary to hold
meetings every two months rather than every three months.

673.   INVITATIONS

     It was decided that Lord Aberdare and Sir Norman Chester be invited
to join the Trustees for lunch after the next meeting. The Chairman undertook
to approach Lord Aberdare on a personal basis initially.


     There being no further business the Chairman declared the meeting
closed.


     The Trustees were joined for lunch mid-way through the meeting by
Mr. J.J. Dunnett, President, and Mr. J.F. Wiseman, Vice-President, of the
Football League.




                                         Chairman

                                             Date
