                                              F T (91) 5th Meeting


     MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH MEETING OF THE FOOTBALL TRUST
           HRT.n ON 17 DECEMBER 1991 AT WALKDEN HOUSE



Present:         The Rt Hon Lord Aberdare KBE    Ch3.irin3.ri
                 R 0 Faulkner       First Deputy Chairman
                 T Wharton OBE     Second Deputy Chairman
                 Y Craig
                 Asst Chief Constable Malcolm George
                 R H G Kelly
                 B Ludlam
                 G Taylor
                 p A Lee     Secretary
                 Mrs P A Finney



Apologies for absence
1.   Apologies were received from Sir John Smith,          Sir   Bert
Millichip and Messrs Hughes, Thwaite and Vaughan.


Mr William Fox
2.   The meeting stood for a minute's silence as a mark of
respect for Bill Fox, who had died on 8 December.       Tne
Chairman expressed the Trust's sympathy to his family and
sadness at the untimely loss to the Trust and football.

Minutes of the previous meeting
3.      The   minutes of the FT(90) 10th meeting were agreed.

Matters arising
Sports Turf Research Institute
4.   Mr Lee reported on his visit to the Institute.    It wa®
aqreed that the offer of grant of £2,000 for aeration research
should be allocated to the turf project underway at Bingley.
A further grant of £2.750, to be matched by the FA, would be
made available in the new financial year to enable tne
Institute to extend the work to include pitches at two League
clubs and, possibly, a rugby club.
Decisions of the Trust
5. The FT(91) 9th and 10th Meeting Schedules of Decision were
noted.
Minutes of the CC(91) 4th meeting
Chairman's Discretionary Fund
6.   A small reserve of £1,000 remained available from the
1991/92 allocation for the exceptionally deserving case.  Mr
Lee was invited to prepare a paper on how a more structured
scheme might operate in 1992/93, after consultation with the
FA on the role the County Associations might play in the
process.
Foundation for Sport and the Arts
7. The following artificial pitch schemes, to which the Trust
had committed funds, but not yet released monies, would be
suggested to the Foundation as recipients of that body's £0.5m
contribution to grassroots football:
                                                       £
Mabley Green, London                                 80,000
Stand Road, Chesterfield                            100,000
Projects in Wales                                    20,000
Derry City Council, N Ireland                       100,000
1991 Allocation for artificial pitch
  project in Scotland                              200,000
                                       Total       £500,000


8. The following recommended grants were agreed;
The Footballers' Further Education and Vocational Training
Society
£25,000 to assist with the cost of providing          educational
courses for players and former players.

Scottish Junior Football Association
£10,000,   matching  the   Scottish Football       Association's
contribution, towards the refurbishment of the     Association's
Glasgow office.
Shifnal Town FC
£15,000   to assist with the re-erection of a stand at the    new
ground.
Newport AFC
£4,000 to assist with the proposed repair and safety work.
Duke of Edinburgh's Award: Midlands region pilot scheme

9   The proposal to fund a pilot project based on League clubs
in the Midlands, at a cost of £15,000, had been referred to
the Amalgamated Football Development and Community Scheme.  Mr
Taylor explained that close links were maintained with the
Award scheme project but that the PFA did not have the
resources to extend co-operation into funding.

Pyramid football: grant aid policy
10.   A meeting would be convened in the new year between
repressntatives from the Chairman s Committee and the GM
Vauxhall    Conference together with its three feeder leagues to
discuss     extended financialsupport     towards safety     and
improvement schemes for Pyramid football in England and clubs
in Scotland outside the Scottish Football League.     Subject to
finances,  it was intended that such support should mirror the
grant regime operating for League and Scottish League clubs
with comparable average attendances.
Amalgamated Football Development and Community Scheme
11.   The    Chairman reported on the helpful presentation  on
proorsss       Mr Burns and Mr Reade,     the Scheme s Chief
Executive and Chief Administrative Officer. The six club
pilot project had now expanded to embrace 61 clubs.         It
remained   the    intention  that   the   Scheme    should  be
self-financing but in the event of sponsorship falling short
of the target, the Trust might be approached for renewed,
smaller scale, funding. Mr Taylor emphasised, and_the meeting
welcomed,    the credit given to the Trust's funding of    the
Scheme by the PFA.
Women's Football Association
12.   Mr Lee reported that payment of the remaining grant
monies was being made against submission of invoices and after
consultation with the Sports Council.
Minutes of LALC (91) 10th meeting
Criteria for determining the sources of grant payment
13.   It was agreed that appropriate applications for     seating
and cover would be met from RPBD funds.

Premier League
14.    Grant aid policy in respect of the Premier League was
discussed.   The Government's position was crucial and remained
that   the Trust's present policy should continue to apply.
They   were not yet prepared to amend the letter of agreement
between the Treasury and the Trust regarding the use of pool
betting duty reduction monies to enable grants to be paid to
Premier League clubs.    In the longer term grant eligibility
should be decided in the light of the wealth created by the
Premier League and how that was to be disbursed throughout the
game.   This steer was helpful but decisions affecting many
clubs likely to be founder members of the new league would
need to be taken in the months ahead. The issues of timing
and discrimination were discussed.     It was agreed that an
interest-free loan policy had attraction.   The Chairman said
that the policy could be so operated that, if appropriate, the
whole or part of a loan could be converted to a grant.
15.    It was agreed that the next step should be to convene a
meeting in early January with DES and Treasury officials to
secure    the Government's view on      grant aid policy     to
prospective members of the Premier League and on the concept
of a loan policy.
Safety
16.   The following recommendations were approved:

(1) Crush barriers
It was agreed that grant aid for the testing of crush barriers
at First and Second Division clubs should cease after the 1992
close season.   Henceforth all grant applications for testing
barriers will be subject to prior notification by the clubs.
(2)   West Ham United and Southend United
Claims from West Ham United and Southend United had exceeded
the grant offer.  It was reaffirmed that clubs should submit
applications to cover any additional work which proved to be
necessary.
(3)   Plymouth Arqyle
It was agreed that the request from Plymouth Argyle for grant
aid toward the reinstallation of defective seats could not be
accepted as the Club had received a grant on their original
installation.
Major Projects
17.   The following recommendations were agreed;

Arsenal
Consideration was deferred in the light of the rejection of
planning permission for the redevelopment of the North Bank.
Aston Villa
£65.650   for   the   cover and £42.009 for the   seating   in   the
Trinity Road stand, with grant offers to count        against    the
major project ceiling.

Manchester City
Trustees expressed concern that the rebuilding of the Platt
Lane Stand eliminated seating for visiting supporters. Mr Lee
had visited Maine Road and said that the Club s plans for the
redevelopment of the ground as a whole should be taken into
account.    Consideration   was   deferred   pending   further
information from the Club on their Taylor plans,how the cost
of them was to be met and what was planned in the long term on
accommodation for away supporters.   In view of the urgency of
the application it was agreed that the Chairman,        Deputy
Chairmen and Mr Lee should decide on the level of grant to be
offered  (and also in the case of Norwich below) in the light
of the additional information requested from the Club and the
outcome of the DES/Treasury loan policy meeting.

Norwich City
Consideration of the application in respect of the demolition
and rebuilding of the Barclay Stand and South Stand Corner at
a cost of approximately £3m was deferred pending further
information on how the Club intended to fund the conversion of
the rest of the ground to all seated accommodation.

Queens Park Rangers
Consideration in respect of the Club's three year programme _of
conversion to all-seated accommodation was deferred pending
the reconciliation of discrepancies      between the    Club's
proposal to the Trust and information provided by it to the
FLA.
Ipswich Town
75% of approved costs not exceeding £290,297 towards        seating
of the North and South Stands was agreed.

Charlton Athletic
The application for additional grant aid of £150,000 towards
family and disabled areas within the new Main Stand was
reiected on the grounds that these facilities had been taken
into account in deciding on the major project grant offer.
Leeds United
The meeting acknowledged that it was possible that there had
been a misunderstanding about grant procedure in the case of
the application in respect of the family enclosure. A grant
of 70% of £71,500 was agreed.

CCTV
18.   A progress report on the operation of the CCTV grant
  gime was noted. It was agreed that the application by Leeds
370
United should be rejected since the Club had failed to follow
the grant aid procedure.
19.  It was agreed that it would be inappropriate for
grant-aided CCTV equipment owned by Darlington FC to be
located at the local police station.

Transport
20.  Stranraer    FC - £18,000 towards the cost of providing   a
new car park.
Football League Services Division
21.  It was agreed that applications for grant aid, even where
the facilities of the Services Division were being drawn upon,
must come direct from the Club.
Association of Football Club Stewards
22.   It was agreed that it would not be appropriate to   offer
grant aid towards the setting up of the Association.

Minutes of National Stadia Sub Committee

Scottish Football Association
23.  It was agreed that Queen's Park could continue to apply
for safety grant aid in the normal way, but that they would
not be eligible for RPBD funds for Taylor-related work in
addition to the £5m earmarked in the national stadium context.

Wemblev Stadium
24.   Mr Faulkner reported on the meeting with Wembley's
Chairman and Financial Director. They were dismayed at the
Government's view that the redevelopment work at Wembley Park
underground station and Olympic Way was not Taylor-related and
was therefore ineligible for receipt of RPBD^ funds.      They
would be making representations to Government in an effort to
secure agreement that the project could be considered for RPBD
grant aid. The Wembley representatives had made it clear they
did not accept that the sightlines at some of the low tier
seating constituted a major problem.     If the FLA were to
threaten their licence on this count, any such seating would
not be sold at football matches. The alternative - to alter
the rake - would be prohibitively expensive.
Minutes of the Public Relations Committee
25. The minutes of the Committee's meeting held on 2 December
were tabled.    Mr Faulkner reported on the need to raise the
public awareness of the Trust, especially amongst political
opinion formers.    It was agreed that the Trust's public
relations effort should be recast with this in mind and
brought in-house by the appointment of a Public Relations
Officer to the Walkden House staff, making use as appropriate
of the services of the Littlewoods' network of small news
agencies which were employed to cover local pools winners. It
was anticipated that the new public relations operation could
be run within the present budget allocation.
26. The association with Scott & Jones should be brought to a
close on 31 March 1992. The meeting acknowledged the long and
good service they had provided.

Management report
27.    The Management Report was noted.

FA Contribution Account
78.   It was agreed, in the light of Mr Lee's discussions with
Mr Kelly and the FA's Chief Accountant,     that disbursements
from the FA's £3.5m contribution account should be made in
accordance with the terms of Mr Kelly's letter of 20 December
1990 and associated paper. The account would therefore be
available for topping-up grants for First and Second_Division
clubs   where applications hadparticular merit.   This might
include the move to       a new ground or a ground sharing
arrangement or where clubs were seeking to provide a higher
standard    of   facilities for    the family,    people   with
disabilities, women and broader community use.   Clubs would be
invited to apply for additional grants u p _to £250,000 and
while   these would be made at the Trust's discretion t h e _ FA
would   be notified in advance and the clubs would be advised
that the additional funding had been made available from the
monies paid to the Trust by the FA.

Staff salaries
29.   It was agreed that the annual review of staff salaries
would be carried out by the First Deputy Chairman, Mr Thwaite
and Mr Lee.
Any other business
FA grant application
30.   The FA's request for assistance towards their proposed
£550,000 media campaign in support of their bid to host the
1996 European Championship Finals fell outside the remit of
the Trust Deed.    It was agreed however that every possible
support for the FA's campaign should be provided in the
context of the Trust's own PR initiatives.
Schedule of meetings 1992
31.   The following meeting dates were agreed;

Wednesday   1   April   -    at the Scottish     Football League,
                             Glasgow.

A meeting, probably in May,to be arranged.
Monday 6 July -              10.30 at Walkden House
Monday 21 September     -    10.30 at Walkden House
Wednesday 16 December -      10.30 at Walkden House



FT
January 1992
