                     THE FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST 1979 ’

    MINUTES OF A MEETING OF TRUSTEES HELD ON TUESDAY 8TH JANUARY 1985 AT 16
    ST. MARTINS-LE-GRAND, LONDON COMMENCING AT 10.33A.M.



         Present:    C.H. Barclay,   F.C.A.   (in the Chair)

                     W.B. Davidson
                     P.C. Dodds
                     C. Lloyd, O.B.E.
                     P.D. Smithson
                     H.B. Sturgeon, F.R.I.C.S.
                     S.W. Taylor
                     T. Wharton

                     R.H.G. Kelly (Observer)
                     W.H. Carter (Messrs. George Corderoy & Co.)
                     N. Steckler (Accountant)




5*53 .APOLOGY FOR ABSENCE

         An apology for absence was received from Mr. T. Finney.

554.POLICY

         The Chairman commenced by apologising for having the call the Trustees
    for an emergency meeting, but following his report to colleagues of the
    meeting with the Football League Management Committee representatives on
    12th December, 1984 they had felt it necessary toconvene  an early meeting.

         His appointment had ceased on 31st December 1984 and he was continuing
    to act as Caretaker Chairman at the request of, and, by courtesy of the
    Management Committee having asked that the Trustees' expressed wish for
    his re-appointment be withdrawn.

        He expressed his appreciation of the help and friendship extended
   to him by the Trustees during his period both as Trustee and latterly as
   Chairman   and stated that the Management Committee had expressed a wish
   that Mr.  T. Wharton take over as new Chairman.

        The Chairman referred to the meeting of the Football Trust held on
   11th December 1984 when the Chairman of that Trust had intimated that F.G.I.T.
   policy matters should be left to F.G.I.T. and he had since received a letter
   from Lord Aberdare regretting his resignation as Chairman of F.G.I.T.

        He stated that it would be in everybody's best interests If Messrs.
   W.B. Davidson and S.W. Taylor gave a report of the meeting with the Football
   League Management Committee, but first asked Mr. Wharton the reasons that
   the League President, Mr. J.J. Dunnett, had given when asking him to become
   Chairman.



                                                                Continued/2
Continued/2


     Mr. Wharton stated that Mr. Dunnett had referred to an acrimonious
meeting on the 12th December, 1984 and that, in his view, Mr. Barclay's
resignation was irrevocable on both sides.

     Mr. Davidson reported first on the meeting with the Football League
Management Committee on 12th December, 1984. The League President had taken
a highly critical view of the Trustees' policy in not releasing more monies
to clubs;although the Chairman had stated that having regard to the amount
of the Trust's commitments, and the known refusal of the PPA to give a
firm undertaking to provide future funds, it was impracticable to comply
with the President's proposals if those commitments were to be met. Mr.
Dunnett had said that the prime object of P.G.I.T. was safety and he would
endeavour to obtain the undertaking from the PPA to provide the funds necessary
to fulfill F.G.I.T.1s commitments if the retrospective grants for safety
were paid as he had requested. His argument in support of his request
was mainly based on the overdrafts that Clubs had raised to enable them
to meet their share of safety costs in the past.

     Mr. Davidson said he had already intimated to the Chairman his intention
to resign as a Trustee in 1985, as he was running down his business commitments
generally, and, in view of the Management Committee's acceptance of the
Chairman's resignation, he also was resigning forthwith and tendered his
letter of resignation to the League President via the prospective Chairman.

     Mr. Taylor confirmed Mr. Davidson's report of the meeting - Mr. Dunnett
had felt that F.G.I.T. had ignored the Management Committee's wishes.
There had been regrettable clash of personalities.

     Mr. Kelly, when asked to confirm the accounts of the meeting, agreed
with the substance and referred also to other meetings attended by Mr.
Dunnett on the 14th March and 21st November, 1984.

     The Chairman accepted that there had been a clash of personalities
but felt also that the clash of principles involved wa,s more important.
The Trustees had an obligation to act independently and free from extraneous
influences and to make their decisions in a judicious manner on all the
relevant facts. On the 29th November, 1984 the Trustees held a very long
meeting at which 1985 grant policy was debated; all the relevant facts
relating to current and prospective financial requirements for safety and
improvement grants for 1984 and 1985 were considered, together with suggestions
for priorities, and the views expressed by outside interested parties.
A majority decision was then taken on 1985 grant policy with one dissentient.

     In view of the Football League President's aggressive attitude, he
felt it impracticable to carry on as Chairman; it would be impossible for
him to be a partyy to clubs being given assurances about their grant applications
and then leave them high and dry because funds were not available. He
had said that he would consult with the Trustees again on the President's
request, if they were provided with a letter of unqualified guarantee from
the PPA undertaking to meet the cash shortfall if the Trustees decided
to act on the President's proposals. He was not prepared to go back on
the standards the Trustees had always applied.

     In the course of the discussion the President had not accepted the
validity of the claims submitted by clubs for improvements, and Mr. J.F.
Wiseman had said that they were now in a new 'ball game'. He regretted
having to make the decision to withdraw as he had enjoyed working, debating
and initiating policy with his fellow Trustees over the many years they
had co-operated together. Having regard to that long and friendly association
he felt it was necessary to outline the full reasons for his decision.

                                                          Continued/3
Continued/3


     Mr. Wharton gave an account of his invitation from the League President
on 18th December 1984 to take the Chair of F.G.I.T.

     The Chairman then read a letter from Messrs. Pomfret Rushton which
said that it was important that Mr. Barclay should be involved with and
co-operate on the 1984 audit and preparation of the accounts. The Trustees
decided that it was necessary for Mr. Barclay to be involved for some weeks
in order to finalise the affairs of the Trust to 31st December 1984 and
gave him discretion in the matter of staff so to do, including some suitable
appreciation for Mr. Steckler's co-operation. Both past and present Chairmen
expressed the desire that the burden of administration be removed from
the former's shoulders as soon as was practicable.

     The Trustees recorded with deep regret the tragic death on 14th December
1984 of Mrs. S. Dingwall who had been appointed Secretary to the Trust
on 29th November, 1984. The necessary bank mandate to the National Westminster
Bank pic authorising acceptance of Mrs. Dingwall's signature as an official
signatory had never been completed. The Trustees decided that P.G.I.T.
should bear the cost of two items totalling approximately £200 for the
benefit of Mrs. Dingwall. The Trustees noted that her salary, increased
from £7,500 p.a. to £8,500 p.a. as authorised by Messrs. W.B. Davidson
and S.W. Taylor on 12th December 1984, had been paid to 31st December, 1984.

     The Trustees examined the pass book sheets of all the Trust's banking
accounts for the year together with all returned cheques, including those
with only one signature, and also a list of cheques included in the letter
to the manager of the National Westminster Bank, giving details of all
cheques issued since the last record in the pass book sheets. These were
approved.

     Mr. Barclay was authorised to examine and approve all accounts relating
to the period prior to 31st December 1984 and received subsequent to this
meeting, together with all administration costs and expenses incurred during
the period that was necessary to enable the accounts to the 31st December
1984 to be finalised and approved. He would submit details of all outstanding
accounts and administration costs and expenses to the Secretary for th#
Trust’s approval.

     The Trustees passed for payment the following accounts which represented
all accounts outstanding received and due prior to 31st December 1984 and
decided to pay all such accounts.


CAPITAL ACCOUNT                                           £

     Chelsea                                           19,543
                                                       21,880
    Sheffield Wednesday                                13,428
    Wimbledon                                         . 2,177
    Manchester City                                       241
    Blackpool                                           8,052
    Brighton & Hove Albion                                147
    Notts. County                                       2,995
    Sheffield United                                    2,551
    Nottingham Forest                                   2,438
    Leicester City                                      2,877


                                                        Continued/4
Continued/4


INCOME ACCOUNT                                            £


     Bargold Investments Ltd                              2 , 600.00
     Horace Holman & Co.                                       40.00
     S.W. Taylor p                                             64.00
     Petty Cash                                                100.00
     Petty Cash                                                100.00
     Caves de la Madeleine (UK) Ltd                           \ 47.15
     Metrocars Ltd                                            ...   86.52
     H.B. Sturgeon                                           52.50
     Pomfret Rushton                                      1,782.50
     Dorpar Limited                                         224%.3%
     Inland Revenue                                    180 , 0 0 0 . 0 0
     C.H. Barclay                                              200.00
     Ashkelon - Jerusalem                                 $ 275.00


     A service charge submitted by landlords Bargold in respect of the
Berkeley Street premises was left for the new Chairman to discuss with
Trustees at a forthcoming meeting.

     The Chairman drew the attention of the Trustees to the following matters
affecting future liabilities which would need to be determined at future
meetings:-

     Shrewsbury Town
     Clubs who had .had improvement loans converted into grants
     Orient
     Preston North End
     Oldham Athletic
     Clubs originally grant aided at 75#

     The Chairman requested an indemnity from the Trustees on the cessation
of his appointment, but Mr. Smithson felt that this would not be applicable
as (a) it was only the beneficiaris, i.e. the clubs, who could give an
indemnity and (b) the Chairman would probably find he was covered anyway.

     The Chairman, in ending his Trusteeship, thanked the Trustees once
again for the,ir fellowship and support and said that the Minutes of the
29th November 1984 meeting would soon be available.

     The Trustees paid tribute to the Chairman's important contribution
to the work of the Trust.

     Mr. P.D. Smithson gave   notice that, in view of the muddled thinking
of the Management Committee   currently appertaining, which had led to the
present situation, he might   find it necessary to re-consider his position
as Trustee, if it was being   suggested that decisions be reversed.

     Messrs. H.B. Sturgeon and S.W. Taylor felt that such matters should
be left for discussion at the next meeting of Trustees on 23rd January, 1985.

     The Trustees then unanimously accepted the Management Committee's
nomination of Mr. T. Wharton as Chairman. Mr. Wharton then took the Chair.


                                                              Continued/5
Continued/5


     The new Chairman indicated, and it was agreed, that it would be appropriate
to deal only with procedural matters immediately and defer matters of policy
until 23rd January 1985.

     It was decided to invite Miss G.L. Firth to act as Secretary to the
Trust, with the administration of the Trust's business reverting to the
Football League Office, Lytham St. Annes. Mr. Kelly indicated that this
would be acceptable to the Football League, subject to (a) a suitable service
fee being paid to the League as had obtained previously and (b) the Trust’s
banking arrangements being conducted by Barclays Bank pic at St. Annes-
on-Sea. This was agreed.

     Mr. P.C. Dodds indicated that, although he hoped to be able to offer
his full support to the new Chairman, he held views similar to those expressed
by Mr. Smithson but not quite so strongly.

     Mr. H.B. Sturgeon expressed his support for the new Chairman.

     It was resolved to delegate the signing of cheques and orders on the
Trust's bank accounts to any two signatories out of the Trustees and Secretary
and it was further resolved to indemnify Barclays Bank a >1c against any
loss, claim or action arising out of such delegation. / /              f




                                            Chai:

                                                Date .       .. T?~.




                                             Trustee
                                             Trustee
                                             Trustee
                                             Trustee

                                             Trustee

                                             Trustee
