                HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
S   Cot t e r                 Pioneer House
                            65-67 Dale Street
                            Liverpool L2 2NS
                           Tel: 0151 236 1919
                           Fax: 0151 236 1936



                          With compliments
rHA           my
      <                                         11                     tn—    a<sias~}<    xj.jd




                                                                                          STATION
          NA*®**          JOHN SINCLAIR
                           CAI.DFR

      ADDRESS:            c/0 NORTHERN GENERAI. HCSPITAT,
                            33 HERRIES RD, SHEFFIELD

      AGE / DAIE OF BIKIH: 29                  08101960

      OCCUPATION:           DOCTOR



      S c,retaS't^u? to S f S S 14                          006 Pa*M ' •«*


      S T S 2           2            J S i 2 ? , J £ t £ . “ -**“ "»         1 ta-

      DATED: 161C89
                                                                       JOHN s CALDER (SIGNED)



                    T am a Qualified doctor ny qualifications are; HBBS I                  in
                    1965 (000085) at the London Hospital.

                    I have worked at the Northern General Hospital for the past eighteen

                   norths.    On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) it was ny working

                   weekend and I was at tho Northern General Hospital.       At approximately

                   15.05/15.10 (1505/1510) hours that afternoon, I received a telephone

                   c a n from John DUNCAN who is a Senior registrar at the Northern

                   Gorcral Hospital and he stated that he was at heme watching the T.V.

                   anc that something was occurring at the Hillsborough football ground.

                   He wont on to say that there were ambulances present and to expect
                   patients at the hospital.

                   As a result of this call I made ray way to casualty to see if I ^ii>|

               obtain any further details.           I spoke with Charge Nurse BMT¥ but he

               va* unable to provide me with further details I ensured that the staff

               on the general surgical wards and in theatxo were aware and that their

               services may be required and then I made ny way back to casualty.

               Vpzn my return I contacted switchboard and informed than that we had a

               major incident and asked them to contact Mr.DUNCAN and Mr JCSHANE


                                                                                                    21
                                                  HH /h *i Or/ iO/^r    ij.ja



                         JOHN   SINCLAIR


   (Registrar) I believe that this was done.

   By this time the first patients were arriving by ambulance.         The first

   patient that I had any dealings with van a white male, aged in his

   late teens.   He appeara] to be approximately 5'10H tnii (5'10), of

  mecium build and had short dark brown hair.     I am unable to recall
  whet he was taring, I think he had a pair of jeans on and that his

  top clothing had already been removed.     Ha was in the resuscitation

  rocm When I first made contact and to the best of my recollection

  there was a staff nurse fron casualty whose name I do not know, with

  the patient.   The youth was cyanosed but there were r» obvious

  external injuries.   He was having difficulty breathing.

  Ite had small pupil* but they were reactive to light.    I intubated the

 patient and together with the nurse we ventilated him.      in a start
 tine hie colour returned to ronral.

 I re-examined the patient who was still un-conscious and could not

 fird any obvious major abdoninal or chest injuries.      H e patient

 appeared stable and in view of this and the fact that I was required

 to assist with other patients I left the nurse, who had been assisting

 me, to continue ventilating the patient.    As far as I am aware this

 patient lived, I vould certainly have expected him to.

     next person I assisted was a young fsnale, I now know that this

patient was Victoria m a s .    she was hrought into the roan where I was

dealing with the patient I have described above.     I rercnter she va?

accompanied by a young man who I believe was wearing a Liverpool

shirt, he was definately a football supporter and an anfculanoanan or

policanan.   The supporter appeared distressed and was calling for a
doctor to assist.

The female was not breathing her face was purple, her pupils were

fixed and dilated, and I recall that she had vomit in her muth.

                                                                                   22
   CAtUISR                 JOHN SINCLAIR


  ' I W wa5 a staff nurse present whose name I do not know.      I intubated

  the patient.   There was no anfeu bag immediately available so I blew

  ck>n the tube and vomit cane back up tho tube and her lungs did not

  dpjieor to expand.    Vfe sucked out the tub© and then connected it to an

  amfcu bag and whilst the staff nurse manually ventilated the patient I

  inserted an I.v line into her aun and adninstered adrenaline.       I think

  that a cardiac monitor had been attached and thoro were no signs of

  cardiac activity.     Ihe patient vies still deeply cyanoeed with

  dilated pupils.     I do recall giving the patient sane int.ra cardiac

  adrenaline but there was still no response.     After approximately ten

  to fifteen minutes, I made the decision to stop treatment.     I than

 moved on to other patients to see if I could be of assistance.       I did

 not have any further dealings with Victoria HICKS.

 I recall that I moved on to ten or three other patients to see if I

 cocld help but all of them had sufficient medical staff with than and

 appeared to be receiving adequate treatment.      I cannot describe any of

 the above patients or their condition.     By this time the place was

 chfiotic.

 The next patient that I had specific dealings with was a young white

male, aged approximately fourteen/fifteen years of age.      He was

brcught into the clean theatre on an ambulance stretcher.      1 can't

ratenter who carried the patient into the hospital. Martin MCSHANE,

John DW*CAN and I approached the patient j inmediately saw that he was

not breathing and that he was cyanosed.      1 started to put a cannula

into his a m but before I had finished John DUNCAN certified the

patient dead and instructed me not to proceed.

AS previously stated the patient was a white male aged fourteen to

fifteen years.   He hoi short dark hair and was of very slim build I
carnot recall what clothing he was wearing.
          CAIDER                JOHN SINCLAIR


          I have boon shown sen© photographs by W.p.s Ap p l e t o n on todays date,

          15.10.B9 (161089) and from the photographs shown I would say that tho

          phctograph bearing tho print number eighty-two (Philip SIEEL£) is the

         beet resemblance to the patient that I am referring to.

         Once the patient had been certified dead by John DUNCAN I had no

         further dealings with the patient.

         I nowed on and assisted with several other patients including sane in

         1.1-U but to the best of «y knowledge none of these             died.

         At the beginning of my statement I refer to the first patient that I

         deelt with whom I believe 1ived to be in the resuscitation roan, I

         no* believe that this patient was in fact in clean tteatre.       He was

         definitely in the same roan that Victoria HICKS received her treatment
         in.

        John CAIXER

                                                            jean s caloer signed
STATEMENT 1AKEW
          FLACE:

          TIME:             DRIEs

WITNESS TO SIGNMTJRE:

OFFICERS SIQ'IATURE:      APPLE7TCN PS7844




                                                                                       24
r ha,   c t.ii i   0 1
                                                                             '/nl   u i' xU' :i


                                                                                            S1MT0N
    NAME:

    ADDRESS:                  C/0 N0R3HERN GENERAL HOSPITAL, HBRRJES RD,
                              HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE, S57AU

    AGE / DATE OF BIRTHt 30                       14101958

    OCCUPATION:               HIGHER SENIOR ANMXKTCAL PA3HQLOGY


    Who states:- 'Tills statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
    by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I mate
    it knowing that if It is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
    prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
    to be false or do not believe to be true.


    DATCDi 030889



                         I am a qualified nortuary technician and qualified in 1981 (000081) in

                         Sheffield.    I have worked at the Northern General Since 1981 (000081).

                         On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I was at hate and as a result

                     of the televison I became aware that there was something happening at

                         the Hillsborough football ground.    I telephoned the Northern General

                     Hospital to see if I was required.        I spoke with the telephone

                     receptionist and as a result of what she said I decided to go to the

                     hospital.

                         I errived at the hospital at approximately 3.35 pm (1535) and want to

                     casualty.        I approached a matron whose name I don't know and she

                     directed me to the orthopaedic plaster roan which was being used as a

                     terporazy mortuary.

                     As I entered the roan I saw a number of bodies lying on trolleys

                     tables and some were even on the floor - I can't be precise about hear

                     mary bodies were there.       There were no other persons present.

                     I came out of the room and approached a police officer, I think he mob

                     the police liaison officer.       I introduced myself and then asked him if

                     these was anyone who could assist me to document the bodies and


                                                                                                     36
 strip them.     I am not authorised to carry out this procedure without

 the. presence of a police officer.

 Six police officers wane given thB job of assisting roe. One of the

 police officers a young female was placed on tte door to stop

 uneuthorised entry.

 together with the police officers, we started to document and strip

 each body.     A female officer made a record of the para-niai property

 anc a full description of each body, including approximate age, height

 anc distinguishing mark.    Hie personal property was kept with the

 patients and put into a brown envelope and marked with the major

 disaster plan number.

 Once thB system was running effectively, I left the police officers to

continue documenting and stripping the bodies.

 I nade iny way over to the hospital mortuary and opened up.     I

contacted___________ an unqualified mortuary technician, and asked

her to cone to the hospital to assist.       I attempted to contact another

technician, but without success.

Mr Cliff LAMBCXJRNE, the Chief MLSO in histopathology, arrived at the

hospital.     I assessed the space in tho mortuary and asked Hr UMBOURNE

to assist in the hospital mortuary.     Mr                 who is an MLSO

also arrived at the hospital and I askad him to assist in the mortuary.

I was concerned that the bodies that had arrived at the mortuary cwmr

tte weekend did not beccroe confused with the bodies arriving frcm

Hi)lshorough.

I Hunt back to the plaster room and continued to doctsnent and strip

the bodies.    As the bodies were stripped, each was catalogued and

documented as far as possible.    I then asked the porters, whose names

1 don't knew, I believe one of than was \                 o move the

bodies from tte plaster room to the mortuary.      Before they left the
 plaster room a leg of each body was marked in indelible ink with tho

 major disaster plan number.     Tt» clothing accompanied the bodies and

 the personal property, cash, jewellery etc remained with the police.

 Ihis process continued until all the bodies in the plaster roam had

 been removed to the mortuary.     There was an additional body in a small

 roan across from the plaster room.     This body was cbcujnented and

 stripped and then transferred to the mortuary.

 One of the bodies, a female who 1 now know to be one of the HICKS'

 girls, was identified.    A second body had a casualty card with a name

 on it placed on his chest.    I do not know where the name on the card

 cure from and I cannot remember at this stage what the name was.

Toeether with                 the hospital adninistrator, the police

 liaison officer and taro (2) other police officers I went to the dining

rocm which was being used by the relatives of the injured

stcod on a table and read out a list of the injured persons at the

hospital and a description of the bodies being held by thB hospital

together with any distinguishing marks on each body.

Fol lowing the announcement a large number of people came towards

inyEelf and the police officers asking for further information.    We

assisted as far as possible I went back to the mortuary and was

acccnponied by a police officer.     I was informed that same relatives

were at the mortuary wanting to look at bodies with the view of

identfying them.   There was no way that I vrould allow anyone to look

at a body unless the description that they had given fitted the dead
person.

IJpcn ny arrival back at the mortuary I discovered that one of the

HICKS' girls had been positively identified.

A decision was nods by someone to move the bodies from the mortuary to

the Hillsborough ground.   I do not know who made this decision but

                                                                             38
 within a very short time it was reversed.     Approximately half an hour

 later, received a telephone call frcm casualty to say that about eix

 (6) ambulances had arrived to take the bodies back to the ground.

 I trade ay way across to casualty to try and find out what was

 happening. By the time I got there the ambulances had already been
 ser.t round to the mortuary.    I spoke with the police liaison officer

 and he confirmed that the bodies were to be transferred to the

 foctball ground on the Coroner's orders.

 I returned to the mortuary and informed the staff that the bodies were

 to be removed.    There were a large number of people in the mortuary

 including ambulance drivers, police officers, mortuary staff and some

social workers who had arrived from the main part of the hospital.

Three (3) or four (4) of the bodies were placed in the first

amfculance, X can't remember the Major Disaster Plan number allocated

to these bodies . I travelled in the ambulance with these bodies.

Upon arrival a senior police officer asked me where the police

coratables were.    I said that I didn't know which officers he was

talking about.    lie informed me that a number of police officers had

been sent to the hospital to accompany one body each, to the ground.

I eaid that I was not aware of those officers and attempts were then

mace to contact them by radio.    Eventually they were contacted and

three (3) or four (4) of them returned to the ground to take

responsibility for the bodies that I had accompanied in the first

anfculance.

I vould say that it was approximately 1 hour later that the next

ambulance arrived with any of the bodies and they were acccnpanied by

the poJ ice officers.   As each body arrived I informed the officer of

it's major disaster plan number which would have been written on the

lec and that officer then became responsible as far as I was concerned
          for that tody.    Each body was acconpanfed with the property bag

         cortaining the clothing and M>P (Major Disaster Plan) records in

         several cases there was nothing or very little written on the notes.

         Wien all of the bodies had arrived at tte ground which I believe was

         arcund 9 pn (2100) my girlfriend arrived and took me back to tte
         hospital.

         I fcent to the mortuary and it was then that I found out that there was

         a tody still on the GITU waiting to be transferred to the ground.

        Arxanganents ware already in hand for this body to be collected by

         ambulance.   At no stage did I ever see that body. I was told fcy the

        steff that everything was in order and that there was little else that

        cot-ld be done.    1 therefore left the hospital and went hone.   I
        firished work at 10 pm (2200).



STATCMENT TAKEN
          FLRCE:

          TIMEs              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIOIAIUREj        J APPUETIQN PS7844
