                                     UDITOBIUM D                           esign                                       JR1 ©
OFFICES AT: 48, Eddington Lane, H e m e Bay, Kent C T 6 5TS                               TELEX: 94016474 BJAD
             159, M ortim er Street, H e rn e Bay, Kent C T 6 SHE                         FAX: 0227-360095
                                                                                          TELEPHONE: 0227-364759
             Mr.Roger Gale M.P.,
             House of Commons,                                                                 27th.April 1989
             Westminster,
             London.
             SW1.

                                                  Safety at Football Grounds

             Dear Roger,

             I have a request of help which is urgent, yet will need some
             explanation in order for you to understand the situation.
             Please bear with me whilst I explain.

               hope you might be able to help me in my efforts to find
             K he correct people within the government, sports council,
               and possibly also the F.A. etc. to form proper objective
             guidelines for the provision of sound systems at football
             stadia in the U.K. Hopefully based upon the lines laid out
             in the attached proposal.

             On this occasion I wear my hat which says "Director of the
             Sound & Communications Industries Federation". I am elected
             by the members of the Institute of Sound & Communications
             Engineers to the board of the Federation.

             The Federation is the titular head of the following
             organisations and represents them to outside world,
             especially on matters such as safety at sports grounds

                      Institute of Sound & Communications Engineers
                     Sound & Communications Manufacturers Association
                     Sound & Communications Distributors Association
                      Sound & Communications Contractors Association
                 Association of Professional Entertainment Hire Companies
                     Communication Marketing & Servicing Association

             I have been appointed by my fellow directors to carry out
             (with the help of our Chief Executive, Ken Walker MBE) the
             task of establishing a forum for discussion and advice to
             any sports ground to improve the safety aspects of the
             ground in the area of sound and communications.

             Since the improvement of sound systems requires not only
             sound power, but intelligibility of sound as well as control
             of the environmental noise, the suggestion that each ground
             seeks advice from their friendly hlfi shop is obviously
             ludicrous.
                                                                                      \

             Equally, to have several professional contractors installing
             systems based upon different criteria (including financial
             muscle) will not result in safe spectators sports. It has
             been reported by our members that many football clubs have
             said "Yes, we will be improving the sound systems, but we
             will be using consultants".

                                          & CP\eject -Jf(movement cSe\mm jpi oH'tund.                            and (B m h fil

                    London C ontact Office: 4th Floor, A D D Offices. 23 Ramillies Place, London, WIV IDG Tel: 01-437-2825
                                            Bromley Jones & Co. Ltd. Registered in London No. 1587961
                                                      MJL
                                                       mv
Now whilst I am a specialised consultant, with Wembley
Stadium as one of my clients, I feel that the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds issued by the Home Office is
totally inadequate and I would not dare insult my clients by
just saying that the system which I design will meet the
loose criteria which are set out in this booklet (copy
enclosed).

 That is my personal involvement to date, but there also
 other professional organisations who ought to be involved
 and who have been contacted in order for them to put
 pressure for these proposals to be adopted from their
 standpoint and with their input. They are:-

^feie Institute of Acoustics - whose membership includes those
                               associated with environmental
                               noise and noise control.

 The Institute of Safety & Public Protection - whose
                              membership includes those
                              responsible for granting
                              licences to sports stadia.

 The establishment of a working party would then provide the
 forum from which the aforementioned guidelines can be
 swiftly updated and also form the basis of a suitable
 amendment to the Safety at Sports Grounds Act.

 The reason for any urgency on this subject is that I do not
 know where to start in the corridors of government, and I
 appreciate that it will involve quite a lot of ferreting
 after that in order to get things moving. The objective
 being to actually have proper guidelines agreed prior to the
 start of the next football season.

 I would appreciate any help you can give me in this quest
 and I am available by telephone, fax, post, or in person to
 receive any suggestions you may have. Meanwhile, I remain,

 yours sincerely,




 Stephen.P.Jones (M.InstSCE)
 Senior Partner,
 B J Auditorium Design.
                                      \v'\
 on behalf of the
 Sound & Communications Industries Federation
             SPORTS GROUND SAFETY - SOUND SENSE

A proposal for structuring effective action to improve
safety through effective sound and communications.

TIMETABLE

     Immediate action:-

     Government working group commissioned.


     Prior to next football season

     Conference of sports ground operators.

     Amendment of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds


     Prior to 1990/91 football season:-

     Legislation updated to incorporate recommendations set
     out in the Guide.

     All grounds fully equipped as indicated in the Guide
     and as required by the legislation.


THE WORKING GROUP

The commissioning by the relevant government ministry of a
working group consisting of sports ground operators,
technical experts, as well as the government officials.

The report of the working group being :-

  a) Presented at a special conference where all sports
     ground operators and other interested parties can hear
     the findings, discuss them and possibly also have a
     demonstration of effective systems.

  b) Published in an immediate amendment to the Guide to
     Safety at Sports Grounds.

  c) Forming the basis for a possible amendment to the
     Safety at Sports Grounds Act together with other
     possible amendments from the Fire, Police and other
     authorities.
                                     \

The technical experts consisting of one person from each of
the following bodies:-

        Sound & Communications Industries Federation
                   Institute of Acoustics
          Institute of Safety & Public Protection
                OVERALL IMPROVEMENT PARAMETERS

Seating Sound:-

To improve the level, intelligibility, and quality of the
sound available at the seats (or terraces) such that three
criteria can be achieved:-

    1. Emergency instructions from the authorities can be
       clearly heard over and above any (ambient) crowd noise
       and that there is no confusion about which part of the
       audience are being addressed.

    2. Commentary and interval music can be comfortably heard
       in a warm and friendly manner, together with general
•      house-keeping announcements.

    3. Entertainment sound (optional) can be routed through a
       professional system as a support system to any stage
       system, such that all the audience have the benefit,
       whilst the people in the environs do not become an
       unwilling audience.


Turnstile Sound:-

    1. Emergency instructions from the authorities can be
       clearly heard over and above any (ambient) crowd noise
       and that there is no confusion about which part of the
       audience are being addressed.

    2. Instructions can be made from a local microphone used
       by a policeman from a vantage point and/or by
       authorities based in the control room and monitoring
       the situation by CCTV.


Circulation Sound:-

  1. Emergency instructions from the authorities can be
     clearly heard.

  2. Commentary and interval music can be comfortably heard
     in a warm and friendly manner, together with general
     house-keeping announcements.


Audio Communications (qroundstaf f ) :-
                                      •,
                                     \V’' ■


  1. Both wired and radio communications can be utilised to
     provide a faster reaction in the event of problems.

  2. Monitoring of TV/Radio commentaries to ensure these
     help rather than hinder.
Video Communications:-

  1. Cameras strategically placed for use in both full house
     and empty house modes.

  2. Digital processing of monitor signals for optimum
     manning levels.

  3. Transmission of all video and audio signals to remote
     observation points.

  3. Recording of all video and audio signals for later
     analysis and/or security purposes.
 SUBJECTS TO BE COVERED

 Objective system performance parameters:-

    a) Minimum sound pressure level in the seating areas.

    b) Sound dispersion variations in the seating areas -
       minimum deviations.

     c) Intelligibility criteria.

     d)   Maintaining environmental noise criteria.

     e)   Minimum sound pressure level at turnstiles and   other
          crowd areas.

     f) Sound dispersion variations at turnstiles and other
        crowd areas.

     g) Minimum sound pressure levels in other public
        circulation areas.


Objective system operational parameters:-

     a)   Central and local sound control positions.

     b)   Instructions from central control directed to relevant
          zones only by selection.

     c) Localised sound control positions over turnstiles and
        other crowd areas.

     C) Multiple sources to multiple destinations.

     d) Priority of control position sound sources.

     e) Interlinking of CCTV camera coverage with the relevant
        sound system zones in central control.

     f) Relay of CCTV and sound to remote observation points.

    g) Limitation of sound pressure levels during
       entertainment usage.
                                     v

    h) Extension of entertainment usage of the sound systems.

     i) Recording of all annoouncements together with pictures
        and extension of the CCTV system for general security.

     j) Overview of internal communications for ground staff
        and security staff.

Produced by B J Auditorium Design for S.C.I.F. 27/4/89
