hs.1.22/adjournl.rjm
                                                    ANNEX A



ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY: GEORGE HOWARTH HP (LAB)
ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT


1.   In his Final Report of the Inquiry into the events at
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989, Lord Justice Taylor stated
that 1there is no point in holding inquiries or publishing
guidance unless the recommendations are followed diligently.1

2.   I am sure this House will agree that both Government and
those who run football have a moral duty to do everything in our
power to ensure that such a disaster is never repeated.


3.  I intend therefore to demonstrate the Government's
continuing commitment to ensuring that the Taylor recommendations
are followed through.

4.  However, before reporting on the current situation, and
describing the role the Football Licensing Authority will play
in implementing certain key recommendations, I should like
briefly to remind the House of progress to date.

5.   At the outset, the Government   asked for an interim report
with recommendations aimed at preventing any further disaster and
improving safety in the short term.       This was published on
1 August 1989.


6.   Copies of that report were sent immediately to local
authorities.   It is local authorities who are responsible for
safety certification under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
and under the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.




                                1
  7.   The Home Office Circular which accompanied Taylor's Interim
  Report urged that where possible its recommendations should be
  implemented directly.    Some 28 of the recommendations were
  earmarked for implementation before the 1989/90 football season
  began, or immediately thereafter.


  8.   Thus even before the Inquiry had been completed, the
  Government was able to get on with the task of ensuring the
  reasonable safety of spectators at sporting events.

  9.   The Government's response to the Final Report of the Inquiry
  was given to the House on 29 January 1990.       We accepted in
  principle all of the recommendations.   Some of these could be
  implemented immediately; some needed further work.

£10.   I can confirm that this work has continued and is still
  continuing.


  11. Taylor's    Final   Report   contained   a   total   of   76
  recommendations, the scope of which reflected the thoroughness
  and professionalism with which the Inquiry team went about their
  task.


  12. Many of these recommendations were concerned with specific
  requirements relating to safety standards at sports grounds.
  Those requirements have been incorporated in the revised Home
  Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. This 'Green Guide' (as
  it is known) was and still is the chief source of information
  available for use by local authorities in drawing up the
  conditions of safety certificates. It therefore plays a central
  role in ensuring sports ground safety.


  13. The revised edition of the 'Green Guide' was published in
  November 1990, following consultation with local authority
  associations and others.  It has been widely praised for its
  clarity and ease of use.



                                 2
14. The main changes included a revised test procedure for crush
barriers, guard rails and hand-rails, together with more detailed
advice on their inspection; guidance on first aid, medical and
ambulance provision; and additional advice on stewarding and
management responsibility was also strengthened.


15. Lord Justice Taylor rightly criticised the quality of
stewarding at football matches. He pointed out that the lack of
able and trained stewards placed a heavier burden on the police.
In turn, this had unnecessarily adverse financial consequences
for the clubs themselves. He therefore recommended that 'clubs
should recruit and retain sufficient competent stewards. They
should be fit, active and robust, and preferably between the ages
of 18 and 55.    Clubs should ensure that stewards are fully
trained [and] aware of their duties'.


16. The Government fully supports this recommendation.      It is
in the interest of both the police, who are hard pressed on other
fronts, and of the clubs, who face policing bills, to reduce
police strength by the use of competent stewards.     There will
probably always be a need for a residual police presence, but it
should be possible to reduce the numbers of police officers
deployed.


17.   The Government therefore welcomes the initiative of the
Football League to produce a training package for clubs to adapt
to their own circumstances and use when training their own
stewards. Both my officials and senior police officers have been
involved in advising the Football League on this package. The
Football League has also been assisting in recruiting the
appropriate calibre of steward.       This too is most welcome.


18. In the fight against hooliganism, Lord Justice Taylor
recommended that four new specific offences should be created.
A Bill introduced last session by my Honourable Friend, the
Member for Westminster North, was supported and strengthened by
the Government and welcomed on all sides of the House.            The


                                  3
  Football (Offences) Act 1991, which it duly became, creates the
  offences of throwing missiles, indecent or racialist chanting and
  going onto the playing area, which are broadly as Taylor
  recommended.

  19. Further, the police have put into place a sophisticated
  training programme for match commanders. This and briefings to
  all officers involved emphasises the absolute priority of
  preserving public safety.


  20. The Government has also accepted Taylor's recommendation
  that there should be an offence of selling tickets for and on the
  day of a football match without authority from the home club.
  This will be introduced as soon as Parliamentary time allows
  although, as Honourable Members will know, that is unlikely to
^^be soon given that our timetable is already very crowded.

  21. I turn now to the role of the Football Licensing Authority
  in ensuring that Taylor's main recommendations - including those
  relating to all-seated accommodation - are met.


  22. The Football Licensing Authority was established on 1 June
  1990 under section 8 of the Football Spectators Act 1989. Its
  Chairman, Mr Norman Jacobs, was appointed shortly afterwards.
  The Government has decided that the FLA should perform the
  following duties:


       (a)   to act as a national inspectorate and review body as
             set out in Taylor recommendation 6(a);


       (b)   to operate a licensing scheme for grounds at which
             designated football matches are played; and,


       (c)   to advise the Government on the introduction of all­
             seated accommodation at Football League grounds and
             the national    stadia in accordance with Taylor
             recommendations 1 to 4.


                                  4
   I shall deal with each of these duties in turn.

   23. Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act empowers the FLA
   to keep under review the discharge by certifying authorities of
   their function under the 1975 Act in relation to sports grounds
   at which designated football matches are played.


  24. The FLA is aware of considerable variation in the standard
  and contents of the safety certificates issued by certifying
  authorities.   It wishes to bring about greater consistency and
  to promote best practice.    Accordingly, in November 1991, it
  issued a consultation paper containing draft guidance on the
  format and content of safety certificates and the procedures for
  issuing and revising them.


^^25.   Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act empowers the FLA
   to require a certifying authority to include in a safety
   certificate such terms and conditions as the FLA may specify.
   However, the FLA intends to proceed, wherever possible, by
   encouragement and persuasion. It will use its Section 13 powers
  only as a last resort.


  26. The FLA's Inspectors have been in the field since last June.
  They have met certifying and building authorities, the police,
  the fire and ambulance services, voluntary organisations and
  supporters' groups.  They have also met club officials and
  inspected grounds on both match and non-match days.   This
  programme of meetings and inspections will continue up to and
  beyond the issue of licences.

  27. Section 9 of the 1989 Act, which creates the offence of
  admitting spectators to unlicensed premises, will be brought into
  force when the Football Licensing Authority is in a position to
  issue licences. This is expected to be in time for the start of
  the 1992/93 football season. The FLA are currently discussing
  with the Home Office the form of application and content of
  licences.


                                 5
28.   Taken together,     recommendations 1 and 4 of Lord Justice
Taylor's Final Report were that the Secretary of State should
ensure that by August 1999 spectators are admitted only to seated
accommodation at matches played at sports grounds designated
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

29. Consequently, the restriction of the all-seater requirement
to football alone represents a deliberate narrowing of the Taylor
recommendations. There are good reasons for this:

30. In paragraphs 85-90 of his report, Taylor considered whether
his recommendations on seating and standing should be extended
to sports other than football at sports grounds designated under
the 1975 Act.    He concluded that all such grounds should be
required in due course to be converted to all seating.

31. The Government's initial response to the Taylor Report
indicated that we accepted the recommendation in principle. The
response continued:

      'The application of a recommendation to Scotland and to
      other    sports cannot be achieved under the Football
      Spectators Act 1989 but the Government will in any case
      wish to discuss     it with   the  sporting authorities
      concerned.'

32. Home Office officials have since consulted representatives
of both the Rugby Union and the Rugby League.    Neither sport
would wish to see all-seated accommodation.    Most designated
cricket   grounds   are   already all-seated.   The   views   of   the
Association of Chief Police Officers were also sought.    They
agreed that the all-seated requirements should not be extended
to other sports.

33. Consequently, the Government has announced (Official Report,
16 January, Col 635) that whilst we still require Football League
clubs to move towards all-seater grounds as recommended by Lord


                                  6
    Justice Taylor, for other sports we see no reason to depart from
    a voluntary approach. We do not therefore intend to introduce
    primary legislation.   However, we shall continue to keep the
    matter under review.


    34. Section 11 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 empowers the
    Secretary of State to direct the FLA by order to include in any
    licence a condition imposing requirements as regards the seating
    of spectators.


    35. The Government therefore intends to make an Order under
    Section 11 which will ensure that the Authority may enforce the
    Taylor deadlines in respect of UEFA high risk matches, the 4
    divisions of the Football League and the national stadia.

^   36. The deadlines which we will be looking to the FLA to enforce
    are well known, but I make no apology for repeating them here:


          (a)   for the first and second divisions of the Football
                League and the National Stadia, standing accommodation
                must be eliminated by August 1994;

          (b)   For the third and fourth divisions of the Football
                League, standing accommodation must be eliminated by
                August 1999.


    37.   Much publicity has recently been afforded to the creation
    of a new Football Association Premier League.    The Government
    has long held the view that the way football is organised and
    administered is a matter for the footballing authorities. Our
    sole responsibility is to ensure that those attending football
    matches may do so in reasonable safety. To the extent that any
    organisational changes have implications for post-Taylor safety
    policies, including all-seating, we intend to make sure that such
    policies are neither inhibited nor circumvented. Be it League
    Division 1 or Premier League, the August 1994 deadline will
    remain.


                                     7
38. The tragic events which occurred at Hillsborough were the
catalyst for changes which are sweeping the world of football.
That these changes, recommended in the Taylor Report, are now
being made is due to this Government's determination to see them
through.




                               8
