                            PEN 3                                                                                    PEN 4
                             0 2 2   £ * *3 n rv D
                                                                                                                     §,■')1 p


                  No 143
                n, 7.005m
                34 PERSONS                                                                 K No 144 \
                                                                                           \ H.4S5m \
(1 . 125m)
                                                                                           \ ''45       \                505m)/>
                                                                                           NPERSONS^


                                                                                                                     No 137             No i3a
                                                         4.525m   . x                                            v   4.46m         ,,  3.645m
        Nj 5.475m                                                                                           //31 PERSONS           /,&a PERSONS V /
        105 PERSONS                                  34 PERSONS^
                                325m)                                   03m)
                                                                                   ea PERSONS

                                                                               ^ 1.S5m                   31 On
               7.425m
             144 PERSONS                                                                             /persons^/ y / 7 y \
                                                                                         RNo 12E
                                                                                           5.e70m
                                                                                         \   -3fl
                                                                                        PERSONS
                                                                                    /
                                                                                 .505m)
                                                                                  ///
                                                                                 FENCE
                                                                                 2.455m
                                                                                          (0.885m)                                                     (0.3m)
                              CO.3m)
                            GATE 3                                                       GATE 4                                                       G ATE 5




      SWFC WEST TERRACE - IDEAL DISTRIBUTION OF PERSONS




                                                     t
                   CRUSH BARRIER STRENGTHS       SPACIKG5

1.0    INTRODUCTION

Until recently there was little guidance available on the strengths and

spacings suitable for crush barriers used on football terraces.         The only-

problem in the design of barriers was often seen as that of ensuring they

did not collapse under crowd pressures.      Uhile it is of paramount importance

that collapse does not occur, it is also important that crowd pressures

cannot be generated so as to caus'e injury particularly to those spectators

pressed against the barrier.

1«1    The supporting evidence for the spacing and strength of crush barriers

recommended in the ’Wheatley Report is given below.     In brief, the

determination of the pressure that can be generated on a terrace is explained,
 ~ \                          *


a distinction being made between the levels of pressure that can be

generated in "peak viewing areas" e.g. behind penalty boxes, and in "other

viewing areas"; a figure is obtained for the pressure that can be generated per

man (or alternatively per foot width of barrier per foot spacing as a

function of slope);      and measurements of the pressures that can be

tolerated by the human body when pressed against a barrier are described.

Other supporting evidence is also mentioned.

1.2.   It is assumed that only on rare occasions will all the spectators

between 2 consecutive barriers up a slope contribute simultaneously to

crowd pressures.      When this "maximum pressure" does occur it causes grave

discomfort but, owing to its transient nature, is unlikely to cause injury.

It is abduced that the pressures which occur frequently will be generated

by half of these spectators and, for the purpose of this paper, this

frequently generated pressure is called the "tolerable pressure".         The

recommended barrier spacing is based on it, the actual distance recommended

between barriers being the standing room required by twice the number of

spectators who exert the tolerable pressure.     It is also assumed that each

spectator occupies an area of 2 square feet, standing on a step of 14" depth


                                      1


                                                                                    Tf
and exerting his pressure over 21” of barrier.      Two series of spacings

are given each of which is based on a different level of tolerance to

crowd pressure:       one level of tolerance is for safety only and the other

for safety plus comfort, these being 300 lbf per person (or 170 lbf per

foot width) and 200 lbf per person (or 115 1bf per foot width)

respectively.

1.3    Since the collapse of a barrier could lead to an incident escalating

in severity, the barriers should withstand the greatest pressure ever

likely to be exerted on them.       Accordingly the recommended barrier

strengths are based on the "maximum pressure" i.e. that pressure which

could be generated by all the spectators who could be involved.       Using

the tolerable pressures quoted in paragraph 1.2, the desired barrier

strengths are 340 lbf per foot width and 230 lbf per foot width for the

2 levels of tolerance.         Should the barrier spacing be less than the

maximum recommended, the barrier strength may be reduced proportionately

provided none is less than 206 lbf per foot width.       (This is the value

quoted in the British Standards Code of Practice for barriers in

buildings)•



2.0    S0UR0ES OF INFORMATION

       Research commissioned by Wheatley Inquiry

       (i)   Measurements of required strength of crush barriers on terraces
                                     'V
             Home Office

      (ii)   Tests to determine the forces tolerated by people when against

             crush barriers — Department of Bio mechanics, University of

             Surrey

   (iii)     Measurements of crowd pressures generated at Liverpool Football

             Club ground — Bingham Blades, & Partners, Consulting Structural

             Engineers 1972

      (iv)   Literature search for levels of force/pressure at which injury

             occurs - Home Office.

                                     2
       Other Research

        (y ) Measurements of required strength of crowd barriers (horizontal

              only) - Ministry of Public Buildings and Works 1948

       (Yi)   Measurements of crowd pressures generated at Everton Football

              Club ground - Bingham Blades & Partners 1971

      (rii)   Strength tests on crush barriers at a football club ground

              Kingston Polytechnic 1971.


3.0   MEASUREMENTS: OF CROWD PRESSURES THAT CAR BE GENERATED

Measurements were made by the Home Office of the pressure that could be

generated on the terraces during a match,        (reference paragraph 2.0).

Thirty police cadets were used to simulate spectators. Two levels of
 \
force were defined - (a) 'lean', corresponding to spectators bearing on

one another but exerting no additional force, and (b) 'push', as 'lean'

but with the crowd exerting an additional force in order to see, but not

pushing aggressively.     The cadets in varying numbers of rows were asked to

'push' or 'lean' against a well padded test barrier attached to an existing

crush barrier at a football ground.        The forces were measured using

pressure gauges.     The experiments were carried out on 3 slopes of 0°, 15°»

and 23^°.     It was considered that condition (b) 'push' corresponded

to the state of the crowd in the "peak viewing areas" of the terraces

 and that condition (a) 'lean' corresponded to the other areas.        Pressures

of up to about 300-lbf per person were tolerated with some discomfort

by the cadets for a few seconds.     Signs of considerable discomfort were

shown for longer periods of time or for greater pressures.

3.1    It was assumed that the force propagated do*m a slope would have

2 components:      (i) the force measured with a slope of 0°, and (ii) a

component proportional to the weight of the spectator and the size of

the slope angle.     The following relationship was found to hold for the

force per spectator.
       P slope      =        Po + 84 sin Q

 where P slope is force in lbf per spectator

        Q is angle to horizontal of the slope

        Po is the force per spectator when Q           =       0°
 and    Po (push)       =    40 lbf and   Po (lean)    =       21 lbf.

 However as the police cadets were above average weight, a normalising

 factor is needed and the relationship becomes:

        P slope     =       Po + 73.5*sin Q

 where Po (push)        =     35.5 lbf and Po (lean)       =    18.5 lbf.

 For example, using this relationship it can be calculated that 9 rov-s

 of spectators all pushing on a 14° terrace will press the foreaost

^spectator against the barrier with a force of 480 lbf (or 274 lbf per

 foot width of barrier).

 3.2   The values for Q = 0° were in agreement, with si&ilar measurements

 Bade in 1948 by the Ministry of Public Buildings and Works (reference

 paragraph   2.0 (v)).          The force as a function of slope was not

 measured on that occasion.

 4.0   MEASUREMENTS OF CROWD PRESSURES ACTUALLY GENERATED

 Measurements were made at 2 football matches of the forces actually

 exerted on a barrier.           The measurements using calibrated strain gauges

 were made at 2 different grounds on barriers situated behind the

 penalty box (reference paragraph 2.0 (iii) and (vi)),

 4.1   Match A.     Barrier spacing behind the test barrier varied from

 13’ to 25' and the terrace slope was 14° (1s4).                 Forces of 100 to

  200 lbf per foot width ©f barrier were measured with occasional

 peaks to 300 lbf per foot width.             The forces did not exceed 200 lbf per

 foot width for 3 or more seconds.

       Match B    Barrier spacing varied from 13*5' to 26' and the terrace

 slope was 14°.         Forces of 100 to over 200 lbf per foot width were

 measured with occasional values of 300 lbf per foot width.
 4.2    Neither match was crucial nor particularly exciting.   At the

 second natch there were 14 casualties including a man with a

 fractured leg and a boy with concussion.    Two experienced plain­

 clothes oen wh© were stationed in the crowd stated that apprehension

 and fear were generated by crowd movements and pressure, and that some

 spectators stood back and braced themselves against the crowd pressure

 with one foot on the barrier.


  5.0   MEASUREMENTS ON HUMAN TOLERANCE TO CROWD PRESSURES

 A series of measurements were made on men and women to determine

  the maximum pressure which could be tolerated by a perscn when

^-pressed against a crush barrier.   Each person while standing was

 pressed against a steel tube located horizontally against various

 positions in turn on his trunk.     The pressure was applied to him by

 Beans of a pack frame on his back with various weights which forced

 him ©n to the barrier.    Three subjective levels of discomfort were

 defined and each person was asked to say when they were reached.

 In particular the third level of discomfort was defined as that which

 became intolerable after a few seconds.

 For men (42 subjects) the height ef the barrier rail at which maximum

 force could be tolerated was found to be 41?"» which corresponds well

 with the usual barrier height of 42".     The mean value of this force

 for men when passive was found to be 107 lbf and when they were

 allowed to resist by pushing against the barrier was 179 lbf (with

 a range of 98 to 233 lbf).    For the passive tests the force tolerated

 was increased by a third to 140 lbf by substituting a 4" wide plank

 for the steel tube.    The values in respect cf women were considerably

 lower.
 5.1    It is felt that although the above results give an order of

 magnitude of the tolerable force, the following comments could be made.
       (i)   The maximum force tolerate.1 was clearly not at the threshold

             of injury.

      (ii)   Although the force was defined as being intolerable after a

             few seconds, periods of surging and pushing in a crov;d on a

             terrace may be more transient, and for these very short

             periods greater forces can apparently be tolerated.

     (iii)   Persons with lower levels of tolerance nay well be protected

             by their stronger ‘companions.


6.0    MEASUREMENTS OF BARRIER STRENGTH AT A FOOTBALL GROUFD

A number of measurements were Bade of the strength of existing crush

barriers at a London Football Club (reference paragraph 2.0 (yii)).
V.


In particular, tests were made on barriers in the same area and siailar

t© a barrier which had collapsed during a match.      Three similar

barriers failed at pressures of 260, 290 and 300 lbf per foot width.

She distance to the next barrier abOTe the collapsed barrier varied

from 10' to 22'.

6.1     The consulting engineers recommended that crush barriers should

be designed and checked to a significantly higher loading than 200 Ilf

per foot width, and that no spacing between barriers should be greater

than 12' and should be less on steep terraces.      They also recommended

that for design purposes there was need to determine the lead which

people can exert on barriers and the maximum pressure which the human

body can bear without injury.

7.0     OTHER MEDICAL E7IDEHCE FOR TEE LEVEL OF FORCE/PRESSURE AT WHICH

        INJURY OCCURS.

A search in medical papers for evidence ef the level of pressure at

which injury occurs to the human body was undertaken by a Heme

Office doctor (reference paragraph 2.0 (ir)).

7.1    Among the information brought to notice by this search were

2 cases of traumatic asphyxia where the pressures (as calculated by the
weight of the objects causing the pressures) differed to a marked

extent.    In the first case the pressure was 1400 pounds for a period

of 15 seconds, and in the second case 300 pounds for seme 4 to 6

minutes.   The reason for the difference in the pressures reported in

these cases may be due to the 1400 pounds being far in excess of the

minimum required to cause the fatality.    Certainly the amount and

duration of the pressure in* the second case were similar to those

reported at the Bolton Wanderers accident in 1946 where layers of 3 or

4 bodies were sufficient to cause death by traumatic asphyxia.

This evidence does indicate that if a barrier should collapse and people

are piled on top of each other even for only a short tice, traumatic

asphyxia is a definite hazard.

7.2   The search disclosed no other information about injury to the

body due to static forces, but did reveal that as far as dynamic forces

are concerned the liver can be injured by impacts of 3-5 nph.    There

was also brought to notice that bone finds increased strength when

subjected to a dynamic as opposed to a static loading:    this may be

the reason why larger forces of a transient nature, can be tolerated.


8.    RECOMMENDED BARRIER STRENGTHS AND SPACINGS

Spectators can be safeguarded .against injury from crowd pressures by

the careful positioning of crush barriers of suitable design.    The

barriers should never collapse under pressure and should be spaced

to limit the number of spectators between 2 barriers so that their

combined pressures can never be sufficient to cause injury.     For

financial reasons there is need to determine the minimum adequate

strength and the maximum acceptable spacing of barriers for this

purpose*     The following summary of the infoxnaticn presented earlier

in this paper provides the basis for the recommendations which have

been made in this regard.
8.1   The pressures which can be generated by spectators when they

'lean' or 'push' on a terrace hare been measured (see paragraph 3).

Per a 14° slope the 'lean' force per person was calculated to be

36 lbf (or 20 lbf per foot width of barrier) and the 'push' to be

53 lbf (or 30 lbf per foot width).

8.2   Pressures measured on 14° slopes during 2 matches (see paragraph 4)

were of the same order of magnitude, being 200 lbf per foot width as

a regular occurrence for periods longer than 3 seconds, and with

occasional   peaks of 300 lbf per foot width.   Although it was

unlikely that all spectators were involved in exerting these pressures -

the eatches were not considered to be exciting - the pressure that

could hare been exerted by each of the persons in the 12 to 22 rows

behind the barriers ranged from 17 to 9 lbf per fcot width (and 27

to 14 lbf during the occasional peaks).     These figures are certainly

of the same order of magnitude as those in paragraph 8.1).

8.3   Further support to these figures is given by the deduced pressure

of 260 to 300 lbf per foot width at which a barrier collapsed (see

paragraph 6).   There were 9 to 19 rows of spectators behind the

barrier and so the 260 represents a pressure per person of 29 to

14 lbf per foot width and the 300 a pressure of 33 to 16 lbf per foot

width.


8.4   It is felt that the measurements mentioned in paragraph 8.1 are

reasonable for calculating the maximum pressure that could be generated

between 2 consecutive barriers up a terrace slope.    Furthermore, the

'push' values should be used for 'peak viewing' areas and the 'lean*

values for other areas.

8.5   The measurements by the University of Surrey of pressures

tolerated by the human body are surprisingly low'(see paragraph 5);

the mean figure for men being 107 lbf when passive and 179 lbf when

resisting by pushing against the barrier.    These figures are lower
than the pressures of 200 lbf per foot width, with peaks to 300, which

were recorded at a match (see paragraph 4);    but these pressures may

have been exerted for shorter periods, and they did generate fear (and

some injuries were in fact reported on that occasion).    The Surrey

figures are also lower than the pressures of 300 lbf per person

tolerated by police cadets (see paragraph 3) but in that case the

barrier was well padded and .the cadets may have been prepared to

tolerate more in the company of their colleagues.

8.6.    Given the supporting evidence of paragraph 8.5, it is reasonable

to use a figure ef 200 lbf per person (or 115 lbf per foot width) as

the tolerable pressure for comfort and safety, and a figure of 300 lfcf

per person (or 170 lbf per foot width) as the tolerable pressure for

safety only.

8.7    As mentioned in paragraphs 1.2 and 1.3 the "tolerable pressure" is

half the "maximum pressure" and so the recommended einiaua strengths

for barriers are 230 and 340 lbf per foot width when the barriers are

spaced for "comfort and safety" and for "safety only" respectively.

Should the space between 2 barriers be less than the maxih u h

recommended, the strength of the front barrier may be reduced in

proportion provided that none is less than 206 lbf per foot width.




Eeme Office

March 1973.
