 From: David Redhouse             cc:   Mr Michael                   Miss Wheldon
       PS/Home Secretary                Mr O ’Brien                  Mr Evans
       0171 273 4602                    Mr Howarth                   Ms Loudon
                                        Permanent Secretary          Mr Middleton /
         26 June 1997                   Mr Boys Smith                Mr Edm und^n
               ,                        Mr Halliday                  Mr Graikft
                                        HMCIC                        Ms Clifford
             r     , j U      ^     i   Mr Warne                     Mr Owen
                                            **                       Mr Warner
            0 (■<>-,                  t     p         A—      >
 Mr Pugh      ^

                   c3
 HILLSBOROUGH : MEETING W ITH LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH

 The Home Secretary met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on Monday 23 June. You and I were
 also present.

 2      LJ Stuart-Smith said that he wanted to be sure that the inquiry was a job for a
judge, and for a judge of his seniority, rather than a decision which the Government
 should make. The Home Secretary said that he and the Lord Chancellor were agreed that
the answer to both questions was yes. The background was that although there had been
general satisfaction with the Taylor Report, there remained dissatisfaction in respect of
both the investigation into the Hillsborough incident itself and also the resulting
disciplinary proceedings to which there was now however a procedural bar. A newspaper
campaign and a TV programme had raised questions about the existence of further
evidence, including video recordings. (Secretary’s note-. The Home Secretary provided
LJ Stuart-Smith with the note of the key issues which had been attached to your advice of
the same day.)

3     The Home Secretary said that officials had considered these questions and their
view was that there was not sufficient evidence to justify a new inquiry. However, there
remained a lot of anxiety that there had been no forensic inquiry of an incident which had
led to 96 deaths. The Home Secretary did not have enough time, nor was he seen as
adequately independent, to conduct such an inquiry. An independent examination of the
evidence was needed to see whether it was sufficient to justify a further inquiry. A judge
of LJ Stuart-Smith seniority was required given the seniority of Lord Taylor who had
conducted the earlier inquiry.

4      You briefly described the areas of uncertainty. There were questions about the
comprehensiveness of the video evidence available to the Taylor inquiry; about the
evidence from technicians; and, about whether there was any missing video evidence. The
police thought that there was no such missing evidence.

5      LJ Stuart-Smith noted that the Taylor Report had been pretty critical of the police.
You said that there was a view that he had not been critical enough. There were further
questions about medical evidence and about the approach adopted by the Western
Midlands police. The television programme had raised other issues as the Home Secretary
had mentioned. You concluded that these were serious questions which, if substantiated,
were of the utmost gravity because previous inquiries would then have been misled. A
judge of LJ Stuart-Smith’s seniority was therefore required in order to give these questions
scrutiny at the highest possible level.

6      LJ Stuart-Smith said that he was not enthusiastic but that the case was persuasive.
He understood that it would take some two to three months. You agreed but noted that it
might be shorter. Equally, if any really serious issues were discovered then it could be
longer. There were many interested parties who would want to make representations.
They had already made some to the Home Secretary, the Attorney General, or, the DPP.
LJ Stuart-Smith would need a full picture of all the available material and then time to
come to a conclusion.

7      LJ Stuart-Smith asked whether the representations were mainly from Liverpool.
You said that there was a Hillsborough family support group based there. The group’s
legal representative was Alan Jones QC. LJ Stuart-Smith said that he knew Mr Jones. The
Home Secretary emphasised that the scrutiny would not in any way be a public enquiry.
LJ Stuart-Smith said that other commitments meant he would not be able to start properly
on the scrutiny until September. You said that that would allow representations to be
assembled. The Home Secretary said that he hoped to make a statement to the House the
following Thursday or Monday. He would provide LJ Stuart-Smith with the draft
statement in advance. The terms of reference for the Scrutiny had been worked up
carefully to show that this would be an assessment of whether there should be any new
inquiry of any kind. The allegations which had been made were sufficient to justify
investigation. LJ Stuart-Smith said that he recognised that this would be a sensitive task.

8      LJ Stuart-Smith said that in connection with his work as a Security Service
Commissioner he hoped to see the Home Secretary again shortly. The Home Secretary
agreed that a meeting would be useful. You said that you assumed LJ Stuart-Smith would
not wish to say anything publicly at the time of the Home Secretary’s statement to the
House. LJ Stuart-Smith said that he would not wish to make public statements at any
stage of the Scrutiny.

9      I should be grateful if you would ensure that an advance copy of the draft statement I
to the House is provided to LJ Stuart-Smith.                                                 I




                             J--A
                                  DAVID REDHOUSE
