INQUIRY INTO TOE HILLSBOROUGH      The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                   SO Q u e e n A n n e ’s G ate
                                   L o n d o n S W I H 9 AT

                                   01-2732577 / 3602/2370




Dr R Hood MA DPhil
Reader in Criminology
University of Oxford
Centre for Criminological Research
12 Bevington Road
OXFORD
0X2 6LH                    12 October 1989




Dear Dr Hood

Thank you for your letter of 27 September
regarding the research work being carried out
at the centre on the role that organised sport,
especially football, can play in the prevention
of crime.

Should Lord Justice Taylor wish further
information ont he research, we shall contact
Mr David Robins direct.

                                Yours sincerely




                           >  R M WHALLEY
                         SLcretary to the Inquiry
                            UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
               CENTRE FOR CRIMINOLOGICAL RESEARCH
                     12 Bevington Road, Oxford 0X 2 6LH
                     Telephone: (0865) 274444              Direct line: (0865)             I- L y ,
                     Director: R oger H ood, M .A ., D .P h il. Reader in Criminology



Mr. R.M. Itfhalley,
Secretary to the Inquiry,
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
London SWlH 9AT.                                                                   27th September 1989




          Thank you very much for your letter about Lord Justice Taylor's
interest in the research work being carried out at this Centre on the
role that organised sport, especially football, can play in the
prevention of crime.

          This work, which is being carried out by the Football Trust
Research Fellow, David Robins, has, as its first stage, attempted to
survey the various schemes which have been set up in various parts of the
country. The aim has been to evaluate how they are organised, who the
participants are, and what has been achieved. I am hoping that an
interim report will be available before the end of this year.                                     II
          Although Mr. Robins' current work is not concerned with crowd
control and safety at sports events, he has, as you may know, a long
experience of working with young people and knows a great deal about
their attitudes and behaviour, especially as these relate to football. I
am sure he would be very happy to see you, if you think that he could be
of assistance.




                                                          Roger Hood
\*D
     -c

'V
