           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 01712732512 Fax 2007


D R Fraser Esq                                                  Your reference:
Silverman Livermore Solicitors
11-13 Victoria Street                                           Our reference:
LIVERPOOL L2
                                                                Date:     a , i    November 1997




In relation to the Inquest on Victoria Hicks I have now heard evidence from a Mr Paul Taylor
that about 4 or 5 weeks after the disaster he saw Mr & Mrs Hicks and identified to them that a
girl he had helped to resuscitate was their daughter Victoria. He told them that after he tried
to give mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, a young police officer wearing gloves felt the pulse of
both Victoria and a young lad, and told Taylor they were both dead and to leave them.

2.      No reference to Mr Taylor’s evidence was made at the mini-inquest on 24 April 1990
to this effect or at all. Mr Taylor gave evidence at the main inquest. At Day 32 p74 he dealt
with his efforts to resuscitate a girl by giving her the kiss of life. He found she had rust in her
mouth and on her face, he then said “someone said ‘leave her she’s dead’.” At p78/9,
presumably on the instructions of Mr & Mrs Hicks, you brought out that the girl Taylor was
talking of was Victoria.

3.     Did you have any instructions at that stage that the person who had said this was a
police officer, that he took the pulse with gloves on, and that according to Mr Taylor, DC
McCombie had told him, when he wished to add these matters to his statement, that ‘unless
(he) knew the name and number of the police officer (he) would be committing peijury if he
made another statement’? If you did, can you please tell me why this was not put to Mr
Taylor at the Inquest.

4.      So far as the mini-inquest is concerned, Dr Popper has told me that copies o f the draft
summaries were sent to the families or their solicitors before the inquests so that any errors
or corrections could be made. Do you know why the question of Paul Taylor’s evidence
relating to Victoria Hicks was not brought to the Coroner’s attention. Can you also tell me
whether Mr Hicks raised any queries on the accuracy of the summary insofar as it related to
PC Marshall’s evidence that he helped to try and resuscitate Victoria and went in the
 ambulance with him and Mr Hicks.

 5.     I would be grateful if you could give this matter your earliest attention, together with
 the questions I asked in my earlier letter.

        M             J % * 4 J ir e £ Q




irORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




  O:\HILLSBOR\M AIN\ FRASER. 163
