INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

J T Dickson Esq                             Your Ref: JTD/SD
Assistant Chief Constable
Operations
Strathclyde Police
173 Pitt Street
GLASGOW
G2 4JS                                     Date
                                             20 November 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975: SAFETY CERTIFICATE

Thank you very much for your letter of 14 November with a number
of Safety Certificates issued in Strathclyde. I know that both
Lord Justice Taylor and his Assessors will find these very
interesting. Many thanks indeed for sending them on.

Can I also acknowledge safe arrival here of your report on the
Rous Cup Tie at Hampden Park on 27 May 1989, and the video on
Exercise Centre Spot.

With best wishes.                    \




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                        STRATHCLYDE POLICE

ANDREW K SLOAN QPM BA
    Chief Constable
                                                           Police Headquarters
                                                           173 Pitt Street

     R o b e r t Whalley Esq                    n          GLASGOW
                                                           G2 4JS
       Secretary
       Hillsborough Inquiry                                 Switchboard 0 4 1 -2 0 4 2 6 2 6
       Room 448                                             Direct Line
       The Home Office                                     Your ref.
       50 Queen Anne's Gate
     [LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                                J          Our ref.


                                                           Date
                                                                       JTD/SD
                                                                       14 November 1989




      Dear


      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 : SAFETY CERTIFICATE

      I am in receipt of a communication from DCC Wilson, Fife Constabulary on behalf
      of ACPO(S) General Purposes Standing Committee. Hr Wilson informs me that
      Sir Peter has requested copies of Safety Certificates issued by Regional
      Councils in Scotland be forwarded to him.

      As you know Strathclyde Regional Council issues 15 such Certificates. The
      Regional Certificate has a standard format which is completed as it pertains to
      each stadium. The Safety Certificate was completely reviewed following the
      Popplewell Inquiry. As circumstances at a stadium change, due to such as
      ground improvement or deteriorating facilities the Regional Council issues a
      formal amendment to the Safety Certificate which takes account of the change in
      circumstances.

      I enclose for your perusal copies of The Safety Certificates for Cliftonhill
      Stadium. Coatbridge (which is the most recent Certificate issued by the
      Region), together with copies of the Hampden Park and Ibrox Stadium
      Certificates. There has been quite a number of amendments to the latter two
      Certificates and 1 enclose only a few examples. It is worthy of note that even
      though the Cliftonhill Certificate was only issued on 15 March 1988 the
      Certificate has been amended and 1 also enclose a copy of such an amendment.

      Copies of all Certificates and amendments are retained by both Strathclyde
      Region Chief Executive's Department and Strathclyde Police.

      Whilst Hr Wilson was happy to collate the Scottish reponse, I felt that given
      the number of grounds in Strathclyde, I should reply direct explaining the
      sample supplied. I trust the enclosures will be of value to you.

      You may also be interested to   learn, following our discussions on exercise
      Centre Spot, that Strathclyde   Police, on behalf of the Scottish Police College,
      will organise two similar one   day exercises which will be attended by
      Superintendents participating   in Command Courses at the College.
                                      - 2 -




The exercises (1Gameplan1) will be held on 8 February and again on 29 March
1990. Each exercise will involve a visit to Hampden Park as a "scene setter"
for the participants. The scenarios will be entirely Police orientated.

May I also take this opportunity to thank you for the kind note which was sent
to the Chief Constable following the Inquiry Team's recent visit to
Strathclyde.

Please contact me if there is any further way in which Strathclyde Police can
be of assistance to the Inquiry.

Yours sincerely




£sistant Chief Constale
operations
4




                         Safetv of Toorts Grounds ^.ct 1975

                            Ge ne ral S a f e f C e r t i f i c a t e




    Whereas the Council have received an application dated 30th December, 1976, free
    the Queen’s Park Football Club Limited, Hampden Park, Mount Florida, Glasgow,
    G42 9BA for a General Safety Certificate under the Act in respect of Kan?d=n Park,
    Mount Florida, Glasgow, G42 9BA, being a stadium designated by the Secretary of
    State for Scotland by means of an Order under Section 1 of the Act;




    And whereas the Council have determined the said Queen's Park Football Club
    Limited to be a qualified person in terms of Section 3(1) of the Act and have
    carried out the consultations required by Section 3(3) of the Act;




    Nov therefore, the Council, in terms of Section 3(2)(a) of the Act, hereby granr
    and issue this General Safety Certificate to the said Queen's Park Football Club
    Limited in respect of the said stadium and that on the conditions set out in
    Parts 2, 3 and 4 of the Schedule hereto which shall form part of the said
    Certificate, being the terms and conditions which the Council consider necessary
    or expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in use for
    the specified activities.




    This Certificate shall come into force one calendar month after the data of issue
    hereof and the conditions of the Certificate shall be complied with from such
    effective date or from such other date or dates as are specified in the several
    Parts of the Schedule hereto.




                       Dated this twenty-ninth day of March, 1978




                                  (Sgd.)       C.H.M. Sharpe
              Senior Depute Director of Administration for and
                                or. behalf of the Council
                                                                                        1




                                     - 2 -

                                   SCHEDULE

                                    PART I

                                Interpretation



            This Certificate, including the Schedule hereof, shall be
            interpreted according to the definitions contained in the
            Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, as read with the supple­
            mentary definitions contained in this Part of the Schedule.



"the Act"                           means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

"authorised person"                means a person authorised in accordance with
                                    Section 11 of the Act

"the building                      means the City of Glasgow District Council, being
 authority"
                                    the local authority for the purposes of the
                                    Building (Scotland) Act 1959 and relative Regula­
                                    tions thereunder within the District in which the
                                    stadium is situated

"the Chief Constable"              means the Chief Constable of the Strathclyde
                                    Police or his authorised representative

"the Council"                      means Strathclyde Regional Council, being the
                                    local authority for the purposes of the Act
                                   within the Strathclyde Region

"covered enclosure"                means an area of terrace over which there is
                                    erected a structure to protect spectators from
                                    inclement weather conditions

"the Firemaster"                   means the Firemaster of the Strathclyde Fire
                                   Brigade or his authorised representative

"gangway"                          means a channel for the passage of spectators

"the Guide"                        means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds -
                                   Football" as first published in 1976 and as csy
                                   be re-published from time to time by the Home
                                   Office and the Scottish Home and Health Department

"the Holder"/
"the Holder"     means the applicant for and the person to whom
                 this Certificate is issued, being a qualified
                 person for the purposes of the Act


"the plan"       means the drawing of the stadium attached to
                 this Certificate in terms of Section 2(4) of
                 the Act and docketed as relative thereto


“the specified   means the activities listed in Part 2 of the
 activities"
                 Schedule


"the stadium"    means the sports stadium referred to in the
                 application for this Certificate and delineated
                 in red on the plan


"stairway"       shall have the meaning assigned to it in the
                 Building Standards (Scotland) Regulations in
                 force from time to time

"Stand"          means a building or area within the stadiua
                 in which seating accommodation is provided for
                 spectators


"terrace"        means an area of steps providing standing
                 accommodation for spectators




                 PART 2/
                                      - A -

                                     PART 2

                           The specified activities




The activities covered by this Certificate (i.e. the specified activities) shall
comprise the following activities to be held at Hatnpden Park, Glasgow, and to
which spectators are admitted, namely:-


                           (1)   Football matches
                           (2)   Athletic activities


but shall not include practice or training sessions for these activities to which
not more than 500 non-paying spectators are admitted.      For the avoidance of
doubt, it is expressly provided that the term "athletic activities" shall exclude
speedway racing, stock car racing and greyhound racing.




Subject, however, to the terms and conditions of the Certificate and to any
general statutory requirements, the stadium may also be used for the following
purposes ancillary to the specified activities, namely:-


     (a)   the playing of music or singing;

     (b)   the provision of news or comment relative to the specified
           activities;

     (c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities and the sale of
           prograiaaes, newssheets and souvenirs;

    (d)    the sale and consumption of refreshments;

    (e)    public.collections of any nature;

    (f)    any other use ancillary to the specified activities which has
           received not less than fourteen days' prior approval by the
           Council.




                                    PART 3/

                                                                           »
                                - 5 -

                                PART 3

  Conditions Imposed in terms of Sections 2(2) and 2(3) of the Act




Attendance Limits:-


The maximum number of spectators which may be admitted to the stadium on
any one occasion for the purposes of a specified activity shall not exceed
88,000 allocated as follows:-


   South Stand (West Section)            -   not   exceeding    4,250
   South Stand (Centre Section)          -   not   exceeding    1,500
   South Stand (East Section)            -   not   exceeding    4,250
   South Enclosure (West Section)        -   not   exceeding    1,060
   South Enclosure (Centre Section 2)    -   not   exceeding      460
   South Enclosure (Centre Section 1)    -   not   exceeding      420
   South Enclosure (East Section)        -   not   exceeding    1,060
   West Terrace 1                        -   not   exceeding    7,500
   West Terrace 2                        -   not   exceeding   12,500
   North Stand                           -   not   exceeding    4,500
   North Terrace 1                       -   not   exceeding   10,000
   North Terrace 2                       —   not   exceeding    9,500
   East Terrace 1                        -   not   exceeding   13,000
   East Terrace 2                        -   not   exceeding   18,000


The Holder shall keep records showing the number of spectators admitted to
the stadium on each occasion for the purposes of a specified activity and
the number of spectators admitted to each of the abovementioned separate
parts of the stadium on such occasion.   Such records shall be kept at the
stadium and shall be made available for examination on request by an
authorised person.




Metering of admissions:-


The Holder shall be required to provide and maintain at every turnstile or
entrance gate to the stadium a metering system to the satisfaction of the
Chief Constable acting on behalf of the Council, to indicate and record all
spectator admissions to the stadium with a view to ensuring that the number
of spectators admitted to each separate part of the stadium does not exceed
the number specified in Condition 1 of this Part of the Schedule.       Such
metering system and the means of communicating the information derived there­
from to a central point within the South Stand shall be of such kind as will
ensure/
ensure that appropriate representatives of the Holder and an appropriate
officer of the Strathclyde Police can readily ascertain the nunber of
spectators admitted through each turnstile or entrance gate and, if necessary,
give instructions immediately to close any such turnstile or entrance gate.


If, in order to comply with this Condition, it is necessary to execute any
additional works and/or to provide any additional equipment, such execution
and/or provision shall be completed not later than   31st December, 1978.




Location of turnstiles or entrance gates


Turnstiles or entrance gates for spectators shall be located and, along
with the accesses therefrom to the several parts of the stadium, shall at
all times be maintained in a proper state of repair at the undernoted
points and kept free from obstructions of any kind:-


                                                                  Number of
                      Reference nunber        Providing         turnstiles or
Part of Stadium
                          on plan            access from        entrance »ates
                                                                at the location

South Stand           Lettered FI - F6     Letherby Drive/               £
(West Section)                                                           0
                      inclusive            Aikenhead Road
South Stand           Lettered F7 - F8     Letherby Drive/               o
(Centre 'Section)     inclusive            Aikenhead Road
South Stand           Lettered F9 - F14    Letherby Drive/               a
                                                                         o
(East Section)        inclusive            Aikenhead Road
South Enclosure                            Letherby Drive/
                      Lettered G1                                        i
(West Section)                             Aikenhead Road
South Enclosure                            Letherby Drive/
                      Lettered G2                                        i
(Centre Section 2)                         Aikenhead Road
South Enclosure                            Letherby Drive/
                      Lettered G3                                        i
(Centre Section 1)                         Aikenhead Road
South Enclosure                            Letherby Drive/
                      Lettered G4                                        i
(East Section)                             Aikenhead Road
West Terrace 1        Lettered H           Letherby Drive               18
West Terrace 2        Lettered J           Somerville Drive             18
                      Lettered K1
North Stand                                Somerville Drive              6
                      K2 K3
North Terrace 1       Lettered L           Somerville Drive             14
North Terrace 2       Lettered M           Somerville Drive             10
East Terrace 1        Lettered N           Somerville Drive             22
East Terrace 2        Lettered 0           Aikenhead Road               18


All turnstiles or entrance gates shall be lettered to correspond with the
appropriate entry in the above table.
No individual turnstile or entrance gate for spectators shall be less than
425mm wide.




Location of exit gates:-


Exit gates for spectators shall be located and, along with the accesses
thereto from the several parts of the stadium, shall be maintained in safe
and proper working condition at the undernoted points and kept free from
obstructions at all times:-

                                                        Minimum
Part of Stadium            Reference number
                                                        width of
                                on plan
                                                   exit gates (metres)

West Terrace 1                 Exit    1                 7.315
West Terrace 1                  Exit   2                 3.660
West Terrace 1                  Exit   3                 3.660
West Terrace 1                  Exit   4                 3.660
West Terrace 1                 Exit    5                 7.320
West Terrace 2                 Exit    6                 7.320
West Terrace 2                 Exit    7                 7.320
West Terrace 2                 Exit    8                 7.320
North Stand                    Exit    9                 2.370
North Terrace 1                Exit 10                 ' 3.660
North Terrace 1                Exit 11                  3.660
North Terrace 1                Exit 12                   7.315
North Terrace 1                Exit 13                   7.315
North Stand                    Exit 14                  3.660
North Terrace 2                Exit 15                   7.320
North Stand                    Exit 16                  2.560
North Terrace 2                Exit 17                  7.320
East Terrace 1                 Exit 18                  7.320
East Terrace 1                 Exit 19                  3.660
East Terrace 1                 Exit 20                  3.660
East Terrace 2                 Exit 21                 10.980
East Terrace 2                 Exit 22                 10.980
East Terrace 2                 Exit 23                  7.315
South Stand
(East Section)                 Exit 24                  1.880

South Stand
(East Section)                 Exit 25                  1.880

South Stand
(East Section)                 Exit 26                  1.512
                                     - 8 -


                                 Reference number               Minimum
      Part of Stadium
                                      on plan                   width of
                                                           exit gates (metres)

      South Stand
      (East Section)                 Exit 27                     1.880
      South Stand
      (East Section)                 Exit 28                     1.753
      South Enclosure
      (East Section and              Exit 29                     1.689
      Centre Section 1)
      South Stand
      (Centre Section)               Exit 30                     1.676
      South Stand
      (Centre Section)               Exit 31                     1.676
      South Enclosure
      (Centre Section 2)             Exit 32                     1.791
      South Enclosure
      (West Section)                 Exit 33                     1.715
      South Stand
      (West Section)                 Exit 34                     1.905
      South Stand
      (West Section) *               Exit 35                     1.549
      South Stand
      (West Section)                 Exit 36                    1.905
     South Stand
     (West Section)                  Exit 37                    1.524
     South Stand
     (West Section)                  Exit 38                    1.905
     South Enclosure .
     (West Section)                 Exit 39                     2.743
     South Enclosure
     (East Section)                 Exit 40                     1.905




5*   Crush barriers and handrails


     Crush barriers and handrails shall be provided and maintained in a good
     state of repair at all times at not less a number of points as are located
     and indicated in green on the plan.     Although not shown on the plan,
     continuous handrails shall be provided and maintained on all stairways
     within the two Stands.    Crush barriers and handrails shall be kept free of
     all sharp projections or edges and, when tested, shall be required to satisfy
     the appropriate loading test specified in Appendix C to the Guide.


     The/
 The Hclder shall arrange     and carry out a programme for thetesting and
 inspection of crush barriers    and handrails within thestadium    on the   basis
 that every crush barrier     and every handrail shall be


      (a)    inspected once   per annum, and


      (b)    tested to the standards of Appendix C to the Guide at
             least once in a period of ten years


 Not less than ten per cent of the total number of such barriers and hand­
 rails shall be tested in any one year.        All testing and inspection carried
 out in terms of this Condition shall be so carried out by an independent
 firm to be approved by the Council.      A copy of each testing and/or
inspection certificate shall be submitted to the Council as soon as it is
issued by the firm concerned.


Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the carrying out of a
regular programme for the testing and inspection of crush barriers and
handrails, the.Council may require any particular barrier or handrail to be
separately tested and/or inspected at any time if it has reasonable cause to
suspect that it may not be capable of satisfying the appropriate loading
test specified in Appendix C to the Guide.


The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
at any testing and/or inspection of crash barriers and/or handrails if it
so wishes.


Any crush barrier or handrail which fails to meet the prescribed test shall
be replaced or strengthened as necessary within six weeks of the date of
the appropriate testing certificate.      Crush barriers and handrails which
are strengthened shall be retested on completion of the strengthening work
to ensure that they satisfy the requirements of Appendix C to the Guide.
Any crush barrier or handrail which, having failed the prescribed test, has
to be replaced shall be immediately removed.




Keeping of records


In addition to the records required to be kept in terms of Condition 1 of
this Part of the Schedule, the Holder shall be required to prepare and
maintain the following records which shall be made available to an authorised
person on request:-
                                 - 10 -


(a) a record of any accident or incident which causes injury (but
      excluding a playing field or track injury) and which is brought to
      his notice as having occurred within the stadium while it was being
      used for a specified activity;


(b)   a record of every test made of crush barriers and/or handrails within
      the stadium in terms of Condition 5 of this Part of the Schedule;


(c)   a record of every test made of an electrical installation within the
      stadium as provided for in Condition 10 of Part 4 of the Schedule;


(d)   a record of the dates of maintenance inspections carried out within
      the stadium, as required by Condition 6 of Part 4 of the Schedule,
      also indicating the nature of any defects found affecting the safety
      of spectators while within the stadium and the dates of the subsequent
      action taken to remedy such defects;


(e)   a record of the date of every exercise held in terms of Conditions 14
      and 29 of Part 4 of the Schedule to test emergency procedures, including
      fire routine procedures;


(f)   a record of the date of every test made of the fire alarm system, the
      emergency lighting system, the public address system and the fire
      fighting equipment within the stadium as provided for in Condition 31
      of Part 4 of the Schedule;


(g)   a record of the name of the person nominated, in terms of Condition 2
      of Part 4 of the Schedule, on each occasion when the stadium is in use
      for a specified activity.


The records required to be kept in terms of this Condition and Condition 1
of this Part of the Schedule may be so kept in a single log book or separate
log books as may be most convenient to the Holder.




                                 PART 4/
                                - 11 -

                                PART 4

      Other Conditions imposed in terms of Section 2(1) of the Act




General


The Holder shall


(a)   comply, as from the appropriate date in each case, with the conditions
      set out in the Schedule at all times when the stadium is in use for
      a specified activity;


(b)   subject to Condition 2 of this Part of the Schedule, retain control
      over all operations in the stadium at all times when the stadium is in
      use for a specified activity;


(c)   arrange, as and when required by the Conditions of this Certificate,
      for the testing of crush barriers and handrails and of the following
      systems and procedures, namely, (i) fire alarm system, (ii) emergency
      lighting system, (iii) public address system, (iv) fire fighting equip­
      ment and (v) fire routine procedures;


(d)   otherwise take such steps as are reasonably practicable to observe
      the spirit and intentions of the recommendations contained in the Guide
      in so far as the said recommendations are not substituted, amended,
      modified, extended or otherwise altered by all or any of the specific
      Conditions of this Certificate.




Nomination of responsible person:-


On each occasion when the stadium is used-for a specified activity, the
Holder shall nominate a responsible person to take charge of the stadium on
his behalf and to be present therein during the whole period of such use.
Such nominated person shall not be engaged on any duties which will prevent
him from exercising general supervision of the stadium on behalf of the
Holder during such use.       The name of the person so nominated shall be made
known to any authorised officer who may be present and have occasion to
                                                                       *
request it and shall be recorded as provided for in Condition 6 of Part 3
of the Schedule.
Dates for provision of new equipment and execution of works


Where, under any Condition of this Part of the Schedule, the Holder is
required either to provide new equipment of any kind or to execute works
within the stadium, such provision or execution shall be completed not
later than 31st December, 1978,   unless the context of any particular
Condition specifically stipulates otherwise in which case such other
stipulated date shall be applicable.




Alterations and additions to stadium:-


Alterations and/or additions to the stadium or to any of the installations
or facilities therein, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be made
except with the prior consent of the Council.      Notice in writing shall be
given by the Holder to the Council of any such alterations or additions
proposed to be made and such notice shall be accompanied by full details
and, as and when necessary or appropriate, by drawings and calculations.
The work shall not be started until the approval of the Council has been
obtained.     Such consent shall be additional to any planning, building
control or other consent required by the Holder.     Alterations and/or
additions approved by the Council in terns of this Condition shall be
required to meet the relative recommendations contained in the Guide unless
the Council   is satisfied that it would be impracticable or otherwise
unreasonable to insist on compliance in full with these recommendations.




Manning of entrance gates:-


Turnstiles or entrance gates shall be manned and operational for such a
period prior to the commencement of a specified activity as will permit the
admission of spectators to all parts of the stadium in an evenly distributed
and controlled manner.     The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable
before the use of the stadium for a specified activity, how many turnstiles
or entrance gates are to be allocated solely for the use of juveniles and/
or old age pensioners and/or specia'l groups.    Such agreement may, in the
discretion of the Chief Constable, either apply to all uses of the stadium
for a specified activity or to any one or more such uses.
                                   - 13 -


6.    Regular inspections of stadium and clearing of litter:-


      During the period between successive uses of the stadium for a specified
      activity, the Holder shall arrange for an inspection to be made on his
      behalf of the whole facilities of the stadium with a view to any defect
      or missing equipment being ascertained and immediately repaired or replaced
      and any other damage whatsoever being made good.     All litter and debris
      accumulated as a result of the immediately preceding use of the stadium
      shall be removed to safe storage before the stadium's further use for a
      specified activity.




7.    Maintenance - General


      All parts of the stadium shall be maintained in a good state of repair
      to the satisfaction of the Council.   The Holder shall carry out without
      delay such works of repair and maintenance within the stadium as may be
      required from time to time by the Council.


      In particular, all steel work and fabric shall be treated as and when
      required to prevent deterioration to structural strength and condition,
      all in accordance with the recommendations given in the relevant British
      Standard Specification and Codes of Practice.


      All drainage systems within those areas in the stadium which are accessible
      to spectators shall be maintained in a safe and efficient condition at all
      times.




8.    Maintenance of surfaces


      The surfaces or every part of all paths, stairways, gangways, terraces,
      accesses and exits within the stadium over which spectators may have
      reasonable cause to pass shall be maintained in a good state of repair free
      from ruts, potholes, depressions or other defects.




9./
                                      -   14   -



   9*    Precautions to be taken because of inclement weather


         Where, because of inclement weather giving possible rise to dangerous
         conditions under foot, e.g. snow or ice, any surfaces within the stadiun
         over which a spectator may have reasonable cause to pass may present
         a hazard to spectators, such surface shall be cleared of such hazard before
         spectators are admitted to the stadium.




 10,     Annual inspection of electrical installations


         The Holder shall have an inspection made annually of the whole electrical
         installations within the stadium and shall submit a copy of the relative
         Inspection Certificate to the Council immediately it is issued by the person
        or firm concerned.   Such Inspection Certificate shall be in the form
        prescribed in Section E of the Regulations for the Electrical Equipment of
        Buildings as published by the Institution of Electrical Engineers and shall
        be signed by a Corporate member of the said Institution or by a Contractor
        currently enrolled with the National Inspection Council for Electrical
        Installation Contracting or by a qualified representative of an electricity
        supply authority or by a surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company.


        Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the inspection of the
        whole electrical installations within the stadium, the Council may require
        any particular part of the installations to be separately tested at any time
        if it has reasonable cause to suspect that it may be defective in some way.


        The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented at
        any inspection of the electrical installations or part thereof if it so
        wishes.



        Any electrical installation or part thereof which fails to pass the
        appropriate test shall be repaired or replaced within one month of the
        issue of the appropriate Certificate.      Any electrical installation or part
        thereof which has to be repaired or replaced shall be re-tested on completion
        of such repairs or replacement so as to comply with the above-mentioned
        Regulations.




11 ./
                                     - 15 -


11•    Parking of vehicles within the stadium:-


       No vehicles other than emergency vehicles (i.e. police, fire, ambulance
       etc.) shall be parked in any part of the stadium while it is in use for a
       specified activity unless with the prior agreement of the Chief Constable.
       Without prejudice, however, to this requirement, the Chief Constable may
       agree with the Holder the allocation of a specific area or areas within the
       stadium for the parking of disabled persons' vehicles while the stadium is
       in use for a specified activity.




12.    Arrangements for attendance of police officers


       The Holder shall arrange at his own expense for the attendance of an
       adequate number of police officers while the stadium is in use for a
       specified activity to ensure the lawful and orderly behaviour of spectators.
       The number of police officers to be in attendance within the stadium during
       any such use shall be agreed in advance between the Holder and the Chief
       Constable.




13.    Methods of admission and segregation of supporters


       The Holder shall discuss and agree with the Chief    Constable prior to the
       use of the stadium for a specified activity


       (a)   the methods of admission to be employed in connection with such
             specified activity (in particular, whether admission shall be by
             ticket only);   and


       (b)   the special arrangements, if any, to be made for the segregation
             of home and visiting supporters.


       Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Condition, it shall
       be in the discretion of the Chief Constable to indicate to the Holder
       that the agreement reached in terms of the said provisions can also apply
       to all or any future uses of the stadium for a specified activity without
       further discussion between them.




14./
                                        -   16   -



14.    Stewarding arrangements - General


      While the stadium is in use for a specified activity, the Holder shall
       ensure the attendance within the stadium of such number of stewards as
      are necessary to ensure compliance with the Conditions of this Certificate
      and such stewards shall be


       (a)   fit and capable to carry out their duties;


       (b)   properly trained and instructed;


      (c)    readily identifiable by dress (e.g. white coat, fluorescent jacket
             etc.); and


      (d)    provided by the Holder with written instructions, to be approved- by
             t*ie Council, as to their general duties in order to fulfil the following
             functions


             (i)         the manning of exit gates;


             (ii)    the control and direction of spectators entering, using
                     or leaving the stadium;         and
                                                              t-




             (iii)   patrolling the stadium and dealing with any emergency,
                     including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire.


      Stewards on duty in implementation of this Condition and, in particular,
      stewards on duty at exit gates and on the access routes thereto shall have
      ready access to loud hailer equipment to enable them to make quick contact
      with spectators, if and when required.


      Where the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only
      and for no other activity, it shall be a sufficient discharge of the
      requirements of this Condition if the Holder ensures the attendance of
      sufficient stewards to ensure the orderly behaviour of the public during
      the period of sale.


      All/
All stewards and other persons employed in the stadium during its use for
a specified activity shall be fully instructed as to their responsibilities
in the event of an emergency and exercises for stewards and other persons
employed within the stadium shall be carried out not less than three times
each playing season to test emergency procedures.




Exit gates - Attendance by stewards:-


All exit gates shall be attended by stewards throughout the entire period
when spectators may be in the stadium in connection with its use for a
specified activity and it shall be the duty of such stewards to open the
exit gates in the event of an emergency and in any event not less than
fifteen minutes before the anticipated end of the specified activity or at
any other time on the request of a police officer.   When opened for- any
reason, all exit gates shall be secured in the fully open position and kept
free of all obstructions.




Positioning of television cameras etc.:-


Television cameras and portable equipment shall be restricted to positions
to be approved in advance by the Chief Constable on behalf of the Council
and shall not be allowed to cause any Qbstruction to the police or emergency
services in the carrying out of their duties.




Provision of first-aid room etc.:-


The Holder shall provide and maintain within the stadium a suitably
equipped first-aid room and/or first-aid points to the satisfaction of
the Council and shall ensure the attendance of a sufficient number of
properly trained first-aid personnel on each occasion when the stadium is
in use for a specified activity.


The attendance of first-aid personnel shall not be considered to be necessary
when the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only and
for no other activity.
                                    - 18 -


18.    Public Address Svstem:-


       The Holder shall maintain for his own use and for the use of the police
       and emergency services, as and when required while the stadium is in use
       for a specified activity, a public address system capable of being heard
      under reasonable conditions by all spectators of normal hearing in any part
       of the stadium to which spectators have a right of access.   Such public
      address system shall be operated and controlled from a position to be
      approved by the Chief Constable on behalf of the Council and shall be
      provided with an emergency power supply so that it is capable of being
      operated at all times.


      The wiring for the public address system shall be either M.I.C.C. cable or
      P.V.C. cable in conduit and the emergency source of power supply shall be
      provided from batteries kept at full capacity by trickle charging from the
      mains supply.   Alternatively, the emergency source of power supply may be
      provided from a generator.


19.   Toilet facilities


      The Holder shall ensure the provision and adequate maintenance to the
      satisfaction of the Council of sufficient toilet facilities, both male
      and female, in all parts of the stadium.




20.   Sale of tickets, programmes and refreshments - General:-


      In allocating premises or facilities for the sale of tickets, programmes
      or refreshments, the Holder shall take all necessary steps to ensure that
      such allocation does not obstruct entrance or exit routes in any way.




21.   Provision of refreshments


      The Holder shall ensure that all premises, appliances and equipment
      associated with the sale of refreshments are maintained in a safe and
      proper working condition at all times.


      All/
All containers in which liquid refreshments are sold or distributed to
spectators while the stadium is in use for a specified activity shall be
made of soft plastic or other soft material.      This requirement shall not
apply to any part of the stadium to which access is given only on the
invitation of the Holder.




Facilities for authorised persons:-


The Holder shall make available adequate viewing and inspection facilities
to authorised persons immediately before, during or after a specified
activity or at any other reasonable time when considered necessary by the
Council.




Accommodation and facilities for Strathclyde Police:-


As soon as possible and not later than 31st July, 1980 the Holder shall
provide and thereafter maintain at his own expense the following accommo­
dation and facilities for the use of the police officers on duty in
connection with the use of the stadium for a specified activity.


(a)   Accommodation - South Stand


      There shall be provided and maintained in such location within the
      South Stand as may be approved by the Chief Constable, the following
      units of accommodation, namely:-


      (i)     A general office with accommodation for lost children and a
              staff of 4/5 persons including typing staff - this office
              to have its own toilet accommodation;


      (ii)    A charge bar incorporating three charge points and secure
              storage for the property of persons charged;


      (iii)   Two detention rooms (one for adults and one for juveniles),
              each with its own toilet;


      (iv)/                                                           I
                                        - 20 -


             (iv)    A refreshment room with its own toilet for the use of police
                     officers on duty;


             (v)     Interview room.


       (b)   Facilities - South Stand


             (i)     Heating shall beavailable within the     accommodation referred
                     to at (a) above;


             (ii)    Basic furnishings, e.g. working surfaces, bench seats,
                     stacking tables and chairs, shall be provided;


             (iii)   A police control room with full radio facilities shall be
                     sited as high as possible in the South Stand;


             (iv)    A telephone communications system shall be available to connect
                     the police control room with the following points, namely


                     (1)   the complex of rooms referred    to at (a) above;
                     (2)   the players' tunnel;
                     (3)   the public address system cubicle;
                     (4)   the main door of the Stand;             -
                     (5)   the police reserve holding areas;
                     (6)   the turnstiles/entrance gates;
                     (7)   the police control point in the North Stand.


             (v)     The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable on areas at
                     either end of the South Stand or elsewhere within the stadium
                     to be made available for use as police reserve holding areas
                     and other possible police requirements, e.g. a command vehicle,
                     prison bus, etc.


       (c)   Accommodation - North Stand


             A police control point suitable for visual observation of the southern
             end of the West and East Terraces shall be provided to the satisfaction
             of the Chief Constable.




24./
                                      - 21 -


24.   Specific repairs, maintenance and improvements to be carried out
      (except-where otherwise provided for)


      (1)   Application to the stadium as a whole


            (a)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, all terracing crush barriers
                   and handrails shall be strengthened or treated for corrosion
                   at the locations indicated in the appropriate crush barrier
                   testing and inspection certificate.
                                                            •


            (b)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, all insecure terracing timber
                   steps and holding down bolts shall be properly fixed and
                   depressions in the ash surfacing infilled to achieve s regular
                   even surface.


            (c)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, all defects in the electrical
                   systems and appliances shall be made safe in accordance with the
                   appropriate electrical testing certificate.


            (d)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, the posts and fixings of the
                   gangway numbering boards which are loose and corroded shall be
                   repaired and made safe.


      (2)   Application to West Terraces


            (a)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, all stairways serving the West
                   Terraces shall be providedwith handrails dividing the stair­
                   ways into channels having a width of between 1.1 metres and 1.8
                   metres and any depressions in the ash surfacing shall be infilled
                   to give a regular even-surfaced tread.


            (b)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, all broken or chipped concrete
                   stairway treads shall be repaired.


            (c)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, the damaged or cracked brick­
                   work around turnstile entrances 19 to 35 (lettered J on plan)
                   shall be repaired or replaced.


            (d)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, the brickwork to the external
                   toilets on the West Terraces shall be repointed.


            (e)/
                                - 22 -


      (e)    Not later than 31st July, 1978, all insecure and cracked
             brickwork and lintels at exits 7, 8 and 9 shall be repaired.


      (f)    Not later than 31st July, 1978, repairs shall be carried out to
             the structural concrete and drainage system of the suspended
             walkway behind the West Terraces.


      (g)    Not later than 31st July, 1978, the temporary scaffolding fence
             along the top passageway at the rear qf the covered terrace
             shall be replaced by a fence capable of withstanding the crowd
             pressures likely to arise.


(3)   Application to East Terraces


      (a)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, the existing fence which divides
             the East Terraces between gangways 29 and 30 shall be removed
             and a fence having the same number of access gates as the
             existing fence shall be erected between gangways 27 and 28 to
             balance the standing capacities and the exit route capacities.


      (b)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, all insecure and rotted timber
             risers on the stairs 'F' and 1L' and on the ramps between stairs
             'M' and 'N' shall be repaired.


      (c)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, the fence along the top perimeter
             passageway shall have any insecure sections repaired, protruding
             nails made flush, and the gates facing the top of gangway 29
             adequately braced to sustain any likely crowd pressure.        Subsi­
             dence of the path surface and fence supports between stairways
             *J 1 and 'M' and at stairway 'L' shall also be treated where
             necessary and made safe.


      (d)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, depressions in the surface of
             the path behind the East Terraces shall be infilled and the ragged
             edges of the corrugated metal fence alongside this path shall be
             repaired.


      (e)/
                                                                        I
                                 - 23 -


    (e)    Not later than 30th April, 1978, the damaged or cracked
           brickwork around turnstile entrance 74 (lettered N on plan)
           shall be repaired or replaced.


    (f)    Not later than 31st July, 1978, the cracks in the concrete
           retaining wall behind the East Terraces shall be sealed to
           prevent deterioration due to the effects of weathering and
           the surface of the earth slope retained by this wall shall be
             treated to avoid further erosion.


(4) .Application to North Stand

    (a)      Not later than 30th April, 1978, the concrete columns on line
             of seats 160 and 166 above parapet level and at the bottom of
             the east stairway which show signs of cracking and deterioration
             shall have all loose material broken out and repairs carried

             out.


     (b)     Not later than 30th April, 1978, all broken glass on stairway
             windows shall be removed to avoid spectators coming in contact
             with this hazard.


     (c)     Not later than 30th April, 1978, the corrugated roof sheeting
             and flashing, together with the timber frame barrier, at turn­
             stiles 61 and 62 (lettered K3 on the plan) shall be repaired or
             replaced.


     (d) Not later than 31st July, 1978, continuous handrails shall be pro­
             vided on both sides of exit stairways where these do not exist at
             present.

     (e)     Not later than 31st July, 1978, weathered concrete on the external
             faces of the east gable walls, the cills facing Somerville Drive,
             and the cracked rendering on the column at entrance L.43 shall
             be repaired.


     (f)     Not later than 31st July, 1979, the flooring and seating which
             is exposed to the effects of weathering shall be inspected and
              replaced as necessary.                                    *


      (g)/
                                 -   24   -



      (g)      Not later than 31st July, 1979, the underside of the suspended
               concrete roof and floor slabs where gutters and downpipes pass
               through shall be inspected and the drainage system and concrete
               structure repaired as necessary.


      (h)      Not later than 31st July, 1979, a permanent ventilation system
               shall be provided for the Generator Room and Electrical Mains
               Sub-Station Switch Room and this shall include an independent
               system for all generator exhausts.     Provision for the storage
               of fuel shall be made to the satisfaction of the Firemaster.


      (i)      Not later than 31st July, 1981, all -oof structural steelwork
               showing signs of rust or loose paint shall be wire-brushed and
               painted.


(5)   Application to South Stand (including Administration Area)


      (a)      Not later than 30th April, 1978, the roof timbers and fixings
               to the external toilet facing the South Stand (East Section)
               shall be made secure.


      (b)      Not later than 31st July, 1978, all seating within the Stand
               shall, where necessary, be repaired and securely fixed in
               position and worn and loose timber steps shall be repaired.


      (c)      Not later than 31st July, 1978, the structural steel raking
               beams at the front of the Stand under the tiered seating shall
               be inspected and repairs carried out to corroded sections where
               necessary, together with replacement of rotted timbers affected
               by weathering immediately above these steel beams.


      (d)      Not later than 31st July, 1978, the brick butt at the rear of
               the seated area adjacent to the    exit at seats 64 and 65 shall
               be repaired and any rough edges    removed.


       (e)     Not later than 31st July, 1978,    the platforms at each end of the
               Press Box which give access to the flagpoles and roof shall have
               all corroded metal flooring panels and brackets repaired.


       (f )/
                            - 25 -


(f)   Not later than 31st July, 1978, clear notices indicating the
      safe loading limits shall be fixed at the access door from the
      Press Box to the television broadcasting platform and on the
      lifting bean at the west end of this platform.       By the same
      date, the small loading platform serving the main television
      broadcasting platform shall be permanently supported and the
      scaffolding structure removed and precautions taken to avoid
      objects falling from these platforms on to the seated area
      below.


(g)   Where television, communications or electricity cables are
      within reach of spectators, whether attached to the Stand
      structure or at ground level, these cables shall be enclosed
      within approved ducts to prevent spectators coming into contact
      with them.   All other cables shall be securely fixed to the
      structure by cable cleats or clips.       The work necessary to
      comply with this condition shall be completed not later than
      31st tJuly, 1978.


(h)   Not later than 31st July, 1978, the vertical cladding sheets
      at the rear of the Stand next to seats numbered 61 and 62 shall
      be made secure.


(i)   Not later than 31st July, 1978, cills and lintels situated in
      the stair towers which are cracked or damaged shall be repaired.


(j)   Not later than 31st July, 1978, continuous handrails shall be
      provided on both sides of exit stairways where these do not
      exist at present, and also along the top of the front seated
      area exit balustrades similar to those already fixed to the rear
      exits.


(k) Not later than 31st July, 1978, the existing accesses/exits to
      the vomitories from    the Stand shall be improved by removing the
      undernoted seats to increase the passageway widths from 405mm
      to 1050mm.    The existing small step at the undernoted sections
      shall then be extended to take in the gap created by the removal
      of such seats.


                        West Section   -   Rows DD to LL
                        East Section   -   Rows BB to LL
                                        - 26 -


              (1)   Not later than 31st July, 1980,     the structural steel on the
                    stair from the Press Box to the     television broadcasting plat­
                    form, the longitudinal steel channels which form the risers to
                    the tiered seating and the continuous steel angles which secure
                    the back of the seats shall be wire brushed and painted.


              (m)   Not later than 31st July, 1980,     the sliding doors on the end
                    gable walls of the Stand shall be inspected and any areas of
                    corrosion treated or repaired.


              (n)   Not later than 31st July, 1981, all structural steelwork in the
                    Stand shall have any areas of loose rust and paint thoroughly
                    cleaned and any corrosion treated.




25.'   Fire Precautions - South and North Stands:-


       The following provisions shall be fully met inrespect         of the South and
       North Stands:-


       (A.)   SOUTH STAND


              (1)   Press Box


       ^            (a)   Both stairs leading to the Press    Boxshall   be enclosed at
                          the top level with materials having a resistance to fire of
                          at least one hour:     any doors within the enclosure shall have
                          a resistance to fire of at least half an hour and shall be
                          made and maintained self-closing and'close-fitting to a 25nm
                          rebate.


                    (b)   The wall and ceiling linings of both corridors of the Press
                          Box shall have a resistance to fire of at least one hour and
                          the doors to all rooms from the corridors shall have a resis­
                          tance to fire of at least half an hour and shall be made and
                          maintained self-closing and close-fitting to a 25mm rebate.


                    (c)   Arrangements shall be made to separate both levels of the
                                                                                  i
                          Press Box with materials having a resistance to fire of at
                          least one hour.


              (2V
                                     - 27 -
/•   i


         (2)   West Section


               The timber-constructed storerooms situated underneath the Stand
               seating area shall be upgraded to provide structures with walls
               and ceilings having a fire resistance of at least one hour.          Doors
               within such structures shall be       half-hour fire resisting and
               shall be made and maintained self-closing and close-fitting to a
               25mm rebate.


         (3)   East Section


               The timber-constructed Snack Bar shall be altered to provide a
               structure having a resistance to fire of at least one hour.
               Alternatively, the Snack Bar may be altered to an open servery
               type, similar to the type at first floor level.


         (4)   Centre Stand/Main Administration Area


               (a) -The undernoted doors shall have a resistance to fire of at
                      least half an hour      and shall be made and maintained self-
                      closing and close-fitting to a 25mm rebate.


                      (1)     Main Stair


                      (1)     Doors to Directors' Box at first floor level.
                      (ii)    Door to offices at first floor level.
                      (iii)   Door to kitchen at ground floor level.
                      (iv)    Doors to both offices at ground floor level.
                      (v)     Doors to both dressing rooms at ground floor level.


                      (2)     Rear Stair from Gymnasium


                      (i)     Door to Gymnasium at first floor level.
                      (ii)    Door to Treasurer's Office at ground floor level.
                      (iii)   Door to Laundry at ground floor level.
                      (iv)    Door to dressing room at ground floor level.
                      (v)     Door to treatment room at ground floor level.
                      (vi)    All storeroom doors leading on to stair enclosure.
                      (vii) Doors from•corridor at ground floor level.        *


               (b)/
                              - 28 -


       (b)    The wall and ceiling linings of the rear stair shall have
              a fire resistance of at least one hour.


       (c)    The plain glazing at the office at ground floor level shall
             be replaced with fire-resisting glazing to a one-hour
             standard and the frames fixed shut.


       (d)   The hatch between the Kitchen and the Billiard Room shall
             be fitted with a hardwood or met^l shutter.


       (e)   The wall and ceiling linings of the offices and storeroom
             at first floor level shall have a resistance to fire of at
             least one hour and the doors shall have a fire resistance of
             at least half an hour and be made and maintained self-closing
             and close-fitting to a 25mm rebate.


      (f)    A ceiling shall be formed in the main electrical switch room
             .and the door thereto shall be one-hour fire-resisting and be
             made and maintained self-closing and close-fitting to a 25nm
             rebate.    Holes in the wall of this room shall be infilled
             with non—combustible materials and the redundant extractor
             fan shall be removed and the vacant space infilled with non­
             combustible materials.


      (g)    Half-hour fire-resisting doors, which shall be made and
             maintained self-closing and close-fitting, shall be provided
             in the corridor at ground floor level adjacent to the Jfein
             Entrance Hall.


(5)   Fire Alarm System


      While the Council regard it as desirable that an electrically-
      operated, manually-activated fire alarm system complying with
      British Standard Code of Practice CP 1019 : 1972 should be
      installed, the Council will accept as compliance with this pro­
      vision a two-stage type alarm system incorporating the public
      address system.

                                                                 I
      The/
                               - 29 -


             The Holder shall not, however, be required to provide a fire
             alarm audible warning system other than within the general area
             of the offices, dressing rooms, gymnasium and working areas.
             Power for the fire alarm system shall be provided from batteries
             kept at full capacity by trickle charging from the mains supply
             and wiring shall be either M.I.C.C. cable or P.V.C. cable in
             conduit.


             Alternatively, power may be supplied by a generator.


       (6)   Automatic Fire Detection System


             An automatic fire detection system in the form of smoke
             detectors shall be provided within the Stand.


             Power for the automatic fire detection system shall be obtained
             from batteries kept at full capacity by trickle charging from
             the mains supply and wiring shall be either M.I.C.C. cable or
             P.V.C. cable in conduit.


             Alternatively, power may be supplied by a generator.


             The automatic and manual fire alarm/detection systems shall be
             so linked that the sounding devices provided will operate equally
             on the actuation of a call point or a smoke detector.


             An indicator panel shall be provided and located within the
             office section to the satisfaction of the Firemaster and shall be
             capable of showing clearly the area from which the alarm has been
             given.


(B)    NORTH STAND


       (1)   The doors to the main electrical switch room and generator room
             at ground floor level shall have a resistance to fire of at
             least one hour and shall be made and maintained self-closing and
             close-fitting to a 25mm rebate.


                                                                       I
(C)/
                                     - 30 -


      (C)    SOUTH AND NORTH STANDS - GENERAL

             (1)   All final exit doors from both Stands shall be modified, as
                   necessary, to open outwards in the direction of exit travel.


                   Where such doors are fitted with panic bolt type fastenings,
                   they shall be clearly marked with the words "PUSH BAR TO OPEN"
                   painted in 100mm high white block capital lettering.    This
                   lettering shall be placed immediately above the bar in each case.


             (2)   Signs bearing the word "EXIT" in green block -capital lettering
                   at least 125mm high on a white background shall be provided
                   throughout the Stand areas to provide clear guidance along all
                   exit routes.   Such signs shall be of the illuminated type
                   complying with British Standard 5266, Part I : 1975 unless they
                   are adequately illuminated by the general and emergency lighting
                   systems.


                   On any occasion when a large number of foreign spectators is
                   expected within the stadium, the Holder shall consider the
                   necessity for the provision of additional ocit notices in the
                   appropriate language.


             (3)   All fire resisting doors which require to be close-fitting and
                   self-closing shall have a notice fixed to both faces of the door,
                   bearing the words "Fire Door - Keep Shut" or words to the like
                   effect.




26.   General and emergency lighting systems


      The existing general and emergency lighting systems in all parts of the
      stadium accessible to spectators and particularly on entrance and exit stair­
      ways, gangways and other routes shall be maintained in a safe and efficient
      working condition, to ensure that spectators may enter, make use of or
      leave the stadium safely.


      The/
                                                - 31 -
V   .
        The l i g h t i n g system mains supply s h a l l be t r a n s f e r r e d t o the emergency
        g e n e r a t o r changeover sy stem.

        All extensions to the emergency lighting system shall comply as far as
        possible with British Standard 5266, Part I : 1975 and give an illumination
        of not less than 0.4 lux.               The whole of such system shall be made to come
        into operation automatically in the event of a failure of the mains supply
        and shall be capable of providing the necessary level of illumination for
        not less than two hours.




27.     Notices on final exit doors from the Stadium:-


        In addition to the requirements of Condition 25(C)(1) of this Part of the
        Schedule relative to the painting of a notice on the inside of final exit
        doors from the Stands, all final exit doors from the stadium, including the
        Stands, shall be clearly and permanently marked on the outside face of the
        doors by the words "EXIT - KEEP CLEAR" in red block capital lettering not
        less than 125mm in height on a white background.




28.     Fire fighting equipment:-


        Portable fire fighting appliances of types to be approved by the Firemaster
        shall be located and maintained at such points throughout the stadium,
        including the Stands, as may likewise be approved by him.                     Without prejudice
        to the foregoing general requirement, a fire blanket of the non-asbestos
        type shall be provided and located within each Snack Bar in the stadium.




29.     Fire routine procedures:-


        The Holder shall take the necessary steps to instruct all staff, including
        stewards, likely to be working within the stadium while it is in use for
        a specified activity, of the procedures to be adopted as uncernoted in the
        event of an outbreak of fire being discovered, namely:-


        (a)    The Fire Brigade to be summoned;


        (b)    A responsible person or persons to proceed to the scene of the' fire
               to find out if it has been extinguished or is under control;


        (c)/
      - r                                         - 32 -
t *

                  (c)    Where the fire (i) is affecting Stand seating or any exit therefrom
                         or (ii) is located elsewhere within either Stand and is not under
                         control, to take immediate steps to arrange the evacuation of that
                         Stand by using the public address system.


                 The full details of fire routine procedures shall be agreed with the
                 Firemaster not later than 31st July, 1978.         Exercises to test fire routine
                 procedures shall be carried out not less than three times each playing
                 season and may be so carried out in conjunction with the exercises referred
                 to in Condition 14 of this Part of the Schedule.




      3®*       Storage of liquefied petroleum gas:-


                 If it is necessary to store or use liquefied petroleum gas within the
            x   stadium, the Holder shall take the necessary steps to observe any guidance
                given by the Firemaster as to the precautions to be taken in so doing.




      31*       Testing of systems:-


                The following arrangements shall be made by the Holder for the testing of
                the undernoted systems:-


                (a)     Fire Alarm - both the manual and automatic fire alarm systems shall
                        be tested in accordance with the procedures set out in British
                        Standard Code of Practice CP 1019 : 1972;


                (b)     Emergency Lighting - the emergency lighting system shall be tested in
                        accordance with the procedures outlined in British Standard 5266 • Part I
                        : 1975;



                (c)     Public Address System - the public address system shall be tested at
                        the same time as the fire alarm system and shall be checked to ensure
                  . that it operates correctly from both the normal and secondary power
                    sources;



                (d)     Fire Fighting Equipment - the fire fighting equipment shall be checked
                        and tested by a competent firm of fire engineers at regular periods
                        but not less often than once per annum.
                                                                          Telephone        UA1-227 332t
                                                                          Switchboard      041-204 290C
                                                                          Our ref          SG/2/4 (Mr.
                                                                          Your ref
                                                                          Date             14th August,




Mr. J . C . Rutherford,
Secretary,
Hampden Park. F o o t b a l l Club L t d . ,
Hampden Park,
GLASGOW,
G42 9BD.



Dear S i r ,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
AMENDMENT TO GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

F o l lo w in g the i s s u e of the Interim Report by the Rt. Hon. Lord J u s t i c e Tay.
on the H i ll sb o ro u g h Stadium D i s a s t e r , the Re gional C ou n ci l, as the appropri*
L i c e n s i n g A u t h o ri t y under the above A ct , have agreed to adopt Recommendation
o f t h e R ep or t r e g a r d i n g t h e maximum c a p a c i t y f o r a r e a s f o r s t a n d i
spectators.            This has the e f f e c t of reducing the c a p a c i t y of such areas by 1
from the e x i s t i n g c a p a c i t y .       I t h e r e f o r e have t o inform you t h a t , v i
immediate e f f e c t , C o n d i t i o n 1 of Part 3 o f the General Safety C e r t i f i c t
c u r r e n t l y i n f o r c e f o r your Stadium w i l l be amended as shown i n the undernote.

T h is l e t t e r s h a l l be co n st ru ed as a formal amendment t o the above mentlor
General S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e f o r the Stadium and s h a l l be read toget her wit h
accordingly.               The u s u a l a p p ea ls p r o v i s i o n s apply i f the Club i s in any v
d i s s a t i s f i e d w it h t h i s amendment.

The S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e w i l l f u rt h er be amended t o r e f l e c t Recommendations 3,
5 , 7, 8 , 9, 10 and 33 of the Report.

The Regional Council would ap p re ci a te your re s p o n se s ar.d a note of a c t i
proposed in r e s p e c t of Rtrcommer.dation s 18 t o 25 and 39 t o 43 of the Report.

Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,


                 /



DeputerTThief E x e c u t i v e
( P r o t e c t i v e and B a s ic S e r v i c e s )
AMM/MM
At t e r d a r c i j L i r i 1 t s

The maxi mun! rur.ber of sp“ c t a c > r c w ^ l c h ci«v b-i aflinit Cod to tf>< S c a d i u n o:
ore occtsior for rht p u r p o s e of a sp« ci f ied activity shall m e exce ed 64,
allocated as follow*:-

South Stand - West                          r.ot   exceed ir.?         4,b52
South Stand - Cert re                       rot    e x c e e d ir r    1,500
South Stard - fcast                         rot    exceed Irf!         4,974
D isabled S p ec t at o r Terrace           r.ot   exceedirK              222 ( 54 w h e e lc h a i r
                                                                                48 Anbularts S e a r i r
                                                                               120 Ambularts Standi
West Terrace                1~H             rot    exceeding           1 ,<>50
West Terrace                2-J             rot    ex c e e d ir £    11,050
North Terrace               1~L             rot    exceed!rR           7,055
North Terraco               2~M             roc    exc*-o:dir.£        7,480
East Terrace                i-M             not    exceedirz          10,030
East Terrace                2-0             not    ex ce ed irp        9,246




           /
                                                 flL Strathclyde
                                               4 ^ / Regional
                                                     Council
                                      Robert Calderwood LLB Chief Executive




Chief Executive's Department                  An equal opportunities authority   Telephone   041-227 3326
Strathclyde House                              A nuclear-free zone authority     Switchboard 041-204 2900
2 0 India Street                                                                 Our ref     SG/2/4 (Mr. Matheson)
Charing Cross                                                                    Your ref
Glasgow G2 4PF                                                                   Date             March, 1989




 Mr« J.C. Rutherford,
 Secretary,
 Queen's Park Football Club Ltd.,
 Hampden Park,
 GLASGOW, G42 9BD.



 Dear Sir,

 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
 HAMPDEN PARK - SOUTH EAST TERRACING

 I refer to my letter of 16th January, 1989 in connection with the sub division
 of the south east terracing.       The  Regional Council, as    the appropriate
 Licensing Authority under theabove Act, have agreed that with immediate effect
 the capacities of the various parts of your ground will be as follows:-

 South Stand - West                                  4,852
 South Stand - Centre                                1,500
 South Stand - East                                  4,974
 Disabled Spectator Terrace                            212    (54
                                                               48
                                                              120
 West Terrace          1 - H                          9,000
 West Terrace          2 - J                         13,000
 North Terrace         1 - L                          8,300
 North Terrace         2 - M                          8,800
 East Terrace          1 - N                         11,800
 East Terrace          2-0                           10,880
 Total Capacity                                      73,318


 This letter shall be construed as a formal amendment to the General Safety
 Certificate for the Stadium and should be read, together with it accordingly.
 The usual appeals provisions apply if the Club is in any way dissatisfied with
 the amendment.

 Yours faithfully,




 Deptfte Chief Executive
 ( P r o t e c t i v e and Basic S e r v i c e s )
                                       flu Strathclyde
                                                Regional
                                       y        Council
                               Robert Calderwood LLB Chief Executive



Chief Executive's Department         An equal opportunities authority   Telephone     041-227 3288
Strathclyde House                     A nuclear-free zone authority     Switchboard   041-204 2900
20 India Street                                                         Our ref       SG/2/4 (Mr. Purdon)
Charing Cross                                    L                       Your ref
Glasgow G2 4PF                                                          Date          22nd June, 1989




Mr. J.C. Rutherford,
Secretary,
Queen's Park Football Club,
Hampden Park,
GLASGOW,
G42 9BD.



 Dear Mr.Rutherford,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
HAMPDEN PARK, GLASGOW
WORLD YOUTH CUP FINAL - 24TH JUNE, 1989

 I refer to my letter of 6th March, 1989 advising of the revised capacities of
 Hampden Park and to the subsequent correspondence and discussions in connection
 with the capacities of the terracing areas of the stadium when used as family
 enclosures.

 I now confirm that the Regional Council, as the appropriate Licensing Authority
 under the above Act, have agreed that, in view of the pricing policies adopted
 for the World Youth Cup Final on 24th June, 1989, the capacities of the various
 parts of the stadium for this match only be revised as follows:-

 Area of Stadium                     Existing Capacities                       Revised Capacities

 South Stand - West                    4,852                                            4,852
 South Stand - Centre                  1,500                                            1,500
 South Stand - East                    4,974                                            4,974
 Disabled Spectator Terrace              222 ( 54 wheelchairs                             222
                                               48 Ambulants seating
                                              120 Ambulants standing)
 West Terrace     1-H                  9,000                                             6,666
 West Terrace     2-J                 13,000                                             9,629
 North Terrace    1-L                  8,300                                             6,148
 North Terrace    2-M                  8,800                                             6,518
 East Terrace     1-N                 11,800                                             8,740
 East Terrace     2-0                 10,880                                             8,059

 Total Capacity                       73,328                                            57,308


 This/*•
                                         -2-


    This letter shall be construed as a formal amendment to the General Safety
    Certificate for the stadium and should be read, together with it accordingly.
    The usual appeals provisions apply if the Club is in any way dissatisfied with
    the amendment.

    Yours sincerely,




    Depute Chief Executive
    (Protective and Basic Services)
    JKP/MM



+
                                                            Ref. No. SRC/2

                                                             (revised October 1981)
                          STRATHCLYDE REGIONAL COUNCIL

                        Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

                        General Safety Certificate


Whereas the Council have received an application dated 11th August 1981 on behalf
of the Rangers Football Club Limited, Ibrox Stadium, Glasgow^ G51 2XD for a further
amendment to the General Safety Certificate under the Act in respect of Ibrox
Stadium, Glasgow, G51 2XD first issued on 29th December 1977 (hereinafter referred
to as "the original Certificate") and subsequently amended on 13th July 1978,
21st September 1978, 24th July 1979, 4th October 1979 and 10th July 1980.




And whereas the Council(a) have determined that the said Rangers Football Club
Limited continue to be a qualified person in terms of Section 3(1) of the Act;
(b) have carried out the consultations required by Section 3(3) of the Act, (c)
have considered the application, (d)have decided to treat it as an application
for the issue of a revised General Safety Certificate incorporating the appropriate
provisions of the original Certificate, all previous amendments thereto and the
amendment now applied for and (e) and have agreed to grant it as hereinafter
provided for;


Now therefore, the Council, in terms of Section 3(2)(a) of the Act, hereby grant
and issue this revised General Safety Certificate to the said Rangers Football
Club Limited in respect of the said stadium and that on the conditions set out in
Parts 2,3 and 4 of the Schedule hereto which shall form part of the said revised
Certificate, being the terms and conditions which the Council consider necessary
or expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in use for the
specified activities.


This revised Certificate shall come into force on 19th September 1981 notwithstanding
the date of issue hereof.     The original Certificate and all previous amendments theBtD
are hereby revoked.




                                     Dated thistwenty-ninth day of October 1981.




                                            for and on behalf of the Council
                                             - 2 -

                                             SCHEDULE


                                              PART 1

                                          Interpretation

                 This Certificate, including the Schedule hereof, shall be
                 interpreted according to the definitions contained in the
                 Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, as read with the supple­
                 mentary definitions contained in this Part of the Schedule.


"the Act"                       means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

"authorised person"             means a person authorised in accordance with
                                Section 11 of the Act

   e building authority" -       means the City of Glasgow District Council, being
                                 the local authority for the purposes of the Building
                                 (Scotland) Acts and relative Regulations thereunder
                                 within the District in which the stadium is situated

"the Chief Constable"            means the Chief Constable of the Strathclyde Police
                                 or his authorised representative

"the Council"                    means Strathclyde Regional Council, being the
                                 local authority for the purposes of the Act within
                                 the Strathclyde Region

"covered enclosure"              means an area of terrace over which there is erected
                                 either wholly or partly a structure to protect spec­
                                 tators from inclement weather conditions

*the Firemaster"                 means the Firemaster of the Strathclyde Fire Brigade
                                 or his authorised representative

"gangway"                        means a channel for the passage of spectators

"the Guide"                     means the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds Football"
                                as first published in 1976 and as may be re-published
                                from time to time by the Home Office and the Scottish
                                Home and Health Department

"the Holder"                     means the applicant for and the person to whom this
                                 Certificate is issued, being a qualified person for the
                                 purposes of the Act

"the plan"                       means the drawing of the stadium attached to this
                                 Certificate in terms of Section 2(4) of the Act and
                                 docketed as relative thereto

"the specified                   means the activities listed in Part 2 of the Schedule
 activities"

"the stadium"                    means the sports stadium referred to in this Certificate
                                 and delineated in red on the plan.
                                 - 3 -

    "stairway"       -   shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Building
                         Standards (Scotland) Regulations in force from time to
                         time

"Stand"              -   means a building within the stadium in which seating
                         accommodation is provided for spectators

"terrace"        -       means an area of steps providing standing accommodation
                         for spectators




                           PART 2/
                                     PART 2

                              The specified activities


Theactivities covered by this Certificate (i.e. the specified activities) shall
comprise the following activities to be held at Ibrox Stadium, Glasgow and to
which spectators are admitted, namely:-

(1)   Football matches but not including practice or training sessions to which
      not more than 500 non-paying spectators are admitted;

(2)    theAnnual Divine Services of the Grand Orange Lodge of Scotland.

Subject, however, to the terms and conditions of the Certificate and to any
general statutory requirements, the stadium may also be used for the following
purposes ancillary to the specified activities, namely:-


      (a)   the playing of music or signing;

      (b)   the provision of news or comment relative to the specified
            activities;

      (c)   the sale of tickets for forthcoming activities and the sale of
            programmes, newssheets and souvenirs;

      (d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments;

      (e)   public collections of any nature;

      (f)   any other use ancillary to the specified activities which has
            received not less than fourteen days' prior approval by the Council.
     Conditions imposed in terms of Sections 2(2) and 2(3) of the Act

Attendance Limits;-

The maximum number of spectators which may be admitted to the stadium on any
one occasion for the purposes of a specified activity shall not exceed 4 5 , 0 2 2
allocated as follows:-


     Main Stand        (Rear)              not exceeding 5,082
     Main Stand        (Front)             not exceeding 4,918 (inclusive of members'
                                                                             seating)
     South Covered Enclosure               not exceeding 9,715
     Broomloan     Road (West) Stand       not exceeding    7,489
     Copland Road.     (East) Stand        not. exceeding   7,489
     North Stand       (Rear)              not exceeding    5,713
     North Stand       (Front)             not exceeding    4,616


The Holder shall keep records showing the number of spectators admitted to
the stadium on each occasion for the purposes of a specified activity and
the number of spectators admitted to each of the abovementioned separate
parts of the stadium on such occasion.   Such records shall be kept at the
stadium and shall be made available for examination on request by an authorised
person.

Metering of admissions:-

The Holder shall be required to provide and maintain at every turnstile or
entrance gate to the stadium a metering system to the satisfaction of the Chief
Constable, acting on behalf of the Council, to indicate and record all specta­
tor admissions to the stadium with a view to ensuring that the number of
spectators admitted to each separate part of the stadium does not exceed the
number specified in Condition 1 of this Part of the Schedule.    Such metering
system and the means of communicating the information derived therefrom to a
central point within the Main Stand shall be of such kind as will ensure that
appropriate representatives of the Holder and an appropriate officer of the
Strathclyde Police can readily ascertain the number of spectators admitted
through each turnstile or entrance gate and, if necessary, give instructions
immediately to close any such turnstile or entrance gate.

Location of turnstiles or entrance gates:-

Turnstiles or entrance gates for spectators shall be located and, along with
the accesses therefrom to the several parts of the stadium, shall at all times
be maintained in a proper state of repair at the undernoted points and kept
free from obstructions of any kind:-
                                          - 6 -

 Part of Stadium                           Ref. No. on             No. of Turnstiles
                                             Plan
 Copland Rd. Stand          (Rear)          1 -   4                        4
 Copland Rd. Stand          (Front)         5 - 14                        10
 Copland Rd. Stand          (Rear)         15 - 18                         4
 South Enclosure                           21 - 28                         8
 Main Stand                 (Rear)         29 - 32                         4
 Main Stand                 (Front)        33 - 44                        12
 Main Stand                 (Rear)         45 - 48                         4
 South Enclosure                           49 - 56                         8
 Broomloan     Rd. Stand    (Rear)         57 - 60                         4
 Broomloan     Rd. Stand    (Front)        61 - 70                        10
 Broomloan     Rd. Stand    (Rear)         71 - 74                         4
^^>rth Stand                (Rear)         75 - 78                         4
 North Stand                (Front)        79 - 86                         8
 North Stand                (Rear)         87, 88                          2
 North Stand                (Front)        89 - 92                         4
 North Stand                (Rear)         93 - 96                         4


 All turnstiles or entrance gates shall be numbered to correspond with the appropriate
 entry in the above table and on the plan of the stadium.


 No individual turnstile or entrance gate for spectators shall be less than 425mm wide.


4.   Location of exit gates

     Exit gates for spectators shall be located and, along with the accesses thereto
     from the several parts of the stadium, shall be maintained in safe and proper
     working condition at the undernoted points and kept free from obstruction at all
     times.

 Parts of Stadium                           Ref. No on                 Minimum width of
                                              Plan                     Exit Gates (metres)
 From track and Exits 2 and 49                   1                             5.110
 Copland Road Stand (Rear)                       2                             1.800
                                           (emergency exit)
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Rear)                3                             3.500
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Front)               4                             1.850
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Front)               5                             1.890
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Front)               6                             1.850
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Front)               7                             1.890
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Front)               8                             1.850
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Rear)                9'                            3.500
 Copland   Road   Stand    (Rear)              1.6 1                           1.800
                                           (emergency exit)
                                               - 7 -

 Parts of Stadium                               Ref. No. on       Minimum width of
                                                   Plan           Exit Gates (metres)
From track and Exit 10                            11 and 12        each   3.700
                                                 (13 not used)
South Enclosure                                   14                      3.227
South Enclosure                                   15                      3.180
Main Stand        (Rear)                          16                      3.905
Main Stand        (Front)                         17                      3.940
Main Stand        (Front)                         18                      3.950
South Enclosure                                   19                      4.070
Main Stand        (Front)                         20                      3.965
Main Stand        (Front)                         21                      4.175
Main Stand        (Rear)                          22                      4.065
South Enclosure                                   23                      3.183
From track and Exit 27                           (24 not used)
                                                   25 and 26      each    3.700
Broomloan Road Stand (Rear)                        27                     1.800
                                               (emergency exit)
 Broomloan   Road   Stand   (Rear)                 28                     3.500
 Broomloan   Road   Stand   (Front)                29                     1.850
 Broomloan   Road   Stand   (Front)                30                     1.890
■roomloan    Road   Stand   (Front)                31                     1.850
 Broomloan   Road   Stand   (Front)                32                     1.890
 Broomloan   Road   Stand   (Front)                33                     1.850
 Broomloan   Road   Stand   (Rear)                 34                     3.500
 Broomloan   Road   Stand   (Rear)                 35
                                               (emergency exit)           1.800
From track and Exits 35 and 37                     36                     5.110
North Stand          (Rear)                        37                     1.400
                                               (emergency exit)
North   Stand               (Rear)                 38                     3.600
North   Stand               (Front)                39                     1.784
North   Stand               (Front)                40                     2.009
North   Stand               (Front)                41                     2.009
North   Stand               (Front)                42                     2.009
North   Stand               (Rear)                 43                     1.750
North   Stand               (Rear)                 44                     1.750
North   Stand               (Front)                45                     1.984
North   Stand               (Front)                46                     2.009
North   Stand               (Front)                47                     2.009
North   Stand               (Rear)                 48                     3.600
North   Stand                (Rear)                49                     1.400
                                               (emergency exit)
                    on Stadium Boundary

                            Exit A.   12.600
                            Exit B    41.500
                            Exit C    66.725
                            Exit D    10.700
                            Exit E    25.000
                                           - 8 -



5.   Crush barriers and handrails

     Crush barriers and handrails shall be provided and maintained in a good
     state of repair at all times at such points within the stadium as may be
     stipulated on behalf of the Council by their Director of Architectural
     and Related Services.   They shall be kept free of all sharp projections
     or edges and, when tested, shall be required to satisfy the appropriate
     loading test specified in Appendix C to the Guide.

     The Holder shall arrange and carry out a programme for the testing and
     inspection of crush barriers and handrails within the stadium on the basis
     that every crush barrier and every handrail shall be

            (a)   inspected once per annum, and

            (b)   tested to the standards of Appendix C to the Guide at
                  least once in a period of ten years

     Not less than ten per cent of the total number of such barriers and hand­
     rails shall be tested in any one year.    All testing and inspections carried
     out in terms of this Condition shall be so carried out by an independent
     firm to be approved by the Council.    A copy of each testing and/or inspection
     certificate shall be submitted to the Council as soon as it is issued by the
     firm concerned.

     Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the carrying out of a
     regular programme for the testing and inspection of crush barriers and hand­
     rails, the Council may require any particular barrier or handrail to be
     separately tested and/or inspected at any time if it has reasonable     causeto
     suspect that it may not be capable of satisfying the appropriate loadingtest
     specified in Appendix C to the Guide.

     The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
     at any testing and/or inspection of crush barriers and/or handrails if it
     so wishes.

     Any crush barriers or handrail which fails to meet the prescribed test shall
     be replaced or strengthened as necessary within six weeks of the date of the
     appropriate testing certificate.    Crush barriers and handrails which are
     strengthened shall be retested on completion of the strengthening work to
     ensure that they satisfy the requirements of Appendix C to the Guide.    Any
     crush barrier or handrail which, having failed the prescribed test, has to be
     replaced shall be insnediately removed.

6. Keeping of records:-

     In addition to the records required to be kept in terms of Condition 1 of
     this Part of the Schedule, the Holder shall be required to prepare and
     maintain the following records which shall be made available to an authorised
     person on request:-

     (a)    a record of any accident or incident which causes injury (but excluding
            a playing field or track injury) and which is brought to his notice as
            having occurred within the stadium while it was being used for a specified
            activity;

     (b)/
                                     - 9 -


     (b)    a record of every test made of crush barriers and/or handrails
           within the stadium in terms of Condition 5 of this Part of the
           Schedule;

     (c)    a record of every test made on an electrical installation within
           the stadium as provided for in Condition 9 of Part 4 of the Schedule;

     (d) a record of the dates of maintenance inspections carried out within
         the stadium, as required by Condition 5 of Part 4 of the Schedule,
         also indicating the nature of any defects found affecting the safety
         of spectators while within the stadium and the dates of the sub­
         sequent action .taken to remedy such defects;

     (e) a record of the date of every exercise held in terms of Conditions
         13 and 23 of Part 4 of the Schedule to test emergency procedures,
         including fire routine procedures;

     (f) a record of the date of every test made of the fire alarm system (both
         manual and automatic), the emergency lighting system, the public address
         system, the fire fighting equipment, the sprinkler installation and smoke
         extractor fans within the stadium as provided for in Condition 25 of Part
         4 of the Schedule;

     (g) a record of the name of the person nominated, in terms of Condition 2
         of Part 4 of the Schedule, on each occasion when the stadium is in use
         for a specified activity.

The records required to be kept in terms of this Condition and Condition 1 of
this Part of the Schedule may be so kept in a single log book or separate log
books as may be most convenient to the Holder.
                                   - 10 -

                                   PART 4

              Other Conditions imposed in terms of Section 2(1) of the Act




 1.   General:-

      The Holder shall

      (a) comply with the conditions set out in the Schedule at all times
          when the stadium is in use for a specified activity;

      (b) subject to Condition 2 of this Part of the Schedule, retain control
          over all operations in the stadium at all times when the stadium is in
          use for a specified activity;

      (c) arrange, as and when required by the Conditions of this Certificate,
          for the testing of crush barriers and handrails and of the following
          systems and procedures, namely, (i) fire alarm system (both manual
          and automatic), (ii) emergency lighting system, (iii) public address
          system, (iv) fire fighting equipment (v) sprinkler installation, (vi)
          smoke extractor fans and (vii) fire routine procedures;

      (d) otherwise take such steps as are reasonably practicable to observe
          the spirit and intentions of the recommendations contained in the Guide
          in so far as the said recommendations are not substituted, amended,
          modified, extended or otherwise altered by all or any of the specific
          Conditions of this Certificate.

 2.   Nomination of responsible person:-

      On each occasion when the stadium is used for a specified activity, the
      Holder shall nominate a responsible person to take charge of the stadium
      on his behalf and to be present therein during the whole period of such
      use.   Such nominated person shall not be engaged on any duties which will
      prevent him from exercising general supervision of the stadium on behalf of
      the Holder during such use.   The name of the person so nominated shall be
      made known to any authorised officer who may be present and have occasion
      to request it and shall be recorded as provided for in Condition 6 of Part 3
      of the Schedule.

 3.   Alterations and additions to stadium:-

      Alterations and/or additions to the stadium or to any of the installations
      of facilities therein, whether permanent or temporary, shall not be made
      except with the prior consent of the Council.    Notice in writing shall be
      given by the Holder to the Council of any such alterations or additions
      proposed to be made and such notice shall be accompanied by full details
      and, as and when necessary or appropriate, by drawings and calculations.
      The work shall not be started until the approval of the Council has been
      obtained.    Such consent shall be additional to any planning, building control
       or other consent required by the Holder.   Alterations and/or additions
       approved by the Council in terms of this Condition shall be required to meet
       the relative recommendations contained in the Guide unless the Council are
       satisfied that it would be impracticable or otherwise unreasonable to insist
       on compliance in full with these recommendations.

4./
                                    - 11 -


4.    Manning of entrance gates:-

      Turnstiles or entrance gates shall be manned and operational for such a
      period prior to the commencement of a specified activity as will permit
      the admission of spectators to all parts of the stadium in an evenly distri­
      buted and controlled manner.   The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable,
      before the use of the stadium for a specified activity, how many turnstiles
      or entrance gates are to be allocated solely for the use of juveniles and/or
      old age pensioners and/or special groups.   Such agreement may, in the discre­
      tion of the Chief Constable, either apply to all uses of the stadium for a
      specified activity or to any one or more such uses.

5.    Regular inspections of stadium and clearing of litter:-

      During the period between successive uses of the stadium for a specified
      activity, the Holder shall arrange for an inspection to be made on his
      behalf of the whole facilities of the stadium with a view to any defect or
      missing equipment being ascertained and immediately repaired or replaced
      and any other damage whatsoever being made good.   All litter and debris
      accumulated as a result of the immediately preceding use of the stadium shall
      be removed to safe storage before the stadium's further use for a specified
      activity.

6.    Maintenance - General:-

      All parts of the stadium shall be maintained in a good state of repair
      to the satisfaction of the Council.   The Holder shall carry out without
      delay such works of repair and maintenance within the stadium as may be
      required from time to time by the Council.

      In particular, all steel work and fabric shall be treated as and when
      required to prevent deterioration to structural strength and condition, all
      in accordance with the recommendations given in the relevant British Standard
      Specification and Codes of Practice.

      All drainage systems within those areas in the stadium which are accessible
      to spectators shall be maintained in a safe and efficient condition at all
      times.

7.    Maintenance of surfaces:-

      The surfaces or every part of all paths, stairways, gangways, terraces,
      accesses and exits within the stadium over which spectators may have
      reasonable cause to pass shall be maintained in a good state of repair free
      from ruts, potholes, depressions or other defects.

8.    Precautions to be taken because of inclement weather:-

      Where, because of inclement weather giving possible rise to dangerous
      conditions under foot, e.g. snow or ice, any surfaces within the stadium over
      which a spectator may have reasonable cause to pass may present a hazard to
      spectators, such surface shall be cleared of such hazard before spectators
      are admitted to the stadium.

9./
                                       - 12 -


9.    Annual inspection of electrical installations:-

      The Holder shall have an inspection made annually of the whole electrical
      installations within the stadium and shall submit a copy of the relative
      Inspection Certificate to the Council immediately it is issued by the person
      or firm concerned.   Such Inspection Certificate shall be in the form
      prescribed in Section E of the Regulations for the Electrical Equipment of
      Buildings as published by the Institution of Electrical Engineers and shall
      be signed by a Corporate member of the said Institution or by a Contractor
      currently enrolled with the National Inspection Council for Electrical
      Installation Contracting or by a qualified representative of an electricity
      supply authority or by a surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company.

      Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the inspection of the whole
      electrical installations within the stadium, the Council may require any
      particular part of the installations to be separately tested at any time
      if it has reasonable cause to suspect that it may be defective in some way.

      The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented at
      any inspection of the electrical installations or part thereof if it so
      wishes

       Any electrical installation or part thereof which fails to pass the appropriate
       test shall be repaired or replaced within one month of the issue of the
       appropriate Certificate.   Any electrical installation or part thereof which
      >has to be repaired or replaced shall be re-tested on completion of such repairs
       or replacement so as to comply with the above-mentioned Regulations.

10.   Parking of vehicles within the stadium:-

      Unless with the prior agreement of the Chief Constable, no vehicles other
      than emergency vehicles (i.e. police, fire, ambulance etc.) shall be parked
      in any part of the stadium for a period extending from two hours before the
      start of a specified activity to two hours after the end of a specified
      activity.   Without prejudice, however, to this requirement, the Chief
      Constable may agree with the Holder the allocation of a specific area or areas
      within the stadium for the parking of disabled persons' vehicles while the
      stadium is in use for a specified activity.

11.   Arrangements for attendance of police officers:-

      The Holder shall arrange at his own expense for the attendance of an adequate
      number of police officers while the stadium is in use for a specified activity
      to ensure the lawful and orderly behavour of spectators.   The number of police
      officers to be in attendance within the stadium during any such use shall be
      agreed in advance between the Holder and the Chief Constable.

12.   Methods of admission and segregation of supporters:-

      The Holder shall discuss and agree with the Chief Constable prior to the
      use of the stadium for a specified activity

         (a) the methods of admission to be employed in connection with such
             specified activity (in particular, whether admission shall be by
             ticket only); and

         (b)/
                                       - 13 -


       (b)   the special arrangements, if any, to be made for the segregation
             of home and visiting supporters.

       Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Condition, it shall
       be in the discretion of the Chief Constable to indicate to the Holder that
       the agreement reached in terms of the said provisions can also apply to
       all or any future uses of the stadium for a specified activity without
       further discussion between them.

13.    Stewarding arrangements - General

       While the stadium is in use for a specified activity, the Holder shall
       ensure the attendance within the stadium of such number of stewards as
       are necessary to ensure compliance with the Conditions of this Certificate
       and such stewards shall be

       (a)   fit and capable to carry out their duties;

       (b)   properly trained and instructed;

       (c)   readily identifiable by dress (e.g. white coat, fluorescent jacket
             etc.), and

       (d)   provided by the Holder with written instructions, to be approved by
             the Council, as to their general duties in order to fulfil the following
             functions:-

             (i)    the manning of exit gates;

             (ii)   the control and direction of spectators entering, using
                    or leaving the stadium; and

             (iii) patrolling the stadium and dealing with any emergency,
                   including raising an alarm and extinguishing any fire.

       Stewards on duty in implementation of this Condition and, in particular,
       stewards on duty at exit gates an<* on the access routes thereto shall have
       ready access to loud hailer equipment to enable them to make quick contact
       with spectators, if and when required.

       Where the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only
       and for no other activity, it shall be a sufficient discharge of the
       requirements of this Condition if the Holder ensures the attendance of
       sufficient stewards to ensure the orderly behaviour of the public during
       the period of sale.

       All stewards and other persons employed in the stadium during its use for
       a specified activity shall be fully instructed as to their responsibilities
       in the event of an emergency and exercises for stewards and other persons
       employed within the stadium shall be carried out not less than three times
       each playing season to test emergency procedures.

14./
                                - 14 -



14.   Exit gates - Attendance by stewards

      .All exit gates shall be attended by stewards throughout the entire
       period when spectators may be in the stadium in connection with its
       use for a specified activity and it shall be the duty of such stewards
       to open the exit gates in the event of an emergency and in any event not
       less than fifteen minutes before the anticipated end of the specified
       activity or at any other time on the request of a police officer.   When
       opened for any reason, all exit gates shall be secured in the fully open
       position and kept free of all obstructions.

15.   Positioning of television cameras etc.:-

       Television cameras and portable equipment shall be restricted to positions
       to be approved in advance by the Chief Constable on behalf of the Council
      and shall not be allowed to cause any obstruction to the police or emergency
      services in the carrying out of their duties.

16.   Provision of first-aid room etc.:-

      The Holder shall maintain within the stadium a suitably equipped first-
      aid room and/or first-aid points to the satisfaction of the Council and
      shall ensure the attendance of a sufficient number of properly trained
      first-aid personnel on each occasion when the stadium is in use for a
      specified activity.

      The attendance of first-aid personnel shall not be considered to be necessary
      when the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only and
      for no other activity.

17.   Public Address System:-

      The Holder shall maintain for his own use and for the use of the police
      and emergency services, as and when required while the stadium is in use
      for a specified activity, a public address system capable of being heard
      under reasonable conditions by all spectators of normal hearing in any part
      of the stadium to which spectators have a right of access.   Such public
      address system shall be operated and controlled from a position to be
      approved by the Chief Constable on behalf of the Council and shall be
      provided with an emergency power supply so that it is capable of being
      operated at all times.

      The wiring for the public address system shall be either M.I.C.C. cable or
      P.V.C. cable or F.P. 200 fire-resistant wiring and the emergency source of
      power supply shall be provided from batteries kept at full capacity by trickle
      charging from the mains supply.

18.   Toilet facilites:-

      The Holder shall ensure the provision and adequate maintenance to the satis­
      faction of the Council of sufficient toilet facilities, both male and female,
      in all parts of the stadium.

19.   Sale of tickets, programmes and refreshments - General:-

      In allocating premises or facilities for the sale of tickets, programmes
      or/
                                          - 15 -


      or refreshments, the Holder shall take all necessary steps to ensure that
      such allocation does not obstruct entrance or exit routes in any way.

20.   Provision of refreshments:-

      The Holder shall ensure that all premises, appliances and equipment
      associated with the sale of refreshments are maintained in a safe and
      proper working condition at all times.

      All containers in which liquid refreshments are sold or distributed to
      spectators while the stadium is in use for a specified activity shall be
      made of soft plastic or other soft material.   This requirement shall not
      apply to any part of the stadium to which access is given only on the
      invitation of the Holder.

21.   Facilities for authorised persons:-

      The Holder shall make available adequate viewing and inspection facilities
i     to authorised persons immediately before,during or after a specified activity
      or at any other reasonable time when considered necessary by the Council.

22.   Accommodation and facilities for Strathclyde      Police

      The Holder shall maintain at his own expense the following accommodation
      and facilities for the use   of the police officers on duty in connection with
      the use of the stadium for a specified activity.

       (a)   Accommodation

             There shall be maintained in such location within the stadium as may be
             approved by the Chief Constable, the following units of accommodation,
             namely:-

             (i)    A general office with accommodation for lost children and a staff
                    of 4/5 persons including typing staff - this office to have its own
                    toilet accommodation;

             (ii) A charge bar incorporating three charge points and secure storage
                  for the property of persons charged;

             (iii) Two detention rooms (one for adults and one for juveniles), each with
                   its own toilet; '

              (iv) A refreshment room with its own toilet for the use of police officers
                   on duty;

               (v) Interview room.

       (b)   Facilities

              (i)     Heating shall be available within the accommodation referred to at
                      (a) above;

              (ii)/
      (b) (ii)     Basic furnishings, e.g. working surfaces, bench seats,
                   stacking tables and chairs shall be provided;

          (iii)    A police control room with full radio facilities shall be
                    sited as high as possible in such location within the stadium
                    as may be approved by the Chief Constable;

          (iv)     A telephone communications system shall be available to connect
                   the police control room with the following points, namely:-

                    (1)    the   complex of rooms   referred toat (a) above;

                    (2)    the   players' tunnel;

                    (3)    the   public address system     cubicle;

                    (4)    the   main door of the Main     Stand;

^                  (5)    the police reserve holding areas;

                    (6)   the turnstiles/entrance gates.

          (v)      The Holder shall agree with the Chief Constable on areas at either
                    end of the Main Stand or elsewhere within the stadium to be made
                    available for use as police reserve holding areas and other possible
                    police requirements, e.g. a command vehicle, prison bus, etc.


23.    Fire routine procedures:-

       The Holder shall take the necessary steps to instruct all staff, including
       stewards, likely to be working within the stadium while it is in use for a
       specified activity, of the procedures to be adopted as undernoted in the event
       of an outbreak of fire being discovered, namely:-

           (a) The Fire Brigade to be summoned;

           (b) A responsible person or persons to proceed to the scene of the fire
               to find out if it has been extinguished or is under control;

          (c)     Where the fire (i) is affecting the seating of a Stand or any exit
                  therefrom or (ii) is located elsewhere within a Stand and is not
                  under control, to take immediate steps to arrange the evacuation
                  of that Stand by using the public address system.

        Exercises to test fire routine procedures shall be carried out not less than
        three times each playing season and may be so carried out in conjunction with
        the exercises referred to in Condition 13 of this Fart of the Schedule.

24.     Storage of liquefied petroleum gas:-

        If it is necessary to store or use liquefied petroleum gas within the stadium,
        the Holder shall take the necessary steps to observe any guidance given by the
        Firemaster as to the precautions to be taken in so doing.

25.     Testing of systems

        The following arrangements shall be made by the Holder for the testing of the
        undernoted systems:-
(a) Fire Alarm - both the manual and automatic fire alarm system shall
                 be tested in accordance with the procedures set out in
                 British Standard 5839: Part 1: 1980.

(b) Emergency
    Lighting -    the emergency lighting system shall be tested in accordance
                  with the procedures outlined in British Standard Code of
                  Practice CP 5266: Part I: 1975;

(c) Public        the public address system shall be tested at the same time
    Address       as the fire alarm system and shall be checked to ensure that
    System -      it operates correctly from both the normal and secondary
                  power sources;

(d) Fire          the fire fighting equipment shall be checked and tested by a
                  competent firm of fire engineers at regular periods but not
   Fighting
                  less often than once per annum.
  Equipment-

(e)Sprinkler      the sprinkler installation shall be tested in accordance with the
   Installation   procedures set out in British Standard Code of Practice CP 402:
                  201 (1952) as amended 1966 and the Rules of the Fire Officers
                  Committee for Automatic Sprinkler Installations (29th Edition
                  as amended).

(f) Smoke         the smoke extractor fans shall be tested in conjunction with the
    Extractor     automatic fire detection systems to ensure that they are in good
    Fans      -   working order.
                                                                              te l e pho ne 041-227 332t>
                                                                              Switchboard 04 1-204 290U
                                                                              Our rt-f      SC / 2 / 3 (Mr. M t t h . c s o r . )
                                                                              Your r e f
                                                                              D ate         14th August, lVSv




    The S e c r e t a r y ,
    Rar.gers F o o t b a l l Club p i c ,
    Ibrox Stadium,
    GLASGOW„
^   C51 2XD.



    Dear S i r ,

    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
    AMENDMENT TO GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

    Fol lowin g the i s s u e of the I n t erim Report by the Rt. Hon. Lord J u s t i c e Taylor
    or the H i ll sb o r o u g h Stadium D i s a s t e r , the Re gi o na l C o un c i l , as the appropriat e
    L i c e n s i n g Aut h o ri t y under the above Ac t, have agreed to adopt Recommendation 2
    o f t h e R ep o rt r e g a r d i n g t h e maximum c a p a c i t y f o r a r e a s f o r s t a n d i n g
    spectators.           This has the e f f e c t of r e duci ng the c a p a c i t y of s uch a re a s by 15%
    from the e x i s t i n g c a p a c i t y .      I t h e r e f o r e have to inform you t h a t , with
    immediate e f f e c t , C o nd itio n 1 of Fart 3 o f the General S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e
    c u r r e n t l y in f o r c e f o r your Stadium w i l l be amended as shown i n the undernote*

    This l e t t e r 6 h a l l be co n s t ru ed a s a formal amendment to the above mentioned
    General S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e f o r t he Stadium and s h a l l be read t o g e t h e r w i th i t
    accordingly.              The u s u a l a p p ea ls p r o v i s i o n s apply i f the Club i s lr. any way
    d i s s a t i s f i e d wit h t h i s amendment.

    The S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e w i l l f u r t h e r be amended t o r e f l e c t Recommendations 3, 4,
    5, 7, 8 , 9 , 10 and 33 of the Report.

    The Regional C oun cil would a p p r e c i a t e your r e s po ns e s and a c o t e of a c t i on
    proposed in r e s p e c t of Recomner.dati o r s 18 to 25 and 39 to 4 3 of the Report.

    Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




    Depor'e Chi ef E x ec u t i v e
    ( P r o t e c t i v e and B a s ic S e r v i c e s )
    AMM/MM
                                                      -1-



Tr.do rr, ,'tt

At_tend_f>1 CJL_ Li ml t s

The maximum number ol s p e c t a t o r s which may bo admitted to the Stadium on anv
one o c c a s i o n f o r the purposes of a s p e c i f i e d a c t i v i t y s h a l l not exceed 42 ,237',
a l l o c a t e d as t o l l c w s : -

Main Stand ( k ea r)                           not e xc e e di ng 5,064
Main Stand (F ro n t )                         not e x c e e di ng 4,848           (ir .c l. Dir ectors               Ill)
                                                                                             Members                  405
                                                                                             E x e c u t i v e Sui te 356
                                                                                             E x e c ut i v e Boxes 16)
South Covered Enclosure ( E a s t )            not    ex ce e di ng      3,462
South Covered Enclosure (West)                 not    e xc e e di ng     3,538
Gcvar, Stand ( Rear)                           not    e x c e e di n g   5,713
Govan Stand (Fro n t )                         not    ex ce e di ng      4 ,t>16
Copland Road Stand (Rear)                      cot    e xc e e di ng     4, 208
Copland Road Stand ( Fron t )                  not    e xc e e di ng     3,280
Broomloar. Road Stand (Rear)                   c ot   e xc e e di ng     4,206
3roomloan Road Stand ( Fro n t )               not    e xc e eding       3 ,2$U




         Arc       T-1\-              ^
         £(        J
          »)<«.'*j      /A/?s
                                H
                                -t- k C*   t
                                       flu Strathclyde
                                      5L C Regional
                                           Council
                               Robert Calderwood LL8 Chief Executive




Chief Executive's Department         An equal opportunities authority                Telephone     041-227 3326
Strathclyde House                     A n u c l e a ' 1ree z o n e a u t ^ o ^ t y   Switchboard   041-204 2900
2 0 India Street                                                                     Our ref       GP/6/5/l(f) Mr.     Matheso
Charing Cross                                                                        Your ref
Glasgow G2 4PF                                                                       Date          10th August, 1988




Dear Sir

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
IER0X STADIUM -EXECUTIVE BOXES

I refer to my letter of 20th June, 1988 and to the letter of 27th June, 1988
from The Miller Partnership giving details of two Executive Boxes sited in the
Enclosure fronting the Main Stand.

The provision of these Boxes will result in a reduction in the number of
spectators who may be admitted to the ground.   I therefore have to inform you,
on behalf of the Regional Council as appropriate Licensing Authority under the
above Act, that with immediate effect Condition 1 of Part 3 of the General
Safety Certificate currently in force for the Stadium shall be amended by the
substitution of the following figures:-

Stadium capacity 43,471, comprising

Main Stand (rear)                       5,084
Main Stand (front)                       4,848 (incl. Directors                                    110
                                                      Members                                      405
                                                      Executive Suite                              356
                                                      Executive Boxes                               16)
South Covered Enclosure (east)          4,072
South Covered Enclosure (west)          4,162
Govan Stand (rear)                      5,713
Govan Stand (front)                     4,616
Copland Road Stand (rear)               4.208
Copland Road Stand (front)              3,280
Broomloan Road Stand (rear)             4.208
Broomloan Road Stand (front)            3,280.

This/..




The Secretary,
Rangers Football Club pic,
Ibrox Stadium,
GLASGOW,
G51 2XD.
This letter shall be construed as a foraal amendment to the above aentioned
General Safety Certificate foxvthe Stadium and shall be read together with it
accordingly.   The usual appeals provisions apply if the Club is in any way
dissatisfied with this amendment.

Yours faithfully,




Depute Chief Executive
(Protective and Basic Services)
AMM/MM
                                                                  Strathclyde
                                                   ,              Regional
                                                                  Council
                                         Roben Calderwood LLB Chief Executive



Chief Executive's Department                      A- es.,8 c>pd:              *<_ s j t-r-   Telephone     0 4 1 -2 2 7 3326
            House                                   A n j c :eA- f ’ ee ? o - t s j -h;.'    Switchboard   0 41-20 4 2900
20 Inrjis Street                                                                             Our ref       G P / 6 / 5 / l ( r ) Mr. Matheso:
C ^ S ’ iOg C rOS£                                                                           Your ref
G.asaOA G2 4PF
                                                                  kS                         Date          16th March, 1988




  Dear S i r ,

  SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
  GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE FOR CLIFTONHILL STADIUM

  I r e f e r t o your a p p l i c a t i o n f o r a General S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e under the above
  Act      in r e s p e c t of C l i f t o n h i l l       S t a d i u m , C o a t b r i d g e and t o subsequent
  c o rr es p o n d en ce and c o n s u l t a t i o n s between v a r i o u s Departjcents of the         Re gi on al
  Council and r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of the Club.

  The General Purposes Committee                             o f the Re gi o na l Council dul y c o n s i d e r e d the
  a p p l i c a t i o n a t t h e i r meeting on             15th March, 1988 and a utho r i s e d t h e i s s u e of
  the        necessary         C ertificate.                Accordingly,        I now e n c l o s e the     principal
  C e r t i f i c a t e d u ly s ig n ed on b eh a lf       of th e C o un c i l .

 In i s s u i n g t h i s C e r t i f i c a t e to you I would remind you o f the appeal p r o v i s i o n s
 o f S e c t i o n s 5 and 7 of the Act and a l s o o f the a ppe al s procedure s e t out i n
 R e g u l a t i o n 6 o f the S a f et y of Sports Grounds R e g u l a t i o n s 1987.

 The R e g i o n a l Council have f ix e d a f e e o f £500 i n terms o f the Act         fo r the
 g r a n t i n g of such C e r t i f i c a t e s and I would ask you t o l e t me have payment of
 t h i s f e e w i t h i n t he next month.

 Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




 Depute Chi ef E x ec u t iv e
 ( P r o t e c t i v e and B a s ic S e r v i c e s )
 AMM/MM


Enel.



Mr. David F o r r e s t e r ,
Secretary,
A l bi on Rovers F o o t b a l l Club L t d . ,
21 Academy S t r e e t ,
COATBRIDGE.




                                                    Telex 7 7 72 3 7 77428
                                                                Ref No: SRC/12




                            STRATHCLYDE REGIONAL COUNCIL

                         Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

                             General Safety Certificate




Whereas the Council received an application dated 18th September 1986 from
Albion Rovers Football Club Limited,       Cliftonhill   Stadium, Main Street,
Coatbridge, for a General Safety Certificate under the above Act in respect of
Cliftonhill Stadium, being a stadium designated by the Secretary of State for
Scotland by means of an Order under Section 1 of the Act;

And    whereas the Council (a) have determined the said Albion Rovers Football
Club    Limited to be a qualified person in terms of Section 3(1) of the Act, (b)
have    carried out the consultations required by Section 3(3) of the Act and (c)
have    agreed to grant the application as hereinafter provided for;

Now therefore, the Council, in terms of Section 3(2)(a) of the Act, hereby
grant and issue this General Safety Certificate to the said Albion Rovers
Football Club Limited in respect of the aforesaid stadium and that subject to
the provisions and conditions set out in Parts 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the Schedule
hereto which shall form part of the said Certificate, being the provisions and
conditions which the Council consider necessary or expedient to secure
reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in use for the specified
activities.

This Certificate shall come into effect one calendar month after the date of
issue hereof and the provisions and conditions thereof shall be complied with
from such effective date or from such other date or dates as are specified in
the several Parts of the Schedule hereto.




                       Dated this Fifteenth day of March 1988




                         Depute Chief Executive for and on
                               behalf of the Council
                                      -2-


                                    SCHEDULE
                                     PART 1
                                 Interpretation



This Certificate, including the Schedule hereof, shall be interpreted according
to the definitions contained in the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, as read
with the supplementary definitions contained in this Part of the Schedule.

"the Act"                        means the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

"authorised person"          -   means a person authorised   in accordance with
                                  Section 11 of the Act.

"the building authority'         means the Honklands District Council, being
                                 the local authority for the purposes of the
                                 Building    (Scotland)   Acts  and   relative
                                 Regulations thereunder within the District in
                                 which the stadium is situated.

"the Chief Constable"            means the Chief Constable of the Strathclyde
                                 Police or his authorised representative.

"the Council"                    means Strathclyde Regional Council, being the
                                 local authority for the purposes of the Act
                                 within the Strathclyde Region.

"covered enclosure"          -   means an area of terrace over which there is
                                  erected a structure to protect spectators from
                                  inclement weather conditions.

"the Firemaster"                 means the Firemaster of the Strathclyde Fire
                                 Brigade or his authorised representative.

"gangway"                        means a channel for the passage of spectators.

"the Guide”                  -   means the revised "Guide to Safety at Sports
                                  Grounds" first published in 1973, amended in
                                  1986 and as may be re-published from time to
                                  time by the Home Office and the Scottish Home
                                  and Health Department.

’the Holder"                     means the applicant for and the person to whom
                                 this Certificate is issued, being a qualified
                                 person for the purposes of the Act.

"the plan"                       means the drawing of the stadium attached to
                                 this Certificate in terms of Section 2(4) of
                                 the Act and docketed as relative thereto.

"the specified activities"       means the activities listed in Part 2 of the
                                 Schedule.

"the stadium"                -   means the sports stadium referred to in     the
                                  application    for   this    Certificate    and
                                  delineated in red on the plan.

"stairway"/.•
     rway   shall have the meaning assigned to it in the
            Building Standards (Scotland) Regulations is
            force from time to time.

"Stand"     means a building or area within the stadium in
            which seating accommodation is provided for
            spectators.

"terrace"   means an area of steps providing      standing
            accommodation for spectators.


              PART 2/..
                                         -4-



                                     PART 2
                           The specified activities


Theactivitiescovered by this Certificate (i.e. the specified activities)
shall comprise    the following activities to be held at Cliftonhill Stadium,
Coatbridge and to which spectators are admitted, regardless of the anticipated
attendance, namely, football matches and greyhound racing, but shall not
include practice or training sessions for these activities to which not more
than 500 non-paying spectators are admitted.

The holder shall notify the Chief Constable timeously of any proposed specified
activity to be held at the Stadium.

Subject, however, to the terms and conditions of the Certificate and to any
general statutory requirements, the stadium may also be used for the following
purposes ancillary to the specified activities, namely:-

Cai   the playing of music or singing;

(b)   the provision of news or comment relative to the specified activities;

(c)   the sale    of tickets   for forthcoming   activities   and   the   sale   of
      programmes, news-sheets and souvenirs;

(d)   the sale and consumption of refreshments is permitted other than those
      regulated under the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980;

(e)   public collections of any nature;

<f)   any other use ancillary to the specified activities which has received
      not less than fourteen days' prior approval by the Council.


                                   PART 3 / .
                                        -5-


                                    PART 3
 Co n d it io n s imposed in terms of S e c t i o n s 2 ( 2 ) and 2 ( 3 ) of the Act


Attendance Limits

The maximum number of spectators which may be admitted to the stadium on
any one occasion for the purposes of a specified activity shall not
exceed 878 allocated as follows (shown on the attached plan):-

East Stand                                 “   not   exceeding     124)
Directors Box                              -   not   exceeding       64) 533
Centre Stand                               -   not   exceeding     150)
West Stand                                 -   not   exceeding     200)
East Stand Enclosure                       -   not   exceeding      170) 340
West Stand Enclosure                       "   not   exceeding     170)

The Holder shall keep records showing the number of spectators admitted
to the stadium on each occasion for the purposes of a specified activity
and the number of spectators admitted to each of the above mentioned
separate parts of the stadium on such occasion.    Such records shall be
kept at the stadium and shall be made available for examination on
request by an authorised person.

Metering of admissions

The Holder shall be required to provide and maintain at every turnstile
or entrance gate to the stadium a metering system, to the satisfaction of
the Chief Constable acting on behalf of the Council, to indicate and
record all spectator admissions to the stadium with a view to ensuring
that the number of spectators admitted to each separate part of the
stadium does not exceed the number specified in Condition 1 of this Part
of the Schedule.

Such metering system and the means of communicating the information
derived therefrom to a control point shall be of such kind as will ensure
that appropriate representatives of the Holder and an appropriate officer
of the Strathclyde Police can readily ascertain the number of spectators
admitted through each turnstile or entrance gate and, if necessary, give
instructions immediately to close any such turnstile or entrance gate.

The holder shall close all turnstiles or entrance gates to any particular
section of the Stadium when the attendance limit for that section is
reached.  The holder shall also close any such turnstile or entrance gate
immediately on receipt of such instruction from the nominated officer of
Strathclyde Police.

If, in order to comply with this Condition, it is necessary to execute
any additional works and/or to provide any additional equipment, such
execution   and/or provision shall be completed      not later than
31st December, 1988.

Location of turnstiles or entrance gates

Turnstiles or entrance gates for spectators shall be located as shown on
the attached plan and, along with the accesses therefrom to the several
parts of the stadium, shall at all times be maintained in a proper state
of repair at the undernoted points and kept free from obstructions of any
kind

/..
                                    -6-


                                                             Number of
                                                             turnstiles or
                     Reference             Providing         entrance gates
Part of Stadium      number on plan        access from       at the location

Main Entrance             1-6              Main Street              6

The turnstiles or entrance gates shall be numbered to correspond with the
appropriate entry in the above table.        No individual turnstile or
entrance gate for spectators shall be less than 425mm wide.

Location of exit gates:-

Exit gates for spectators shall be located as shown on the attached plan
and, along with the accesses thereto from the several parts of the
stadium, shall be maintained in a safe and proper working condition at
the undemoted points and kept free from obstruction at all times:-

                                                         Minimum width of
Part of Stadium               Reference letter on plan   exif gates (metres)

East   Stand to Stair 1                    A                1.100
East   Enclosure to Terrace                B                2.500
West   Enclosure to Terrace                C                2.500
Main   Exits to Main Street                D                1.400
                                          E                 1.175

Crush barriers and handrails;-

Crush barriers and handrails shall be provided and maintained in a good
state of repair at all times.    The foregoing provision relative to crush
barriers and handrails shall include those handrails on stairways within
the Stand.     All crush barriers and handrails shall be kept free of all
sharp projections or edges and, when tested, shall be required to satisfy
the appropriate loading test specified in Annex C to the Guide.

The Holder shall arrange and carry out a programme for the testing and
inspection of crush barriers and handrails within the stadium on the basis
that every crush barrier and every handrail shall be

(a)     inspected once per annum; and

(b)     tested to the standards of Annex C to the Guide at least once in a
        period of ten years.

Not less than ten per cent of the total number of such barriers and
handrails shall be tested in any one year.    All testing and inspection
carried out in terms of this Condition shall be so carried out by an
independent firm to be approved by the Council.   A copy of each testing
and/or inspection certificate shall be submitted to the Council as soon
as it is issued by the firm concerned.  Testing should be carried out by
or under the supervision of a suitably qualified engineer i.e. a
structural or civil engineer.

Without/.
                                      -7-



     Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the carrying out of a
     regular programme for the testing and inspection of crush barriers and
     handrails, the Council may require any particular barrier or handrail to
     be separately tested and/or inspected at any time if it has reasonable
     cause to suspect that it may not be capable of satisfying the appropriate
     loading test specified in Annex C to the Guide.

     The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
     at any testing and/or inspection of crush barriers and/or handrails if it
     so wishes.

     Any crush barrier or handrail which fails to meet the prescribed test
     shall be replaced or strengthened as necessary within     six weeks of the
     date of the appropriate testing certificate.         Crush barriers    and
     handrails which are strengthened shall be re-tested on completion of the
     strengthening work to ensure that they satisfy the requirements of Annex
     C to the Guide.   Any crush barrier or handrail which, having failed the
     prescribed test, has to be replaced shall be immediately removed.

6.   Keeping of records:-

     In addition to the records required to be kept in terms of Condition 1 of
     this Part of the Schedule, the Holder shall be required to prepare and
     maintain the following records which shall be made available td an
     authorised person on request

     (a)   a recordof any accident or incident which causes injury (but
           excluding a playing field or track injury) and which is brought to
           the Holder's notice as having occurred within the stadium while it
           was being used for a specified activity;

     (b)   a record  of every test made of crush barriers and/or handrails
           within the stadium in terms of Condition 5 of this Part of the
           Schedule;

     (c)      a record of every test made of an electrical installation within
              the stadium as provided for in Condition 10 of Part 4 of the
              Schedule;

     (d)   a record of the dates of maintenance inspections carried out within
            the stadium, as required by Condition 6 of Part 4 of the Schedule,
            also indicating the nature of any defects found affecting the
            safety of spectators while within the stadium and the dates of the
            subsequent action taken to remedy such defects;

     (e)   a record   of the date of every exercise held in terms of Conditions
            14 and 29 of Part 4 of the Schedule to test emergency procedures,
            including fire routine procedures, this record to include dates and
            full details of each occasion when instruction and training is
            given to stewards.    Strathclyde Police should be notified of the
            date and time of any scheduled test/exercise vis-a-vis emergency
            procedures such as evacuation;

     (f)   a record   of the date of every test made of the fire alarm system,
            the emergency lighting system, the public address system and the
            fire fighting equipment within the stadium as provided for in
            Condition 32 of Part 4 of the Schedule;

     (g)/..
                                 -8-


(g)   a record of the name of the person nominated, in terms of Condition
      2 of Part 4 of the Schedule, on each occasion when the stadium is
      in use for a specified activity.

The records required to be kept in terms of this Condition and Condition
1 of this Part of the Schedule may be so kept in a single log book or
separate log books as may be most convenient to the Holder.


                             PART 4 / . .
                                         -9-


                                        PART 4
             Other Conditions imposed in terms of Section 2(1) of the Act


1.     General

       The Holder shall

       (a)    comply with the conditions set out in the Schedule     at all   times
              when the stadium is in use for a specified activity;

       (b)    subject to Condition 2 of this Part of the Schedule, retain control
               over all operations in the stadium at all times when the stadium is
               in use for a specified activity;

       (c)    arrange,    as and when required by the Conditions of this
               Certificate, for the testing of crush barriers and handrails and of
               the following systems and procedures, namely,      (i) fire alarm
               system,   (ii) emergency lighting system,    (iii) public address
               system,   (iv) fire fighting equipment and (v) fire routine
               procedures;

       (d)    otherwise take such steps as are reasonably practicable to observe
               the spirit and intentions of the recommendations contained in the
               Guide in so far as the said recommendations are not substituted,
               amended, modified, extended or otherwise altered by all or any of
               the specific Conditions of this Certificate;

       (e)    notwithstanding the holder’s responsibilities in law in relation to
               crowd safety and crowd control, he shall take such steps as are
               reasonable to comply with the instructions of the Senior Police
               Officer on duty at any specified activity regarding crowd safety
               and control of spectators in an emergency.

2.     Nomination of responsible person:-

       On each occasion when the stadium is used for a specified activity, the
       Holder shall nominate a responsible person to take charge of the stadium
       on the Holder's behalf and to       be present therein duringthe wholeperiod
       of such use.    Such nominated person shall not be engaged on any duties
       which will prevent him/her from exercising general supervision of the
       stadium on behalf of the Holder during such use. The name of the person
       so nominated shall be made known to the Chief Constable or his authorised
       representative 24 hours before any specified activity.     On the day of,
       but before the start of the specified activity, this responsible person
       shall make personal contact with the Senior Police Officer in charge. He
       should thereafter be readily available for consultation with the Senior
       Police Officer until termination of the specified activity.    The name of
       the person so nominated shall be recorded as provided for in Condition 6
       of Part 3 of this Schedule.

3.     Dates for provision of new equipment and execution of works:-

       Where, under any Condition of this Part of the Schedule, the Holder is
       required either to provide new equipment of any kind or to execute works
       within the stadium, such provision or execution shall be completed not
       later than 31st July, 1988 unless the context of any particular Condition
       specifically stipulates otherwise in which case such other stipulated
       dates shall be applicable.

4/..
                                                       -10-


4.     A l t e r a t i o n s and a d d i t i o n s to stadiuns:-

       Alterations and/or additions to the stadium or to           any   of the
       installations of facilities therein, whether permanent or temporary,
       shall not be made except with the prior consent of the Council.    Notice
       in writing shall be given by the Holder to the Council of        any such
       alterations or additions proposed to be made and such notice shall be
       accompanied by full details and, as and when necessary or appropriate, by
       drawings and calculations.    The work, shall not be started until the
       approval of the Council has been obtained.        Such consent shall be
       additional to any planning, building control or other consent required by
       the Holder.    Alterations and/or additions approved by the Council in
       terms of this Condition shall be required         to meet the relative
       recommendations contained in the Guide unless the Council are satisfied
       that it would be impracticable or otherwise unreasonable to insist on
       compliance in full with these recommendations.

5.     Manning of entrance gates:-

       Turnstiles or entrance gates shall be manned and operational for such a
       period prior to the commencement of a specified activity as will permit
       the admission of spectators to all parts of the stadium in an evenly
       distributed and controlled manner. All such turnstiles or entrance gates
       shall comply with the conditions of Part 3 of the Schedule.

6.     Regular inspections of stadium and clearing of litter:-

       During the period between successive uses of the stadium for a specified
       activity, the Holder shall arrange for an inspection to be made on his
       behalf of the whole facilities of the stadium with a view to any defect
       or missing equipment being ascertained and immediately repaired or
       replaced and any other damage whatsoever being made good. All litter and
       debris accumulated as a result of the immediately preceding use of the
       stadium shall be removed to safe storage before the stadium's further use
       for a specified activity.

7.     Maintenance - General:-

       All parts of the stadium shall be maintained in a good state of repair to
       the satisfaction of the Council.      The Holder shall carry out without
       delay such works of repair and maintenance within the stadium as may be
       required from time to time by the Council.

       In particular, all steel work and fabric shall be treated as and when
       required to prevent deterioration to structural strength and condition,
       all in accordance with the recommendations given in the relevant British
       Standard Specification or Code of Practice.

       All drainage systems within those areas in the stadium which are
       accessible to spectators shall be maintained in a safe and efficient
       condition at- all times.

8.     Maintenance of surfaces:-

       The surfaces of every part of all paths, stairways, gangways, terraces,
       accesses and exits within the stadium over which spectators may have
       reasonable cause to pass shall be maintained in a good state of repair
       free from ruts, potholes, depressions or other defects.

9./.
                                                            -11-


 9.    Precau tion s to be taken b eca us e of incl ement w e a th e r : _

       Where, because of inclement weather giving possible rise to dangerous
       conditions under foot,e.g. snow or ice, any surfaces within the stadium
       over which a spectator may have reasonable cause topass may present a
       hazard to spectators, such surfaces shall be cleared of such hazard
       before spectators are admitted to the stadium.

10.    Annual in s p e c t i o n of e l e c t r i c a l i n s t a l l a t i o n s

       The Holder shall have an inspection made annually of the whole electrical
       installations within the stadium and shall submit a copy of the relative
       Inspection Certificate to the Council immediately it is issued by the
       person or firm concerned.    Such Inspection Certificate shall be in the
       form prescribed in Section E of the Regulations for the Electrical
       Equipment of Buildings as published by the Institution of Electrical
       Engineers and shall      be signed by a corporate member of     the said
       Institution or by a     Contractor currently enrolled with the   National
       Inspection Council for Electrical Installation Contracting or by a
       qualified representative of an Electricity Supply Authority or by a
       Surveyor of an Engineering Insurance Company.

       Without prejudice to the foregoing requirement for the inspection of the
       whole electrical installations within the stadium, the Council -may
       require any particular part of the installations to be separately tested
       at any time if it has reasonable cause to suspect that it may be
       defective in some way.

       The Holder shall afford the Council the opportunity of being represented
       at any inspection of the electrical installations or part thereof if it
       so wishes.

       Any electrical installation or part thereof which fails • to pass the
       appropriate test shall be repaired or replaced within one month of the
       issue of the appropriate Certificate.    Any electrical installation or
       part thereof which has to be repaired or replaced shall be re-tested on
       completion of such repairs or replacement so as to comply with the
       above-mentioned Regulations.

11.    Parking of vehicles within the stadium:-

       No vehicles other than emergency vehicles (i.e. police, fire, ambulance
       etc.) shall be parked or used in any part of the stadium while it is in
       use for a specified activity unless with the prior agreement of the Chief
       Constable.   Without prejudice, however, to this requirement, the Chief
       Constable may agree with the Holder the allocation of a specific area or
       areas within the stadium for the parking of disabled persons' vehicles,
       including their type and size, while the stadium is in use for a
       specified activity.

12.    Arranger.eats for attendance of Police Officers:-

       The Holder shall arrange at his own expense for the attendance of an
       adequate number of Police Officers while the stadium is in use for a
       specified activity to ensure the lawful and orderly behaviour of
       spectators. The number of Police Officers to be in attendance within the
       stadium during any such use shall be determined by the Chief Constable.

13./
                                                            -12-


13.   M e t h o d s of    a d m i s s i o n and s e g r e g a t i o n of s u p p o r t e r s ?-

      The     Holder shall discuss and agree with the Chief Constable prior to                       the
      use     of the stadium for a specified activity

      (a)         the time that the stadium will be opened for admission of the
                public to allow for an orderly and safe occupation of the ground;

      (b)         the methods of adaission to be employed in connection with such
                specified activity (in particular, how admission by ticket only,
                when required by the Chief Constable, shall be administered); and

      (c)       the special arrangements, if any, to be made for the segregation of
                home and visiting supporters.

      Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Condition, it shall
      be in the discretion of the Chief Constable to indicate to the Holder
      that the agreement reached in terms of the said provisions can also apply
      to all or any future uses of the stadium for a specified activity without
      further discussion between them.

14.   Stewarding arrangements - General:-

      Manning levels and stewarding requirements will vary depending upon the
      size and configuration of the ground and the nature of event and ground
      levels.

      While the          stadium is in use for a specified activity, the Holder shall
      agree with         the Chief Constable the number of stewards necessary to ensure
      compliance         with the Conditions of this Certificate and shall ensure the
      attendance         within the stadium of such number and such stewards shall be

      (a)       fit and capable to carry out their duties;

      (b)      properly trained and instructed;

      (c)      readily   identifiable by dress (e.g. white coat, fluorescent                      jacket
                etc.); and

      (d)       provided by the Holder with written instructions, to be approved by
                theCouncil, as to their general duties inorder to fulfil        the
                following functions :-

                    (i)       controlling or    directing members of the     public who are
                               entering or leaving the ground, to help achieve an even
                               flow of people to the viewing areas and' safe dispersal of
                               spectators on the terraces or viewing slopes;

                  (ii)         patrolling the ground     to deal   with any emergencies,
                               including raising an alarm or extinguishing a fire;

                 (iii)         manning entrances, exits and       other strategic  points
                               especially exit doors and gates which arenot continuously
                               open whilst the ground is in use; and

                  (iv)        assisting police as appropriate or as requested with crowd
                              control; and

                    (v)/.
                                              -13-



                 (v)   undertaking s p e c i f i c d u t i e s i n an emergency.

         Every steward should carry on him a general check list of his duties and
         responsibilities.   This check list should comply with Paragraph 196 of
         the Guide.

         Stewards on duty in implementation of this Condition and, in particular,
         stewards on duty at exit gates and on the access routes thereto shall
         have ready access to loud hailer equipment to enable them to make quick
         contact with spectators, if and when required.

         Where the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of tickets only
         and for no other activity, it shall be a sufficient discharge of the
         requirements of this Condition if the Holder ensures the attendance of
         sufficient stewards to ensure the orderly behaviour of the public during
         the period of sale.

         All stewards and other persons employed in the stadium during its use for
         a specified     activity shall    be   fully  instructed    as  to  their
         responsibilities in the event of an emergency and exercises for stewards
         and other persons employed within the stadium shall be carried out not
         less than three times each playing season to test emergency procedures
         and a record kept of the duration of the exercise, details of the
         instruction given and by whom.   The assistance of Strathclyde Police and
         Fire Brigade should be sought to assist in such training exercises.

15.      Exit gates - Attendance by stewards

         All exit gates shall be attended by stewards throughout the entire period
         when spectators may be in the stadium in connection with its use for a
         specified activity and it shall be the duty of such stewards to open the
         exit gates in the event of an emergency and in any event not less than
         fifteen minutes before the anticipated end of the specified activity or
         at any other time on the request of a Police Officer.     When opened for
         any reason, all exit gates shall be secured in the fully open position
         and kept free of all obstructions.

16.      Positioning of television cameras etc.:-

         Television  cameras and portable     equipment shall be restricted to
         positions to be approved in advance by the Chief Constable on behalf of
         the Council and shall not be allowed to cause any obstruction to the
         Police or emergency services in the carrying out of their duties.

17.      Provision of first-aid room etc.

         The Holder shall provide within the stadium a suitably equipped first-aid
         or ambulance room and/or first-aid points to the satisfaction of the
         Council and shall ensure the attendance of a sufficient number of
         properly trained first-aid personnel on each occasion when the stadium is
         in use for a specified activity.

         The attendance of first-aid personnel shall not be considered to be
         necessary when the public is admitted to the stadium for the sale of
         tickets only and for no other activity.

18./..
                                            -14-



18.   Public A d d r e s s S y s t e m :-

      The Holder shall maintain for his own use and for the Police and
      emergency services, as and when required while the stadium is in use for
      a specified activity, a public address system capable of being heard
      under reasonable conditions by all spectators of normal hearing in a n y
      part of the stadium to which spectators have a right of access.     Such
      public address system shall be of a design which provides an over-ride
      facility for use by the Police in an emergency and shall be operated ar.d
      controlled from a position to be approved by the Chief Constable on
      behalf of the Council and shall be provided with an emergency power
      supply so that it is capable of being operated at all times.

      The wiring of the public address system shall be either M.I.C.C. cable or
      P.V.C. cable in conduit and the emergency source of power supply shall be
      provided from batteries kept at full capacity by trickle charging froc
      the mains supply.

      Alternatively, the emergency source of power supply may be provided froE
      a generator.

19.   Toilet Facilities:-

      The Holder shall ensure the provision and adequate maintenance tor the
      satisfaction of the Council of sufficient toilet facilities, both male
      and female, in all parts of the stadium.

20.   Sale of tickets, programmes and refreshments ~ General

      In allocating premises or facilities for the sale of tickets, programmes
      or refreshments, the Holder shall take all necessary steps to ensure that
      such allocation does not obstructentrance or exit routes in any way.

21.   Provision of refreshments

      The Holder shall ensure that all premises, appliances and equipment
      associated with the sale of permitted refreshments are maintained in a
      safe and proper working condition at all times.

      All containers in which permitted refreshments are sold or distributed to
      spectators while the stadium is in use for a specified activity shall be
      made of soft plastic or other similar material of such construction that
      it is incapable of being moulded to form any kind of missile.        This
      requirement shall not apply to any part of the stadium to which access is
      given only on the invitation of the Holder.

22.   Facilities for authorised persons:-

      The Holder shall make available adequate viewing and inspection
      facilities to authorised persons immediately before, during or after a
      specified activity    or at any other reasonable time when considered
      necessary by the Council.

23.    Accommodation and facilities for Strathclyde Police

       Within a period of five years from the date of this Certificate,      the
       Holder shall provide and thereafter maintain at his own expense the
       following accommodation and facilities for the use of the police officers
       on duty in connection with the use of the stadium for a specific
       activity:

       (a)/.
(a)    Accomnodat ion

      There shall be provided and maintained in such location within the
      Stand or elsewhere within the stadium as may be approved by the
      Chief Constable, the following units of accommodation, namely:

         (i)   a general office with accommodation for lost children and a
               staff of two/three persons, including typing staff - this
               office to have its own toilet accommodation;

        (ii)   a charge bar and secure storage for the property of persons
               charged;

       (iii)   two detention rooms (one for adults and one for juveniles)
               each with its own toilet;

        (iv)   a refreshment   room with its     own   toilet   for   the   use   of
                police officers on duty; and

         (v)   interview room.

(b)   * Facilities

         (i)   Heating shall be available         within    the   accommodation
               referred to at (a) above;

        (ii)   basic furnishings, e.g. working surfaces, bench              seats,
               stacking tables and chairs shall be provided; and

       (iii)   a telephone communications system shall be available to
               connect the police accommodation with the following points,
               namely:

                (1 )    control room
                (2 )    control point at the players' tunnel
                (3)      Coatbridge police office.

Specific repairs and maintenance to be carried out:-

(a)   Not later than 31st July, 1988 the existing           East Stairway
       (external) shall be reconstructed to the same standard as the Vest
       Stairway (external) to a minimum width of 2.5 metres; and

(b)   not later than 31st July, 1988 barricading shall    be provided to
       deter spectators from attempting to utilise the existing Vest and
       North Terraces and the East ash viewing area.

Grandstand

(1)   Not later than 31st July, 1988 the existing three vomitories from
       the Stand to the Stand Enclosures (2, 3 and 4) shall be upgraded to
       accord with Chapters 6 and 7 of the Guide and made structurally
       sound.

(2)   The timber flooring of the seating deck should      be examined and
       reformed as necessary.   AJ.1 defective flooring should be replaced
       and any holes or openings sealed off.
                                             -16-



  ( 3)   The s p e c t a t o r area of the Stand s ho ul d be s eparated from any rooss
         or v o id s by a c o n s t r u c t i o n ha v i ng a f i r e r e s i s t e n c e of not l e s s
         than h a l f an hour.

  (4)    The stairs from the East Stand to the enclosure (Stair 1) should be
         upgraded to comply with Chapters 6 and 7 of the Guide with respect
         to handrails or balustrade.

  (5)    The following areas should be cleared of all storage and sealed off
         to prevent further use:-

         (a)     the room off the tea bar               at   the   west     end of the      Stand    at
                 first floor level; and

         (b)       the area east of the home team dressing room; and

  (6 )   The following doorsshould be made and maintained self closing and
          fire resisting, half hour grade:-

         (a)     Ground Floor

                     (i)      the door      giving     access to      the     home    team dressing
                             room;

                    (ii)      the door      giving     access to      the     away    team dressing
                             room; and

                   (iii)      the door     giving      access to      the     officials’ dressing
                             room.

         (b)       First Floor

                     (i)      the door    giving access to the tea bar;

                    (ii)      the door    giving access to the kitchen; .

                   (iii)      the door    giving access to the office;

                    (iv)      the door    giving access to the board room;

                     (v)     the door giving access to the stairway leading to the
                             seating deck.

    (7)' The following doors shall be made fire resisting and kept locked

          (a)      the door giving access to the long cupboard off the home team
                   dressing room corridor; and

          (b)      the door giving access to the long cupboard off the away team
                   dressing room.

^ (8 )   General and emergency lighting shall be provided as follows

          (a)      four   number   total   lights   shall   be  fitted  on   the
                   Directors'/Players’ internal stairway within the Stand and in
                   the corridor leading to the Directors' Room;

          (b)/..
                                                  -17-



             (b)      spill l i g h t i n g pl u s e m e r g e n c y l i g h t i n g shall    be fit t e d to
                      illuminate the rear of the Stand seating areas                          and gangways.
                      The wiring for this should preferably be MIMS                           PVC sheathed
                      cable and the lighting shall be sufficient for                          a duration of
                      three hours;

                (c)   illuminated exit plates shall be fitted above all vomitories
                      from the Stand seating areas to the Stand Enclosures;

                (d)   the lighting in the Stand Enclosures shall be increased by at
                      least two floods; and

                (e)   all existing fluorescent fittings shall have                           their   lighting
                      tubes replaced where they are missing.

2.6•   Fire Alarm Svstem:-

       An  electrically-operated fire alarm system     complying with British
       Standard 5839 - Part I: 1980 shall be installed, within the Stand. The
       system shall include manual fire alarm call points and automatic fire
       detectors as follows

       (a)   Break glass call points shall be installedadjacent                               to the     exit
             door of each occupied room within the stand building.

       (b)      An automatic fire detection system shall be installed in all areas
                (including the voids) below the seating deck.

       The system shall be of smoke    detection type with the exception of     the
       bath areas, laundry and boiler room which may be .of heat detection type.

       An indicator panel showing the      area or zone of fire                        alarm activation
       should be provided and located in the control room.

       Details indicating the proposed arrangements for giving effect to  the
       above shall be submitted to the Council for approval prior to any work
       being carried out.

       Power for the fire alarm systems shall be provided from batteries kept at
       full capacity by trickle charging from the mains supply and wiring shall
       be either M.I.C.C. cable or P.V.C. cable in conduit.       Alternatively,
       power may be provided by a generator.

27.    General and Emergency Lighting System

       The existing general lighting system and the emergency lighting system
       required below shall, in all parts of the stadium accessible to
       spectators and particularly on entrance and exit stairways, gangways and
       other routes, be maintained in a safe and efficient working condition, to
       ensure that spectators may enter, make use of, or leave the stadium
       safely.    In particular, the emergency lighting system to serve all
       entrance and exit stairways, gangways and other routes shall be of such a
       standard of both provision and maintenance as will allow persons to make
       their way to a place of safety during the failure of the mains supply or
       in the event of any other emergency which may affect the general lighting
       of the stadium.

       The/..
The emergency l i g h t i n g system s h a l l comply w i t h B r i t i s h Standard 5266,
Part I : 1975 and g i v e an i l l u m i n a t i o n of not l e s s than 0 . 4 l ux .             The
whole of such s yst em s h a l l be made to come i n t o o p e r a t i o n a u t o m a t i c a l l y
in the event of a f a i l u r e of the mains s uppl y or any l o c a l c i r c u i t and
s h a l l be capable o f p ro v i di ng the n e c e s s a r y i l l u m i n a t i o n f o r not l e s s
than th ree hours.

F i re Equipment: -

Portable fire fighting appliances of types to be approved by the
Firemaster shall be located and maintained at such points throughout the
stadium as may likewise be approved by him.      Without prejudice to the
foregoing general requirement, a fire blanket of the non-asbestos type
shall be provided and located within every snack bar or kitchen area.

F i r e Routine Procedures ; -

The Holder shall take the necessary steps to instruct all staff,
including stewards, likely to be working within the stadium while it is
in use for a specified activity, of the procedures to be adopted, as
undernoted, in the event of an outbreak of fire being discovered,
namely

(a)     The Fire Brigade to be summoned;

(b)     A responsible person or persons to proceed to the scene of the fire
        to find out if it has been extinguished or is under control;

(c)     Where the fire (i) may affect the Stand seating or any exit
        therefrom or (ii) is located elsewhere., within the Stand and is not
        under control, to take immediate steps to arrange the evacuation of
        the Stand by using the public address system.

The full details of the fire routine procedures shall be agreed with the
Firemaster.   Exercises to test the fire routine procedures shall be
carried out not less than three times in each playing season and Bay be
so carried out in conjunction with the exercises referred to in Condition
14 of this Part of the Schedule.

Emergency Signs and Notices

.(a)    Signs bearing the word "EXIT" in green block capital lettering at
         least 125mm high on a white background shall be provided throughout
         the Stand area to provide clear guidance along all exit routes.
         Such signs shall be of the illuminated type complying with the
         British Standard 5266, Part I : 1975 unless they are adequately
         illuminated by the general and emergency lighting systems.

         On any occasion when a large number of foreign spectators is
         expected within the stadium,  the Holder   shall consider the
         necessity for the provision of additional exit notices in the
         appropriate language.

(b)     All fire resisting doors which are required to be close-fitting and
         self-closing shall have a notice fixed to both faces of the door
         bearing the words "Fire Door - Keep Shut" or words to the like
         effect.
                                       -19-



      (c)   All final exit doors from the stadium, i n c l u d i n g the Stand, shall
            be clearly and permanently marked on the outside face of the doors
            by the words "EXIT - KEEP CLEAR" in red block capital lettering not
            less than 125 mm in height on a white background.

      (d)   Where final exit doors are fitted with panic bolt type fastenings,
            they shall be clearly marked with the words "PUSH BAR TO OPEN"
            painted in 100mm high white block capitals. The lettering shall be
            placed immediately above the bar in each case.

31.   Storage of liquefied petroleum gas;-

      If it is necessary to store or use liquefied petroleum gas within the
      stadium, the Holder shall take the necessary steps to observe any
      guidance given by the Firemaster as to the precautions to be taken in so
      doing.

32.   Testing of Systems:-

      The following arrangements shall be made by the Holder for the testing of
      the undemoted systems:-

      (a)   Fire Alarm - both the manual and automatic fire alarm systems shall
            be tested in accordance with the proceduresoutlined in British
            Standard 5839 - Part I: 1980;

      (b)   Emergency Lighting - the emergency lighting system shall be tested
            in accordance with the procedures outlined     in British Standard
            5266, Part I: 1975;

      (c)   Public Address System - the public address system shall be tested
            at the same time as the fire alarm system and shall be checked to
            ensure  that it operates correctly from both the normal and
            secondary power sources;

      (d)   Fire Fighting   Equipment - the fire fighting    equipment shall be
            checked and tested by a competent firm of Fire Engineers at regular
            periods but not less often than once per annum.

      (e)   All automatic fire detection and fire warning, emergency lighting
            and public address systems shall be tested twenty four hours before
            an event.

33.   Review and amendment of Certificate;-

      If at any time it appears appropriate for them to do so, the Council may
      review or amend the terms and conditions of any part of the Certificate
      or any of the requirements contained therein.

34.   Prohibition of smoking within Stand(s):-

      While the stadium is in use for a specified activity, the Holder shall
      ensure that smoking is prohibited within the seated area of the Stand(s)
      and signs to that effect shall be prominently displayed throughout the
      Stand(s).  Any tickets sold to secure entry shall clearly indicate where
      smoking is prohibited and general advice on the extent of the prohibition
      shall be referred to in Club natch programmes.

      It shall be the responsibility of the holder, through his Club Stewards,
      to enforce this prohibition.
iv iciu v jt a u u u iii                                 auauiviyuu
                                                         Regional
                                                         Council
                                                      A nuclear-free zone authority
FROM        Chief Executive
            (Protective and Basic Services)           A n equal opportunities authority


                                                            Ext: 3326

TO          Chief Constable                             Our Ref: GP/6/5/l(r) (Mr. Matheson)

                                                      Your Ref:

                                                           Date: 16th March, 1988




SUBJECT     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
            GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE FOR CLIFTONHILL STADIUM, COATBRIDGE




In terms of Regulation 5 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987r I
hereby give notice that the Regional Council have agreed to grant a General
Safety Certificate in respect of Cliftonhill Stadium, Coatbridge and, in so
doing, I would remind you that under Section 5 of the Act you may appeal to the
Court against the inclusion of anything in or the omission of anything from the
Certificate.   A copy of the Certificate is enclosed, together with a copy of
the covering letter to the Club.

I have sent a 'personal' copy of the Certificate to Assistant Chief Constable
Dickson in view os his close involvement in the matter.
                      r




Depute Chief Executive
AMM/MM


Ends
                                                 Strathclyde                                       -• -
                                                 Regional
                                                 Council
                               Robert Calderwood LLB Chief Executive




Chief Executive's Department         An equal oppo rtu n ities authority
                                                                           Telephone   041-227 3262
Strathclyde House                     A nuclear-tree zone authority
                                                                           Switchboard 041-204 2900
2 0 India Street                                                           Our ref     SG/2/13 (Mr.Purdon)
Charing Cross                                                              Your ref
Glasgow G2 4PF                                                             Date        2.0 September, 1989


                                                                                       A.C.C.
Albion Rovers Football Club Ltd.,                                                    Operation*
per David Forrester, CA,
21 Academy Street,                                                              A CK O . .

COATBRIDGE.
                                                                                 2 6 SEPI989


Dear Sirs,

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
CLIFTONHILL STADIUM, COATBRIDGE

Following completion of the various items of Improvement work, at Cliftonhill
Stadium, I have to inform you on behalf of the Regional Council as the
appropriate Licensing Authority under the above Act that, with immediate
effect, Condition 1 of Part 3 of the General Safety Certificate currently in
farce for the Stadium will be amended as follows:-

             East Stand                                    not    exceeding   124)
             Directors' Box                                not    exceeding    64)
             Centre Stand                                  not    exceeding   150)           538
             Vest Stand                                    not    exceeding   200)
             East Stand Enclosure                          not    exceeding             289
             Vest Stand Enclosure                          not    exceeding             289
             North East Terrace                            not    exceeding           2,380

                                                           Total                      3,496


This amendment takes account of the issue of the Interim Report by the Rt. Hon.
Lord Justice Taylor on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, from which the
Regional Council have agreed to adopt Recommendation 2 regarding the maximum
capacity for areas for standing spectators in respect of all the designated
grounds in Strathclyde.     As you know, this has the effect of reducing the
capacity of such areas by 15% on the basis of the guidelines contained within
the 'Green Guide'. The revised capacity, based solely on the parameters of the
'Green Guide' and without the 15% reduction referred to, is shown for
information in the undernote.

This letter shall be construed as a formal amendment to the above mentioned
General Safety Certificate for the Stadium and shall be read together with it
accordingly.   The appeals provisions contained within Section 5 of the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as amended and Section 6 of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Regulations 1987 apply if the Club is in any way dissatisfied with this
amendment.

The/.
                                                     -2-


 The S af et y C e r t i f i c a t e w i l l f u rt h e r be amended to r e f l e c t Recommendations
 ->» I , O, V, 10 and 33 of the Report.                                                               5 3, 4,

 proposed1 in3 r C° Un.Cllf     "0uld aPPr e c i a t e your re sponse s and a note of a ct i o n
    P          res pect of      Recommendations 18 t o 25        and 39 t o 43 of the Report
Yours f a i t h f u l l y ,




Depute Chief Executive
(Protective and Basic Services)
j m p /m m




Undernote—for information only

Capacity without 15Z reduction


              East Stand
                                                        not   exceeding      124)
              Directors' Box
                                                        not   exceeding       64)
              Centre Stand
                                                        not   exceeding      150)        538
              West Stand
              East Stand Enclosure
                                                        not   exceeding      200 )
                                                        not   exceeding                  340
              West Stand Enclosure
                                                        not   exceeding                  340
              North East Terrace
                                                        not   exceeding              2 ,8 0 0

                                                        Total                        4 ,0 1 8
