Revised draft 3.7.89

                                                   /
                                              /
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS' BILL AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
MEMORANDUM BY THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE ENVIRONMENT


1.   The Home Secretary and I have been Considering what
                                       f
                                       "Bill should be tabled
      during the Committee stage in theons,
                                         C in order to put the
                                       tion to respond positively
                                       Lord Justice Taylor might
                                       n the Hillsborough




                                        the House approved a
                                       tee on the Bill that it has
                                       elating to any aspect of
                                        football matches.     Thus
                                       n safety.


                                       een to table such
                                       (
                                       d Justice Taylor's interim
                                        report in late July, this
                                       1
                                       utumn spillover.     However
                                        the Committee stage
                                       amendments before the


                                                                1
4.   Under existing legislation on safety at sports grounds the
Home Secretary has powers which would enable him to respond, if
he so wished/ to Taylor recommendations about, for example,
requiring local authorities to impose particular terms and
conditions in safety certificates.


5.   But the existing legislation does not contain powers to
enable the Home Secretary to monitor the way in which local
authorities carry out their duty to issue and enforce safety
                                                    fttty
certificates, or to require local authorities to make/changes jar
      \\Pk>
tefoe way they do- so. I indicated during the 2nd Reading debate
that we had it in mind to table an enabling amendment on this in
case Lord Justice Taylor makes a recommendation about it.


6.   Lord Justice Taylor seems unlikely in his interim report to
recommend radical changes (eg that the duty to issue and enforce
safety certificates should be taken away from local authorities
and be given to a new national safety authority).   To table an
amendment on such a basic structural issue^ would be seen (not
least by him) as pre-empting too far what he might say.     If such
a recommendation were made in his final report, and this were
accepted, it would have to be the subject of a further Bill.


Proposed amendments


7.   On this basis I propose to table during the Committee
stage - in the autumn if possible, in July if necessary -
amendments covering the following two issues

                                2
     A.   an amendment which provides1mej^it^ an enabling power to
     give the licensing authority under the Bill the extra task
     of ensuring that local authorities are carrying out their
     responsibilities under the safety of sports grounds
     legislation in such a way as to achieve a consistent
     standard of safety at designated football gjpertSnds:   this
     enabling power would be used, in the light of Lord Justice
     Taylor's interim report and his final report (BafPggtred Marly
     irNjA^tff^if it seemed to the Government the best way
     forward;


     B.   an amendment which would empower/me/to require all­
     seated accommodation at major football grounds and to impose
     this through the licensing arrangements in the Bill.


Oversight of local authorities' issue and enforcement of safety
certificates.


8.   The need here is for an enabling provision, rather than one
directly giving the licensing authority under the Bill this extra
task, because we do not want to be seen to be pre-empting Taylor,
and because there is at present an insufficient basis for
concluding that central monitoring of the performance of local
authorities in issuing and enforcing safety certificates is the
best way forward.


9.   There are some (eg the Sports Council) who take the^View that
there should be a central licensing authority to issue safety
certificates for major sports clubs because of a perceived
variety in standards applied by local authorities.    But these
differences may arise from the different nature of eaqh football
                                                   v3-/r
ground, and a central authority might in time a’
                                               l«o be accused of
inconsistency.    Moreover, the enquiry by Mr Justice Popplewell
into the Bradford City football club fire in 1985 concluded that
the local authority safety certificate system was working
satisfactorily.


10.   However, even if Lord Justice Taylor does not recommend
central monitoring of local authorities, I may wish to make use
of the proposed enabling power.    Thus far in the passage of the
Bill we have argued that there is no reason why local authorities
should not work together with the licensing authority in dealing
with safety certificates and the requirements of the national
membership scheme.    But I think we must acknowledge that there
could be a potential conflict in this area.    The Hillsborough
disaster, and the unsubstantiated assertions that the membership
scheme "would have made it worse", have increased the risk that a
small number of local authorities might seek to use their role as
'•safety authorities" to disrupt the membership scheme.


11.   The Home Secretary and I are agreed that the best way
forward is to take this enabling power.    It would mean that, in
addition to its powers in respect of the national membership
scheme set out in the Bill, we would take a power to give the
licensing authority, if we felt it right to do so in the light of
                Taylor, two additional duties in respect of safety.     These would
                be to:


                      (i) monitor the way in which local authorities issue and
                      enforce safety certificates.    The object here would be to
                      ensure a consistency of approach as between one authority
                      and another in settingstandards for safety,   and that local
                      authorities have effective systems in place to ensure that  rQffJ
                                                     •                      •         'i ^
                      ground operators fully comply with the terms and conditions     /
                                              ^                        I             vir
r                     of safety certificates. / The licensing authority would have,
                                                       .                               '
                      power to require the local authority to make changes to tj           • •!i«
                                                                                                Y


                      certificate and its arrangements for ensuring compli
                                                                                           J
                      where it concluded this to be necessarf
\w'
      -fj£\.
       oh&
         A'-S
                                                                                       NT
      tJr*'           (ii) ( to enforce any order whiph the Home Secretary m Lght
                                                         -tjp* M f' tSiij ■ <r-1
                      make about the contents of safety certificates if a lo :al
                      authority failed to comply with


                In the event of a local authority failing to act on any direction^
                under (i) and (ii), it would be for the licensing authority to
                seek redress through the courts.      (a,-* ^       iUvl" ^          f^-


                12.      It is important that a local authority opposed in principle
                to the football membership scheme envisaged by the Bill should
                not be able to use its safety certificate power to frustrate the
                membership scheme.     Equally it is important that the licensing
                authority should not approve arrangements for the membership
                   scheme which are not compatible with safety.        There needs to be
                   a bridge between the two functions.


                   13.       A bridge will be provided by the Home Office/Scottish Home
                   and Health Department "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds", the
                   "Green Guide".       This in effect contains nationally recommended
                   standards about safety at sports groundsT^ In exercising their
                   safety certificate powers local authorities are expected to
                   impose terms and conditions which are consistent with the Guide.
                   Equally, in exercising its powers under 11(i) above and when
                   approving arrangements for the national membership scheme, the
                                                          cut-
                   licensing authority will be expected to ±m consistent^with the
                   Green Guide.


                   14. , There is/a risk that there will on occasion be a genuine
                         \
               difference of opinion between a local authority and the licensing
 /?/ |..La^O
       ...i* ' p
'Ajv/VO ctf^author j|ty about how to apply the Guide at a particular sports

o^O'               ground.       Under the power at, ll(i) above, the final decision will
                   rest with the licensing authority.      But since the local authority
 apASM         j   will still have the statutory duty to issue and enforce safety
 AflpjAs.t)
    J)             certificates we would make provision in the Bill for the local
     *             authority to be able to appeal against the decision of the
   j uffj
                   licensing authority to the Secretary of State:      such appeals
 teusers
 I         ,       would be decided by the Home Secretary and myself jointly.
  fy> iMtiit       y


     \             15.        We shall be considering further whether this building of
(Ia'V-% ,
    6 “            bridges between the licensing^and the safety certificate
                    functions could be improved further by a code of practice, or by

                                                       6
a directive by the Secretary of State, which sets out how the
licensing authority is to conduct itself in relation to local
authorities.      This would put on public record, for all to see,
what is the basis for the licensing authority's activities.


16.     A note on the structure of the licensing authority and
the inspectorate it will need in order to carry out its functions
is at Annex B.


The status of the licensing authority


17.   The licensing authority could take one of three forms:


      (i)     the authority could be part of the Football Membership
      Authority in the Bill;


      (ii) make it an extension of my Department;


      (iii)    make it a non-departmental public body (NDPB).


18.    I would not wish to contemplate giving powers of the kind
proposed to the Football Membership Authority which will draw up
and run the national membership scheme itself, unless we also had
to take over the running of the Football Membership Authority.
At this stage it remains my hope that we can leave the Football
Membership Authority to the football authorities.       They have
made clear that they would be unwilling to accept responsibility
for the licensing function.       I shall wish to take a close

                                    7
interest in the composition and constitution of the football
Membership Authority.    I am considering whether it would be
desirable to make some joint appointments to it and the licensing
authority - if so we may need to amend the Bill to ensure that
this possible, but on the other hand it might be better to keep
the two entirely separate.


19.   I see no merit in making the licensing authority an
extension of a Government Department since I would wish to be
distanced from its proposed extended functions.      While hesitant
about creating a new public body, I think that there is a strong
case for housing the licensing authority in an NDPB.       It will be
necessary for me and the Home Secretary to appoint the members of
the licensing authority. ^~And it will IbjL important in the context
of its extended safety role that it id independent of Government
                                   / may appeal^to^^^SeereEsry
- not least so that a local authority           T"

oJg*^g£at«"fwhere there is conflict //between
                                       e      the safety certificate
and the licence (see paragraph 14 - 15 above).


Power to recruire all seater stadia


20.   Following the Hillsborough disaster, the Government said it
believed that the future of football in the country lies in a
national membership scheme in designated grounds and now it seems
also in providing all seated accommodation at major football
      \t
clubs, involving the disappearance of terraces at these grounds.
                21.     I have discussed this issue with the football authorities
                and made clear to them that it is not our intention that there
                should be blanket change to all seated accommodation.     The move
                to all seating would be appropriate for the major clubs;     which
                ones would be a matter for further discussion;    and the change
                would need to be phased in at the designated clubs.      The cost
                would be for football.     It is clear that there is no consensus
                on the merit of all seater stadia within football and there could
                be opposition to the proposal from individual clubs.


                22.    The Home Secretary and I agree that the move to all seated
                accommodation at major clubs could not successfully be left to
                the discretion of individual local authorities, who in practice
                would find it very difficult to impose such a requirement.
                 Instead this needs to be carried forward at national level*
                •beoauca imposition of the requirement by a specific date could on
                 financial grounds lead a club to decide either not to use the
                ground after that date or not to act on the requirement.       The
                 sanction against the latter would need to be to order the club
P       ^ —     not to admit spectators to the terraces which should have been
                 converted to seats;     this in itself could lead to the club to
    M
              v discontinue to use the ground.    There is scope here for judicial
i,0           \
               / review on the grounds that the Government were acting
                unreasonably in imposing on a club a requirement which could in
                practice lead to its going out of business.      We would have to be
                 ready to assert that this would be better than to allow terracing
                 to continue.



                                                   9
       23.   At a national level the imposition of an all-seated
       requirement could be achieved in one of two ways.     First the Bill
       could be used to extend the powers which the Home Secretary
       already has under the safety of sports grounds legislation,
       working through the safety certificate issued by the local
       authority.   (The existing legislation might possibly be used as
       it stands;   but it could not be used safely.     Bearing in mind
f'
     \ the potentially harmful financial effect on a football club, an
^      unequivocal power to impose an all-seated requirement is needed.)
       Alternatively, we could add to the Bill a provision empowering me
       to impose the requirement as part of the licensing system.


       24.    The Home Secretary and I have concluded that the latter
       course would be more appropriate, since we envisage anyway
       (paragraph® \
                   \\
                    \        above) that ^^ licensing authority under the
       Bill should have tasks relating to safety, and bearing in mind
       also that it might not be possible make a good case in i-niivi rlnnl.
       eases that safety considerations necessarily called for all­
       seated accommodation.


       25.    I would not exercise on my own the power to impose the all
       seated requirement.   I envisage that the licensing authority in
                                                                    j
       consultation with the clubs, should be empowered to identify
       which grounds should be made subject to the change, to what
       extent (all seated or some terracing allowed) and to what
       timetable.   T&e licensing authority would make a formal
       recommendation to me, and the Bill would provide for me to issue
       the appropriate direction in respect of designated grounds.

                                         10
This directive power would be exercisable by statutory
instrument, subject to the negative resolution procedure and
Parliament would therefore be able to debate and vote on the
issue.      The licensing authority would act on the directive by
making the all-seated requirement a condition of the licence, and
would be responsible for enforcing this as well as other
conditions of the licence.


The cost implications of the licensing authority


26.   The ^t>otball Spectators Bill provides for some or all of the
costs of the licensing authority in respect of its functions
under the national membership scheme to be recovered through fees
charged to football clubs for the issue of licenses.      I do not
propose that we should seek to provide for the costs of the
licensing authority in respect of its safety functions or of its
role in relation to all-seated accommodation to be recovered in
this way.      Receipts from fees by the authority would be treated
as revenue surrenderable to the Consolidated Fund and the
authority's expenses would be met by grant in aid for which we
would need to seek PES cover.


27.      The proposal to extend the licensing authority's functions
requires a revision of the estimated cost to public funds given
in my letter of 29 September seeking the Committee's approval to
Part I of the Bill.      The annual salary and ancillary costs of
the authority would be some [£100,000] and inspectorate
[£360,000] and the administrative support team £[        ].

                                  11
Accommodation would cost some £ [                  ] a year, travelling and
subsistence [£40,000] and a possible consultancy budget, to cover
the need to buy in any additional expertise not available to the
inspection teams [£30,000] a year.              This gives an annual cost to
public funds of some £[               ].


E C Implications


28.   The functions of the licensing authority have no EC
implications.


29.    I propose that I should table amendments to the Bill,
preferably in the overspill in the autumn but if necessary before
the summer recess


      (i) to enable me to give the licensing authortfty extra
      tasks relating to safety as set out*paragraph 7A^ 11 lo 15
      above;


      (ii) to empower me to require all-seated accommodation at
      major clubs through the Bill's licensing system, as proposed
      in paragraphs   7 B^2 4 V-®   25,,,__ ^ above.


30.    The first amendment would be presented as getting ourselves
into the position of being able to implement Taylor if he made
such a recommendation and we thought the case for it was right.
The second amendment would be presented as furthering the
Government's view that there should be a move to all-seated
accommodation at major clubs.                      M

                                           12                          *
                                                                                               MNfcX'B #




THE LICENSING AUTHORITY AND ITS INSPECTORATE



X*       In    °r<5er   to     carry   out     its        functions       the   licensing

authority would need to have an inspectorate.                         The Home Secretary

has    pointed   out    that there     would     be      strong misgivings          by   the

Association of Chief Police Officers and the Chief and Assistant

Chief Fire Officers’ Association at the idea that the professional

competence of the police and fire services in making their input

into    the   content     of   individual      safety       certificates        should    be

supervised by the licensing authority.                     To secure the confidence
of    interested   parties      both   the    authority         and    its   inspectorate

will therefore need to include suitable people from the police

and    fire   services.        We   also     think       that   the     engineering      and

building      professions      would    have        to     be   represented         on   the

authority and the inspectorate teams since both make an essential
contribution to the content of safety certificates.



         ^    therefore      propose   that     a     small       licensing     authority

should be set up on which the interests I have identified should

be represented under a lay chairman. Appointments would be at the

level    of   retired     Chief     Constable        and    his       equivalent.        The

inspectorate would comprise of teams of inspectors,                          and I think

we would require three teams or their part time equivalent,                              on

which the same interests would be represented.                          Appointments to

the inspectorate would be at Chief SuperintendentTleveT



3.       The team of inspectors could be expected to spend some 4

days on a ground inspection, including preliminary work on plans

and the safety certificates, reappraisal and report in the light
of   -the on    site   inspection     and   travelling.       We   envisage    that

grounds should be inspected annually but that the authority would

have discretion about the nature and extent of each inspection.

It may decide      that a full inspection is only required at less

frequent intervals^ay every two or three years^ and in the light

of   physical    changes   to   the    ground.         The   authority   and   its

inspectorate     would   require    a small,     say    5 man,     administrative
support team.
