BRIEFING FOR PRIME MINISTER’S QUESTIONS

HILLSBOROUGH


ACCUSATION

That no further action is to be taken following the judicial scrutiny o f'n ew ’evidence
of the Hillsborough disaster.


FACTS

The Home Secretary announced last June that he was setting up a judicial scrutiny of
evidence submitted by the families of the Hillsborough victims. Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith has now reported and the Home Secretary will announce that he, together with
the Attorney-General and Director of Public Prosecutions, has accepted the Judge’s
conclusions that there are no grounds for a further public inquiry or any basis for a
renewed application to quash the inquest verdict or to reconsider the decisions of the
prosecution and disciplinary authorities.


LINE TO TAKE


My Rt hon Friend, the Home Secretary, will be making a statement on the
Hillsborough scrutiny immediately following these Questions.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90198# 1
                                                                Parly No. K 01570




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR NAMED DAY ANSWER ON
THURSDAY 10 FEBRUARY 2000




Mr Frank Field (Birkenhead): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
Department, when copies of the information which formed the background to
the Hillsborough Inquiry will be moved to Liverpool; and where in the city it will
be made available for public access.




DRAFT REPLY


Copies of the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith were placed in the
Library of the House following the scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster. In response
to earlier representations by my hon. Friend the Member for Crosby, it was confirmed
the House is willing to loan the material to a nominated library in Liverpool. I
understand that the Library of the House is still waiting to be contacted by the hon.
Member.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90219# 1
BACKGROUND NOTE




The Question is believed to refer to the material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster, rather than that considered by Lord
Justice Taylor’s original inquiry.


2.      Copies of the police statements and other evidence considered in the scrutiny
were placed in the House of Commons Library following Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
scrutiny. In response to a letter from Claire Curtis-Thomas MP in August last year
which indicated that there was a difficulty in victims’ relatives accessing the papers in
the House Library, officials contacted the Library. As a result, the Library indicated its
willingness to loan the scrutiny papers to a library in Liverpool, subject to the papers
being returned if, at any time, they are required by the House Library. Charles Clarke
wrote to Claire Curtis-Thomas to ask her to make the necessary arrangements to put
the House Library in contact with a suitable library in Liverpool.


3.     Frank Field has previously shown interest in this issue and raised the
possibility of the scrutiny material being placed in Liverpool Central Library with the
Home Secretary in the House on 26 October 1998.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90219# 1
