                                             Ms Snow
                                             Ms Spencer
                                             Mr Yates
                                             Mr Hammond
                                             Mr Faulkner
                                             HMCIC
                                             Mr Angel
                                             Mr Boys Smith
 k                                           Mr Norris
                                             Mr Turney
                                             Miss P Edwards LAB
   u)dk "Vky           zr^faM                Mr Moorey
                                             Mr Cogbill
                                             Miss A Edwards, F2
                                             Mr Fulton
                                d            Miss Goose
                                             Mr Grant
                                             Mrs Lee
                                             Mr Nagler
                                             Mr Goddard
                                             Mr Kinney
                                             Mr J B Taylor
                                             Mr Crawley, SHHD
                                             Mr McClelland, NIO
                                             Mr J Vaughan, DoE
                                             Mr P Gregory, DE
                                             Mr Lunn, DTI




Secretary of State



TAYLOR REPORT; PROPOSED NEW OFFENCE OF CHANTING OBSCENE OR
RACIALIST ABUSE


Mr Goddard's submission of 11 July proposed, inter alia, that
Taylor's recommendation of a new offence of chanting obscene or
racialist abuse at a football match should be accepted.  I am
concerned about the implications of such a change in encouraging
pressure for wider changes in the law on racial or religious
incitement.

We have a difficult and delicate line to hold.  It is under
continuous pressure. The "Satanic Verses" controversy adds to the
difficulty and could at any time become an even more major issue.

Last week I had a helpful discussion with the Solicitor General and
officials to ensure that there was a clear Government line worked
out in advance should there be intensification of agitation or
violence over the Rushdie affair in the summer. The Solicitor's
position was not in favour of amending the general law to meet
Rushdie problems. However, he shared our recognition that pressure

                                                                    1
for change could grow and great care is needed not to risk adding
to it.

If we are prepared to introduce legislation for football grounds,
even though the substance of the misconduct to be dealt with seems
to be already covered by the existing law, that makes it more
difficult to head off unwelcome proposals for more specific
offences outside football grounds with the argument that the
existing provisions are sufficient. Moreover, the argument that
conduct which is somewhere below the threshold of an offence under
section 5 of the Public Order Act, and which might be regarded as
"bad manners rather than criminality", can be justified in the
context of a football match could easily be used against us by
those who see the consequences of Mr Rushdie's "bad manners" as
having rather wider adverse consequences than misconduct at a
football match.

There are counter arguments and decent distinctions:      the Rushdie
debate is more in terms of religion than race.      I would not wish to
argue that a change which is important for the Government's policy
in^to.rbing football hooliganism should be abandoned.     I am,
h o ^ B ’er, concerned that there could be some embarrassment as
regards holding the line of our policies outside football grounds.
If the new offence is to be introduced particular care will be
necessary over the arguments used to justify it.

You may care to discuss.




                                    ff    J PATTEN


                                C f k r w f W '
17 July 1990
                                 fav\A    w    U/io         fl/foeyvtej




                                                                      2
