                                                       7


                               cc    Ms   Snow
                                     Mr   Chilcot
                                     Mr   Moriarty
                                     Mr   Boys Smith
                                     Mr   Turney
                                     Mr   Mower

                                     Mr Soden
                                     Mr Mould
                                     Mr Lidington


Mr Walters



HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY



Sir Clive Whitmore has discussed with the secretary to the
inquiry, Mr Whalley, Lord Justice Taylor's plans for work on
the second stage of the Hillsborough stadium disaster inquiry.
Mr Whalley agreed with Sir Clive Whitmore that there was no
need for Lord Justice Taylor to meet either Sir Clive or the
Home Secretary at this stage in the proceedings; Mr Whalley
would consider with Lord Justice Taylor whether the judge
would find it helpful to have such a meeting in early
December.

2.    Sir Peter Taylor still aims to submit his final ..report in
              Lord Justice Taylor has been reading evidence
g ^ ^ Y E e d tQ the inquiry by interested parties. He and the
assessors have been visiting various sports grounds and
matches. Coverage will include Wales and Scotland. They have
concentrated on football although other sports have also been
covered. They have not visited grounds which only attract
small crowds or where danger lay in the sport itself rather
than in large crowds, for example motor racing but will be
considering the impact of any recommendations on smaller
clubs. Sir Peter will also visit some European grounds but he
doubts the need to go further afield. Meetings to receive
oral evidence are being arranged for October and November.
Separate sessions have already been fixed to hear evidence
from Home Office officials, Environment officials and ACPO and
arrangements will be made for the Football Association and
league and football supporters' organisations to present
evidence. So faqr MjPs representing Liverpool constituencies
have not indicated       wish to give evidence.   Mr Blunkett has
contacted the inquiry and made it clear that he expects to be
seen. Lord Justice*Taylor does not intend to see individual
MPs but is minded to invite the All Party Football Committee
to supplement their written evidence with an oral briefing.
Mr Blunkett has been invited to send in any points in writing
direct to the Inquiry or via the All Party Committee.

3. On identity card schemes Lord Justice Taylor will now be
discussing evidence from the DOE with them. We understand
that having visited several matches and seen the arrangements
necessary to control the behaviour of away-team fans he is
sympathetic for the need for some improved means of
controlling fans. He is considering asking the Football
Association and supporters' organisation what alternatives to
a membership scheme they would propose which would meet the
Government's objectives.

4. A working party has been established under the
chairmanship of Professor Maunder to consider deficiencies in
the green guide. To ensure that work progresses rapidly
membership has been kept small and does not include a
representative of the police/ fire service or, formally, local
authorities (the Liverpool City surveyor who assisted the
first stage of the inquiry is a member of the party).  If a
police input is needed the intention is to invite an ad hoc
member to attend. The working party will seek to identify
areas of weakness in the present guide and in particular to
clarify passages which are at present vague or unclear. The
working party will not look into such areas as management
responsibility for carrying out advice contained in the guide.

5. Sir Clive Whitmore will meet Mr Whalley again in November
to discuss progress on the inquiry.




                             R G Yates
                             Private Secretary
                             19 October 1989
i




    m
