                                                     fflnm
                                                     YORK CITY FC
                                                               F o u n d ed 1922
                                         Y o rk C ity A sso ciatio n F o o tb a ll & A th letic C lub Pic
                                                      Bootham Crescent, York Y 0 3 7A Q
           M D B S /K ' S                                   Telephone   0904 6244-17                   6 t h O c to b e r 1989



           Rt. Hon. Sir Peter Taylor
           Supreme Court Department and Office
           Royal Court of Justice
           London
           WC2A 2LL



           Dear Lord Justice,

           I am writing to you as Chairman of the Associate Member Clubs of the
           Football League.   Since the publication of the Interim report arising
           from your Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, the Football
           League, including the Associate Members of the Football League, that
           is the Clubs forming the 3rd and 4th Divisions, have been endeavouring
           to comply with what we believe to be the intention and the spirit of
           your interim recommendations.

           Unfortunately we have been faced by wildly varying interpretations of
           these interim recommendations by the Licensing Authorities and the Police.

           We for our part have started from the basic premise contained in Paragraph
           311 of your Report in which you state "...the real cause of the Hillsborough
           disaster was overcrowding and it is against that danger that my interim
           recommendations are primarily directed".   We have also had in mind
           that the "main thrust of the interim recommendations as a holding exercise
           is to reduce numbers on the terraces to increase vigilance and to achieve
           a proper balance in crowd control between prevention of disorder and
           maintenance of safety".

         It has become apparant that most of the Licensing Authorities and the
         Police are working on the principle that every match at each 3rd and
       \ 4th Division ground is going to be attended by a capacity crowd for
       I that particular ground.   The average attendance in the 3rd Division
       j last season was 5500 and the average capacity is 20,000.   In the 4th
         Division the average crowd last season was 3200 and the avarage capacity
         is 12,000.

         On the basis of these figures it is clear that at an average 3rd or
         4th Division game there is not the slightest chance of a disaster occurring
         due to 'overcrowding'.   In our opinion there is a need for a degree
       f of applied commonsence but we fear that this will not prove possible
       t unless some guidance is given by you in due course.


                                                                                                            cont....

                                    Registered office as above address Registered number 183969 England

Directors: M .D.B. Sinclair (Chairman) D .M . Craig OBE JP B.A. Houghton J.E.H. Quickfall FCA R.B. Strachan M A LLB FCIS E.B. Swallow C. W ebb

                            President; J.R. G reenw ay M P Club Secretary; K. Usher Company Secretary: I.R. Fowler

              Team M an ager: J.C. Bird Telephone 32858 Lottery Office: Telephone 52409 Commercial O ffice: Telephone 645941
4




                                                                        2.


    The following   examples are typical of what is happening:-

    1.   Additional police officers (i.e. additional to the numbers who
         have previously been allocated to the category of game involved)
         are being drafted in to stand at gates in perimeter fences where
         there is seated accommodation despite the fact that your report
         is conceFriedwith the terracing.   Frequently police officers
         are standing at gates where the spectators occupy only a small
         percentage of the seats available.

    2.   Aditional police officers are being drafted into games to stand
          in front of perimeter gates where the number of standing spectators
          is on average less than 20% of the permitted capacity even after
          the 15% reduction contained in your recommendations.   These gates
          are also being kept fully opened when with the crowd involved
          it would really be better to have it unlocked rather than standing
          open bearing in mind it is important "to achieve a proper balance
          in crowd control between prevention of disorder and maintenance
          of safety".

    3.   Additional police officers are being drafted into games to stand
          in front of gates contained in boundary fences fronting the home
          spectators area.    The boundary fence in these cases being in
          the order of just over one metre high, as distinct from perimeter
          fences to prevent unruly crowds getting onto the playing area
          which are over -2 meters high.

    When there is a possibility of a capacity crowd or a crowd approaching
    capacity in any section of the ground there is clearly a need to have
    in being your interim recommendations but surely there is a need for
    discretion and common sense during the other times which after all make
    up over 90% of the games in the 3rd and 4th Divisions.

    On behalf of the Associate Members of the Football League I would therefore
    ask you consider the above and, if you feel it appropriate, make a distinction
    between recommendations which are unqualified and applicable to all
    matches and those which are dependent on certain specific relevant factors
    such as:-

          a) the likely attendance at the match
          b) the height of the boundary fencing
          c) whether or not a particular section of the ground is for
             standing or seated spectators

    It is the opinion of the Associate Members that if the recommendations
    were to take account of these factors the conclusion of agreements between
    Clubs and their police authorities would be greatly facilitated.   Indeed
    it would be of considerable assistance if you felt able to issue supplementary
    guidelines relating to such agreements at an early stage rather than
    wait until the final report is published.


                                                            cont....
The Associate Members are very mindful of the need to ensure the safety
of spectators within their grounds and to establish appropriate agreements
with the Police and the purpose of this letter is to draw your attention
to the practical problems the Clubs are experiencing because in some
instances Police Authorities are not prepared to take into account the
factors we have outlined above when seeking to implement your interim
recommendations.

If it would assist you in considering this matter you would be very
welcome to Visit either my own Club at York City or any of the other
Associate Member Clubs and if you wish to accept this invitation please
let me know and I can make the necessary arrangements.




                          Yours sincerely



                         /
                          M D B Sinclair
                          Chairman
                          Associate Members
