                                        cc      Mr Boys Smith
                                                Miss Edwards, LAB
                                                Mr Addison

Ms Ransford
FI Division


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - COMPENSATION PAYMENTS

Thank you for your minute of 8 February covering a draft reply to
the South Yorkshire Police Authority Solicitor.

In principle I agree that compensation payments should qualify
for police grant. However I enter two caveats:

     (i) South Yorkshire's £8m insurance cover includes
     bereavement damage up to the present statutory limit of
     £3,500 per person. Accordingly the Home Office would only
     pay police grant on the element of any settlement above that
     figure. Or, if you prefer, in calculating the grant due we
     would take into account the fact that South Yorkshire would
     be getting insurance monies covering the first £3,500 of
     each compensation case. So we would not expect to pay 51%
     of say £10,000 but 51% of £6,500.

     (ii) We would regard it as essential that the Home Office
     was consulted before payments in excess of £10,000 were
     going to be offered.  (Paragraph 5 of your minute takes a
     similar line).

In the light of these two points I suggest that the second and
third paragraphs of your letter be revised as follows:

Amend final sentence of the second paragraph as follows:

     "As far as the grant provision is concerned, if on legal
     advice, your authority proposes to settle a higher level
     than the statutory figure the Home Office would be prepared
     to pay grant on that element of compensation not covered by
     your Authority's insurance, provided the total compensation
     figure paid did not exceed £10,000 per person.

Amend the third paragraph to read:

     If your Authority proposes to settle at a figure in excess
     of £10,000 per case we would need to be consulted beforehand
     because of the implications for grant expenditure."




                                        FINANCE DIVISION 2
     February 1990
