From: Paul Pugh                           cc: Mr Michael
      Head of Operational Policing            Mr O’Brien
      Policy Unit                             Mr Howarth
      Room 539                                Sir Richard Wilson
      Queen Anne’s Gate                       Miss Wheldon
      S 0171-273-3141                         Mr Boys Smith
      13 June 1997                            Mr Granatt
                                              Mr Middleton LAB
                                              Ms Loudon
                                              Mr Edmundson
                                              Mr Warner
                                              Mr Owen




Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue

Taking forward the establishment of the independent review of the evidence in the
light of the letters from the Attorney General and the Lord Chancellor.

Timing

2.      Pressing - the sooner we can clear the air and announce the Inquiry the
better.

Summary

3.    Lord Irvine wrote on 6 June (attached at A) proposing Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to carry out the review. You have indicated that you would be happy to
appoint him.

4.      The Attorney General has agreed in principle with commissioning an
independent examination of the evidence but has concerns about the terms of
reference which you proposed (his letter is attached at B). He is anxious not to
compromise the statutory responsibilities which he and the DPP exercise. He wants
to make sure that the terms of reference do not appear to fetter or pre-empt their
discretion. He proposes amended terms of reference to meet that concern.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90232#l
Recommendation

5.    That you agree to the amended terms of reference proposed by the Attorney,
subject to some minor qualifications; and that you confirm that you are happy for
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be appointed. A draft letter is attached.

Consideration

6.     You wrote on 29 May to the Lord Chancellor about who would be a suitable
person to carry out the examination. He considers that it would be better not to
appoint Mr Justice Collins, who was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry, but to appoint a
senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal. He proposes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,
whom he describes as “in first class intellectual order. He has the requisite
experience; his public presence is impressive.” Home Office experience of Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith through his work in dealing with complaints against the security
services confirms the opinion expressed by the Lord Chancellor that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith is very impressive both intellectually and in public presence - although
he can be austere and lacking in warmth. You have already indicated that you
would be content to appoint him and the draft letter attached confirms that.

7.      Your letter of 5 June (attached at C) proposed terms of reference asking the
person appointed to advise on whether there is new evidence which provides
sufficient grounds for you to establish a Public Inquiry, or for the Attorney to consider
applying to the High Court for a new Inquest, or for the DPP to consider bringing
criminal charges against any person. The Attorney is concerned that terms of
reference which specifically ask the person to advise on those issues could fetter or
pre-empt the discretion which rests with him and the DPP. We anticipated this
concern when we discussed the terms of reference with you on 4 June, but the
Attorney considers that the terms of reference are still too specific and invite the
person appointed to impinge on the statutory responsibilities which rest with him and
the DPP. He raises a particular concern in relation to the possibility of any future
criminal proceedings: if a High Court Judge had publicly expressed a view that there
were grounds for criminal proceedings, such views would be likely to carry such
weight that they might be regarded as making a fair trial impossible. This last point
seems particularly telling: it would be completely counter-productive if terms of
reference which invited a Judge to make specific recommendations about criminal
proceedings were later held to make a fair trial impossible.

8.    I have consulted Home Office legal advisers, and our view is that you should
accept the Attorney’s assessment of how the terms of reference might affect the
statutory responsibilities which he and the DPP exercise. Although the terms of
reference which the Attorney proposes are not as explicit as those which we would
have liked, they still allow sufficient scope for the examination to deal with the main
issue of concern - that is, whether there is any new evidence.

9.     There are a couple of minor qualifications which he might want to raise: the
draft proposed by the Attorney makes no reference explicitly to the Home Secretary.
We think it should. Secondly, our original draft allowed for the possibility that the
Judge might comment on whether there is any other action which should be taken in


::odma\meridio\edrm#90232# 1
the public interest, beyond the specific issues covered in the terms of reference. We
think a sentence to that effect should appear in the terms of reference. The draft
letter attached at D covers these two points.

Handling

10.     If the Attorney is content with the slightly amended proposals, that should
allow the terms of reference to be agreed during the course of next week. We need
to consider when an oral statement might be made: I suggest Private Office should
sound out the business managers about possible dates. We need to take account
of when you might announce the inquiry into relations between the police and
minority ethnic communities. (Steve Wells is putting forward further advice on that in
parallel with this submission). If that inquiry is also announced by way of an oral
statement, we should keep some distance between the two announcements, so that
you are not making two oral statements announcing inquiries in the same week. We
will put forward further advice on the handling of an announcement on Hillsborough
during the course of next week, together with a first draft of an oral statement. We
need to prepare the handling of this one very carefully, but I suggest we might be
looking to an announcement at the end of the week beginning 23 June or the
following week.




                                                                        PAUL PUGH




::odma\meridio\edrm#90232#l
                                                                                       ANNEX D


DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY


The Right Hon John Morris QC MP
Attorney General


THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


Thank you for your letter of 10 June about the proposed independent examination of
the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.


I am grateful to you for your agreement in principle with what I proposed.                       I
understand your concerns about the terms of reference and the statutory
responsibilities which rest with you and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Although           I would     prefer terms     of   reference which     invited   more   explicit
recommendations, I am broadly content with the amended terms which you
proposed. I would, however, like to suggest some small changes to refer explicitly to
my role as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to advise on any
other action which should be taken in the public interest. I suggest therefore terms
of reference along the following lines:


           To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
           Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


                       (a)    To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


                       (b)    To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General
                       for the purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;
                       or




::odma\meridio\edrm#90232#l
                       (c)        To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                       police disciplinary matters;


           And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
            is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State
           for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
            (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by them
           which which may be relevant to their respective duties;                  and to advise
           whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public interest.


I would be grateful if you would confirm that you are happy with the slightly amended
version.


I am grateful to Derry Irvine for proposing that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might take
on this task. He seems to me very suitable for what we have in mind. If Derry is
able to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is willing to take on the task, I suggest
the next step might be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet officials to discuss his
requirements.                  The appropriate official is Paul Pugh, Head of the Operational
Policing Policy Unit here (0171-273 3141).


I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Lord
Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister without Portfolio, the Secretary
of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and to Sir Robin
Butler.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90232# 1
