42-2.JS
                                     /Uv (
                                         mm;
C J Anderton Esq CBE CStJ QPM CBIM                  273 2746
Chief Constable
Greater Manchester Police
PO Box 22 (S West PDO)
Chester House
Boyer Street
iMANCHESTER Ml 6 ORE                         16 February 1990




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT

On 29 January the Home Secretary made a statement in the House
about the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into
the tragedy at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989. In
his statement the Home Secretary referred to a schedule placed
in the Library of the House setting out the Government's
Tesponse to each of the xecommendations set out in Chapters 3/
4 and 5 of the report, I enclose a^copy of the schedule.
The purpose of this letter.is to ask you formally to bring the
xecommendations and-the Government's response to them to the
attention of.ACPO.. ;have jio doubt^that ACPO will wish to
encourage.chief officers to proceedsguickly to take any
necessary action to implement the xecommendations directed at
the police service. Many of the xecommendations substantially
xepeat those .made in the interim report to which the police
service made a notably prompt and positive xesponse for which
the Home Secretary was grateful.
There are a number of xecommendations to which I wish to make
particular reference.                                    __
Recommendation 11 revises to some extent interim
recommendation 4. It is now made clear that the agreement___
setting out the club's and the police's respective functions
as to crowd safety and control is seen as a statement of
intent, not a binding contract. Paragraph 214 of the report
says explicitly, *'I am content that tthe document] can be
subject to alteration without breach of contract should
circumstances so demand.” I hope that the re-formulation of
this crucial recommendation will ease the problems that I know
were seen to arise from the wording of the interim
recommendation.
Recommendations 1S and 20, dealing with the closure and
manning of gates provide greater flexibility than did the
earlier interim recommendations (9 and 10). It will now be at
local discretion whether the perimeter gates are left fully
open, partially open or closed but unlocked. Also for local
decision, by the Police Commander, will be whether the manning
of a perimeter gate should be by a police officer or a
steward. This new flexibility is no doubt desirable for
operational reasons but it does underline the need for a clear
agreement about such matters to be embodied in the statement
of intent agreed between the police and the club.
Turning to the batch of recommendations (44-58) covering
police planning .and communications, these will no doubt all
receive careful consideration, but I pick out three which are
of particular concern to the Home Office.
^Recommendation 52 dealing with the training of present and
future Police Commanders is a key one in this group. I
presume that your own sub-committee and the Training Committee
have an interest here. I understand that the Police Staff
College at Bramshill is planning to hold during 1990 a
 conference which will have as its theme the operational
-management of football matches. Within the Police Department
Gay Catto will be following up this recommendation with you or
whoever you advise her_is the appropriate contact.
 -Recommendation 53 deals.with charging for police services.
-‘James Addison will be;following up the Government's xesponse
  to this recommendation through bis normal contacts with the
ipc^ce^ervice^nd police Authorities,. ^
^Recommendation 55 for the provision of a dedicated command
 channel seems to be.crucial to effective police control. The
 Home Office has therefore made extra channels available for
^iise :at~events including1
                          'a channel for command purposes.
 Information-about these channels has recently been circulated
 to forces.
Recommendations 59r63 cover co-ordination of the emergency
services. I simply wish to reiterate the Government's
response that those concerned will be urged to comply with the
one recommendation (61) which was not in the interim report.
 There-are two more general matters which call J.or some
 commentv^iTirstly,^recommendation 42, directed at clubs, calls
■for a significant change in the recruitment, training and
 eventual quality of stewarding. There are obvious
 repercussions here for the call on police resources. The Home
 Secretary made this connection in his response ‘to a question
            following his statement when he said, "I therefore wholly
            applaud Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation that stewards
            should be trained so that fewer police officers are required
            at grounds".
            Second, Taylor's recommendations (70-73) for some new offences
            and penalties call for careful study. The Home Secretary has
            said that he will be examining these recommendations as a
            matter of urgency. John Goddard will shortly be writing to
            you separately about this but I can say now that we shall want
            to take careful account of ACPO's views on the enforceability
            *
            and resource implications for the police of implementing these
            recommendations.
            If you think it would be helpful to discuss .any of the matters
            raised in this letter or any other issues arising from the
            Taylor report I should be glad to arrange a .meeting here with
            those concerned. “ We shall, of course, be reporting back to
            Ministers on the response by the police service to Taylor in
            due course and a meeting with you at that stage, perhaps after
            Easter, would provide a convenient opportunity for you to
            bring us up to date. In the meantime, we will be meeting at
            the NFIU Steering Committee on 26 February, and you might like
            a preliminary informal word then.




.;iV: v .
                                          s w boys.smith :;v'-vv ■             \
                                          Police Department it ^

                                                                         V--




                                                ..   :       - r - -   . .         r   —   V   '•




  'Ticc ‘ Mr Chilcot
  :'--    Mr Hammond                                                    • "i-



  - -- "-HMCIC
          Mr Addison
          Mr Goddard
          Mrs Reisz ...
        i-Mr.s Catto            r£ijL*
          Mr Cane
          Miss Goose
          Mr Cogbill
