      SCRUTINY OF EVIDENCE
        RELATING TO THE
 HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM
            DISASTER




                           BY
          THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




Cm 3878
APPENDIX 7

COMMENTS ON AMENDED SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
STATEMENTS



Chief Inspector Creaser


Mr Creaser’s original statement contained the following passage:
      “A t approximately 12 noon I visited the Police Control Room and there spoke to
      Superintendent Murray. I asked him if he had any preference as to the manner in
      which the spectators should be allowed to fill the Leppings Lane terraces. I was
      informed that the filling o f the fenced pens would be allowed to take place in a
      natural fashion and that no control would be exercised by the Police on the
      supporters regarding which particular pen would be filled. This instruction was
      exactly in line with the instruction given the previous year, when Liverpool
      supporters had occupied the same parts o f the stadium. I only raised this question
      because I was aware that on previous occasions different methods had been used to
      accommodate spectators”.

The solicitors advised—
       “I feel that the comment about packing the pens on page 4 should either be
       expanded to include detail o f when (in his experience) this had been done, or the
       entire section dealing with this should be deleted”.

In the event the passage was deleted from Mr Creaser’s statement. The whole question
of whether supporters should be allowed to find their own level or pens filled
sequentially was an important one and considered at length by Lord Taylor. He made
findings critical of the policy of allowing supporters to find their own level. In my
opinion this passage is factual—it may have called for some elaboration but it should
not have been omitted.


But PS Goddard’s statement also refers to this conversation. He says:
      “Inspector Creaser came into the Control Box and asked Superintendent Murray
      about the Leppings Lane terraces and it was stated by Superintendent Murray that
      the standing fans would find their own levels in the pens rather than trying to fill
      one pen at a time. ”

Although the solicitors suggested this might be reconsidered, it was left in.
P C 446 Groome

Apart from Mr Frost’s statement, this statement was more extensively altered than any
other:
       Deleted— “An officer o f Inspector Calvert’s experience o f policing would have
       been far better placed at the Leppings Lane end o f the ground
      Deleted— “The control room seemed to have been hit by some sort o f paralysis”
      Amended— “It was noticeable that the only supervisory officers above the rank o f
      Inspector on the pitch were Chief Inspectors Beal and Sumner and
      Superintendent Greenwood. Certain supervisory officers were conspicuous by
      their absence. It was utter chaos. ” This was changed to “On the pitch were Chief
      Inspectors Beal and Sumner and Superintendent Greenwood . The words in
      italics were deleted.
      Deleted—“Why, during the period 2.00 and 2.45 pm when the Leppings Lane end
      and the West Stand were not very full, except for the centre pen, was the kick-off
      not put back and the delay broadcast to the supporters outside. You cannot pass
      30-40 thousand through the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end in one hour. A t 2
      pm I would estimate that only 12,000 were in the ground.
       Why was there a 10 per cent reduction in manpower from the previous semi-final in
       1988. 80 more police officers at the Leppings Lane end could have made a
       difference, filtering fans at the Leppings Lane end. Approximately 980 officers
       were used for the semi-final in 1988,1,000for the semi-final in 1987 and 1,200for
       the semi-final between Wolves and Spurs.
       The control room staff are not used to working in the pressure o f a control room.
       The staff for control room duties should be from weekly leave staff or mornings, as
       they are used to making decisions under pressure.
       ... The policing at Hillsborough has become complacent over the least (sic) 2-3
       years
       . .. various officers working the track and in the ground had warned that things
       were starting to go wrong over this period, yet no action was taken. Manpower
       levels were steadily cut...
       The decision to replace Chief Superintendent Mole before the semi-final needs to
       come under some scrutiny. This man had many years experience o f policing big
       matches at Hillsborough. ”.

 Although these criticisms are trenchantly expressed they are all matters of opinion and
 comment (the underlying factual matters are not necessarily correct). They were all
 matters which were considered at length in Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, where findings
 adverse to the police were made.
PC 115 Huckstepp

Omitted was:
      “The crush outside the ground could have been better controlled with more police
      officers and a better regulation o f the flow o f fans. .. knowing the ground as I do
      and how the Leppings Lane end fills up it might possibly have been better to direct
      the fans coming in through the open gates into the flank areas. ”


This is a pure statement of opinion, but it might suggest that other methods of filtering
supporters had been used in the past. There seems to have been some confusion in this
case between the police and the solicitors. In a letter of 12 May 1989 the solicitors
recommended removal of comment from a statement by a PC “Hickstep”. There was no
such person, and the solicitors presumably meant PC Huckstepp (whose handwritten
statement was evidently processed in the South Yorkshire Police typing pool on 7 May).

The unamended version of PC Huckstepp’s statement went to the West Midlands Police
and Lord Taylor’s Inquiry—they saw the passage in italics above and PC Huckstepp was
cross-examined on the point (Day 15, page 113).


PC 1669 Walpole

The original statement contained this passage:
       “By 2.55 pm the central pen for standing at the Leppings Lane end appeared to be
      absolutely packed solid whilst the pen towards the Police Control was about half
      full and the pen towards the North Stand was perhaps only one sixth full. For
      normal big games the standing fans at the Leppings Lane terrace have filled each
      pen slowly well before kick off. I did not hear any radio messagefo r the entrance
      to the central pen to be closed off, despite this being packed solid ”

In the amended version the last sentence (which I have emphasised) is omitted. It can
probably be regarded as comment; but it does carry with it the implication that in the
past the centre pens had been closed off, though I doubt whether this adds much to the
preceding sentence.

A number of comments at the end of the statement were in my view properly excluded.
Inspector White

A somewhat similar point can be made in the case of an omission from this officer’s
original statement:
       “During the briefing no mention was made about the tunnel gates being used to
       control ingress o f the crowd. Although on rare occasions in the past I have used the
       gates nearest the concourses to control flow away from the tunnel around to the
       south pen. I did this only for a few moments merely as a psychological support to
       turn the fans round to the south pen. I would not use them for any length o f time as
       when they are in the closed position they would be an obstruction in an emergency
       evacuation situation as they would have to be opened against the crowd and also
       because this is the only ingress/egress for fans in the central pens to get to the snack
       bar and toilets. ”


PC 1842 Brookes

A similar point arises here. The following passage was omitted:
      “Why were the sliding doors at the back o f the tunnel not closed at 2.45 when those
      sections o f the ground were full as at the Manchester United match this season. ”


This is comment, but contains factual material about what happened previously. But PC
Brookes’s reference to “sliding doors” is unclear—the doors at the back of the tunnel
were hinged, not sliding, and could not safely be used when spectators were in pens 3
and 4 because they might impede escape. But moveable barriers had previously been
used. It might have been better to seek clarification of this part of PC Brookes’s
statement rather than exclude it.


PC 2102 Eustis


Deleted is the following:
      “I remember that last year the crush behind the goal was immense and was
      appalled that people would stand being in amongst people so tightly packed.
      Whenever anything happened on the field for example the Liverpool goals last year
      the crowd in the pens below us at Leppings Lane just became a sea o f waves the
      crowd from behind pushing forward time and again to create waves o f people. I
      passed comment to fellow officers last year about how glad I was not to be in
      amongst the crowd. ”

This is a factual statement, although it seems to be at variance with other evidence,
including that of the supporters who had by the time PC Eustis” statement came to be
considered (5 June 1989) already given evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and made no
particular criticism of the condition in the pens in 1988.1 think it might have been better
to invite PC Eustis to reconsider this passage rather than delete it.
PS Crawford


The solicitors suggested review of part of Sergeant Crawford’s statement, with the result
that the following was omitted—
      “Ipersonally thought we were very light on manpower at this end compared with
      previous years.
      I have worked this end o f the ground either outside the turnstiles, inside searching
      or in the West Stand for several years at Cup ties, FA Cup Semi-Finals and league
      matches with a lot more manpower. In fact I have seen more manpower at this end
      during league matches. Normally we have had a serial at the centre tunnel to direct
      fans to the North or South pens when the Centre pens had been filled. This was not
      the case at this match and several o f my serial remarked on this. ”

His personal feelings are irrelevant, and the numbers of police on duty are a matter of
record. But his past experience relating to the shutting of the centre pens is a question of
fact. It may be that the solicitors saw some confusion in this part of his statement
between what happened at League games as opposed to FA Cup semi-finals. If so, it
would have been better to ask him to clarify the point.

P C 2302 Powell


Referring to the position in Leppings Lane at 2.45 pm, the following passage is omitted:
       “The first thing I said was, “Where are all the bobbies, there’s hardly anybody
      there”. I saw numerous people climbing over the tops o f the turnstiles and the few
      Police Officers that I saw appeared to be doing nothing about it. My main
      observation at this point was the lack o f Police presence. I couldn’t understand how
      such a large crowd could have possibly gathered. I recall in previous games there
       was usually a large Police presence concentrated on this part o f the ground usually
      forming some sort o f cordon.”

This passage contains material about PC Powell’s own feelings, which are irrelevant.
But the reference to the cordon is an assertion of fact, although the statement is
somewhat vague as to where it was. The question of a police cordon (on Leppings Lane)
was an important issue at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, over which he criticised the police.


P C 2547Ramsden


The solicitors advised the deletion of the following:
      “I also felt in relation to the entrance outside Leppings Lane end that there should
      have been some sort o f semi-sterile area. We, that is Rotherham officers, had this
      particular duty for the FA Cup Semi-Final in 1987 which was played between
      Leeds United and Coventry City.
      On this occasion we kept the crowds back outside the metal railings and gates to
      allow myself and other officers to carry out searches etc. Also there seemed to be a
      general lack ofinformation coming from within the ground from ground control
      via the radio or the public address system, either giving information to us, or
      information and requests etc., to the crowd. ”

This is another statement in which comment (the first sentence) and fact are
intertwined. In fact only the first two sentences were deleted.

The result was that the previous occasion was not identified, although the substance of
what happened was retained. The point is perhaps a minor one since anyone reading the
statement would ask—what omission is referred to? Comments at the end of the
statement were in my view properly excluded.
