             THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
             Room 528
             50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
             Direct Line 0171 273 4046   Fax 4028



Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                      Your reference:
Royal Courts of Justice
LONDON WC2A2LL                                                 Our reference:

                                                               Date:              July 1997




HILLSBOROUGH

I attach some material which you may wish to see, at this early stage, before starting to look
at documents. This is

        a)       a full copy of your terms of reference;

        b)       the Hansard text of the Home Secretary’s announcement of your scrutiny
                 exercise on 30 June, and the debate about it;

        c)       press cuttings, mainly from Liverpool and Sheffield papers, following the
                 Home Secretary’s announcement.

2.     I will forward more substantive material in time for you to begin to look at it on
Monday. This will consist of material which the Home Office has received from the
Hillsborough Family Support Group and from the South Yorkshire police, together with other
recent material on Home Office files.

 Contacts

 3.     I have, in a preliminary way, telephoned South Yorkshire Police, the Crown
 Prosecution Service, the Chairman of the Police Complaints Authority and the Attorney
 General’s Office to introduce myself as Secretary of the Inquiry and to give them a contact
 point.

 4.     The police said that they have recently had a number of letters from Sheffield people
 commenting on alleged drunkenness among Liverpool supporters on the afternoon of the
 disaster - the writers say they have not come forward before. The police will ask these
 correspondents if they would like this material forwarded to you, and will send it on unless
 the reply is that they would not like you to see it.

  5.     I think we might hear quite a lot more of this sort of thing from the police before the
 scrutiny is finished.
6.       I have not as yet contacted any representatives of the families. I have contact points in
the solicitor and chairman, etc., of the Hillsborough Families Support Group. My initial
thought is that I might first get in touch with the solicitor by telephone, following up with a
letter.

7.      I attach a draft of this letter. Would you be content for me to proceed in this way?

Title

8.     Finally at this early stage there is the very minor question of what this exercise should
be called, on letterheads and so on. There are a number of options - ‘The Hillsborough
Scrutiny’ seems short and sensible. You will see the result at the head of this letter. Our
phone, fax and room numbers will however change when we have moved onto the 11th floor
here in September.

9.      Are you content with ‘The Hillsborough Scrutiny’?




C F BONE
