                                                                                        &

                                                QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT




The Rt Hon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand
LONDON
W C 2 A 2LL




                                                       /


I am glad that you have been able to begin work on Hillsborough, and I have
seen the helpful statement which you issued to the press. I understand that you
have discussed with Paul Pugh some concerns about the disclosure of evidence
submitted to you, and I thought it would be helpful to set out my understanding
of the position.

As you know, one of the main concerns of the families has been w h at they
believe to be concealment of material evidence. It is important therefore that all
interested parties can be reassured in relation to your work that no material
evidence will be withheld from them. The outcome of your scrutiny, and the
reasons for whatever conclusions are reached, should be as open as possible.

For that reason, I have given a commitment to publish your report and as far as
possible make public documentary evidence considered by you. Much of the
documentary evidence is already in the public domain; but even for material
which is not already public, including written submissions which may be
prepared specifically for your scrutiny, my intention is to make that material
public as far as possible - unless in relation to particular pieces of evidence there
are good reasons w h y it should not be disclosed.

I know that you were concerned particularly about the transcripts of any
meetings which you may hold. I agree that the records of meetings which are
held in private, with no cross examination of witnesses, should not be generally
disclosed, and that you should include relevant oral evidence in summary form in
your report. I assume that if individuals request the transcripts of their own
meetings with you that they will receive them. Some witnesses may
themselves w ant to disclose transcripts of their meetings to third parties, but
that is a matter for them.
When you report to me it is my intention to make available publicly the
documentary evidence which you have considered, probably by placing a copy
of that material in the Library of the House of Commons. There may be some
material which it would not be right to disclose because of its potential impact
on any proceedings which might follow, or because it is of a purely personal
nature,ws or for other reasons in the public interest. When you submit your
report, therefore, I would be grateful if you would identify any documentary
material which you believe should not be disclosed and your reasons for
recommending that it should remain private.

If you would find it helpful to meet to discuss any issues arising from your work,
please contact my office and they will make arrangements.




                                 JACK STRAW
