                                                                Parly No. J 02437




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR WRITTEN ANSWER ON THURSDAY
15 APRIL 1999



Mr Frank Field (Birkenhead): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
Department, if he will place in the Library a list of all the documents (a) which
have been made available for public consultation in respect of the Hillsborough
disaster and (b) which have since been withdrawn.




DRAFT REPLY


Following my [the Home Secretary’s] announcement of the outcome of Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster, as much of the evidence
considered by the scrutiny as possible was placed in the Library of the House. The
material is comprised of:

       Transcripts of interviews with those who gave evidence to Lord Justice
       Stuart-Smith;

       Other records of discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
       transcripts were not made;

       Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses;

       Other written statements consulted at the request of the families;

       Statements by South Yorkshire Police officers (in their original and amended
       forms);

       Oral and written submissions made to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by Counsel
       and others on behalf of the Family Support Group;

       Transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s Open Meeting on 6 October and
       meeting with Counsel for the Family Support Group on 30 September;




:odma\meridio\edrm#90216# 1
       South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989 semi-finals;

       Statements by the Police Complaints Authority;

       Report produced by David Phillips of Devon & Cornwall Constabulary at
       request of South Yorkshire Police;

       Report by Noel Bume (structural engineer) at the request of South Yorkshire
       Police Authority;

       Police videotapes TB1,2,3 and 4;

       Written evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by those whom he
       consulted.


The names of those who gave written or oral evidence to the scrutiny, and those
whom Lord Justice Stuart-Smith consulted, are set out in Appendix 1 of his report.


No documents have been withdrawn from the Library.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90216# 1
BACKGROUND NOTE




Mr Field previously made representations for copies of all the material placed in the
Library of the House following Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the
Hillsborough Disaster to be placed in Liverpool Central Library. A copy of his letter
and our reply is attached. Our reply indicated that the police statements had been
returned to South Yorkshire Police and that it would be a large and costly exercise to
copy all the material again.


2.      We are not aware that any material has been withdrawn from the House
Library and it is not clear what has prompted Mr Field to believe that this may be the
case.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90216# 1
