                                                                                  DRAFT 2
                                                                      17 February 1998 17:27



                         HO M E SECRETARY’S STATEMENT
                         WEDNESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1998

                             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER




With permission Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


2      Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so many people. The families
and friends of the 96 Liverpool fans who died on 15 April 1989 have suffered
immeasurably and the whole of the nation was moved by what occurred that day.
Although it is now almost nine years since that fateful day, many of the families and others
have felt that new evidence was available which would cast new light on these events. As
Home Secretary, I was determined to do all I could to establish if that was indeed the case.


3      Within two months of the Election, on 30 June 1997 I therefore announced to the
House that the Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I had agreed to
appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal to conduct
an independent scrutiny of this matter. His terms of reference were:


       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
       Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


       (a)    to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


       (b)     to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the purpose
               of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
          (c)     to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                  disciplinary matters; and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence
                  not previously available is of such significance as to justify establishment by
                  the Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further public inquiry;
                  and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
                  previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
                  duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which should be
                  taken in the public interest.


4        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
today.


5          His scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy anddetailed examinations of the
evidence in this case. The public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered
fully the causes of the disaster and made wide ranging recommendations about crowd
control and safety at sports events which have had a profound effect on safety at football
grounds and the policing of football matches.


6         The deaths that occurred were also the subject of inquests conducted by the
Coroner for the Western District of South Yorkshire. The inquests, conducted in two
parts in April and May 1990 and between November 1990 and March 1991, involved over
80 days of public hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands
police, supervised by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were
any grounds for criminal or disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the
taking of more than 5000 statements. At a later stage in November 1993, there was a
judicial review of the coroner’s proceedings, which upheld the inquest verdict of accidental
death and the conduct of those proceedings. We have now had this further detailed
scrutiny by a senior Lord Justice of Appeal.


7          The main causes of the disaster are clear. They were identified by Lord Taylor in
his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to a single cause or
person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that “the main reason for the disaster was the



Statementrhills                                   2
failure of police control”. The South Yorkshire police have accepted the main share of
responsibility for the disaster.      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the Local
Authority were also criticised by Lord Taylor.


8         With any major disaster, it is inevitable that over the course of time some new
information may become available which was not known at the relevant time. There were
many thousands of people present at Hillsborough on that awful day and millions more
watched it on their television screens.        There will always be some new shred of
information which might be gleaned. But that does not necessarily mean that the previous
outcomes would have been any different. We must be satisfied that any re-opening of
previous proceedings would be merited, and that any new information is not simply new,
but also material to those proceedings.


9        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence which has
been put to him. He has looked equally rigorously at all the information presented to
him, by individuals and official bodies. He has produced a thorough and comprehensive
report. His clear conclusion, however, is that there is no basis on which there should be a
further public inquiry.     He also finds no basis for a renewed application to quash the
verdict of the inquest, or any material which should be put before the Director of Public
Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to re-consider the
decisions they have already taken. He concludes that none of the evidence which he was
asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence which was available to
Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.


10        I, the Attorney General and the DPP have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report very carefully. We have no reason to believe that his conclusions are wrong. This
will, I know, disappoint the families of those who died at Hillsborough and many who
have campaigned on their behalf.


11        I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough may feel betrayed
by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state of the




Statement:hills                                3
ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which resulted from the Taylor
Inquiry should mean that such a disaster will never be repeated.


12        But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough families.
As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,


          “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held
         to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent
          of losing their job”.


13        There are serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system.        The Home
Affairs Committee produced a report earlier this year which makes recommendations for
change.       I will be responding fully to that report soon.        But what happened after
Hillsborough is a prime example of why we have to improve the current arrangements.


14       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on the coroner’s proceedings after a major
disaster, which has been subject to a public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of a
Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests, published in March 1997, that the
role of the coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.


15       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith highlights in his report the exceptionally difficult task
which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I
think, unnecessary burden on him when the Taylor Report had covered substantially the
same ground. Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the system in its present
form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this kind. If no inquest had been
necessary, the Taylor inquiry, which all have accepted as an excellent report, would then
have remained unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.


16        I therefore agree in principle with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s recommendations
that there should rarely be the need for an inquest following a judicial inquiry into a major
disaster.




Statement.hills                                4
[17       This report is substantial and detailed. I appreciate that Honourable Members will
not have had the opportunity to read it fully.          With the agreement of my Right
Honourable Friend the Leader of the House, I am able to indicate that the Government
would be willing to make time available for Honourable Members to debate the report
further, if that were the wish of the House.]


18      When I established the scrutiny I said that I would do my best to ensure that the
evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published.           Most of the main
material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report. Much of
the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain, consisting of
transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor Inquiry. I am arranging
for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in the Library of
the House.


19      All Honourable Members will have the most profound sympathy with the families
and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend
what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


         “ I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
         especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could be
         done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look
         dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of
         the evidence which had previously been considered”.


20.      I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions must consider
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same light. I recognise that it will be difficult and
painful for the families of those who died to accept the conclusions of this report. But
having established this rigorous judicial scrutiny I must accept its conclusions.




Statemenfchills                                 5
