                                Hillsborough Scrutiny

General

Confident that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in which the
families and the public can have confidence.

My Rt Hon Friend, the Home Secretary, has undertaken to make public the advice
given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his report, and to take whatever action is needed
if he suggests material evidence about the disaster has been overlooked.


Will the Home Secretary extend the timescale for submissions in view o f the delays
experienced by the families in obtaining information from South Yorkshire Police?

This is entirely a matter for LJ Stuart-Smith, however he asked for any remaining
submissions to reach him by 5 December and he has indicated that he expects to
report shortly.

He has assured the Home Secretary that he has been given full access to the material
held by South Yorkshire Police and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully
the issues raised by the Family Support Group and others.


Are you aware of the families’ concern about LJ Stuart-Smith’s position in the light of
his remark in Liverpool?

The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this remark, which he made
off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it to be taken seriously. He has
made clear that the behaviour o f the fans is not the subject of the Scrutiny.


Background

The Home Secretary announced in June that he was asking Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
to conduct a scrutiny to ascertain whether there is any new evidence relating to the
1989 Hillsborough disaster which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s
inquiry, the Coroner’s inquest and the prosecuting and police disciplinary authorities.
The Judge has indicated that he will submit his report by the end o f the year.

Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to conduct a public inquiry into the Hillsborough
disaster in which 96 Liverpool fans died immediately following the tragedy in 1989.
Lord Taylor reported on both the causes of the tragedy and on his recommendations
for crowd safety at sports grounds.



Contact: Matthew Pyne - tel: 273- 2433
