           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
          Room 1106
          50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
          Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Peter Robinson                                                Your reference:
Chief Executive
Liverpool FC                                                  Our reference:
Anfield Road
LIVERPOOL L4 0TH                                               Date:      *~ IS November 1997




I thought I should write to you about the timetable for my scrutiny of evidence relating to the
Hillsborough football stadium disaster.

When the Home Secretary appointed me to carry out this task I said that I expected to be able
to let him have my report by the end of this year. My work on the scrutiny is now well
advanced. I have looked in great detail at all the points which have been put to me by the
Family Support Group and others. Unless important new evidence is presented to me I
believe that I shall be able to keep to the timetable which I outlined when I began and I would
like if at all possible to do so. I think this would be in the best interests of all concerned.

You may like to be aware that I have written to the Family Support Group, to the Chief
Officers of the South Yorkshire and West Midlands police, and to others whom I have
approached in the course of my scrutiny to let them know that it would be a great help to me
if any further evidence which parties would like to submit could be at this office by close on
Friday 5 December.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\LFC. 178
               THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
               Room 1106
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
               Direct Line 0 1 7 1 2 7 3 2 5 1 2 Fax 2007



    G H Mackrell                                                 Your reference:
    Secretary
    Sheffield Wednesday FC                                       Our reference:
    Hillsborough
    SHEFFIELD S61SW                                               Date:      O S     November 1997




           S)qCa(       XAs
    I am writing to you about the timetable for my scrutiny of evidence relating to the Hillsborough
    football stadium disaster.

    When the Home Secretary appointed me to carry out this task I said that I expected to be able
    to let him have my report by the end of this year. My work on the scrutiny is now well
    advanced. I have looked in great detail at all the points which have been put to me by the
    Family Support Group and others. Unless important new evidence is presented to me I
    believe that I shall be able to keep to the timetable which I outlined when I began and I would
    like if at all possible to do so. I think this would be in the best interests of all concerned.

    It would be a great help to me if any further evidence which parties would like to
    submit could be at this office by close on Friday 5 December. I am writing in similar
    terms to the Family Support Group, to the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire police, and to
    others whom I have approached in the course of my scrutiny.


                         Ji/L




f   LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




     G :\HILLSBOR\MAIN\SHEFFWED.177
