PETER GARRETT,
My name is Peter Je^|rey Garrett I am a Police Constable with
Merseyside Police stationed at Belle Vale Police Station in
Liverpool.   I have been a Police Officer for 11 1/2 years.


On Saturday 15th April 1989 in company with
                                    I travelled to Sheffield to
attend the F.A. Semi-final football match between Liverpool F.C.
and Nottingham Forest F.C. being staged at the Hillsborough
Stadium. I was in possession of a match ticket for admittance to
the North Stand. I was collected at my home by                  in
his motor vehicle at a little after 1000 hours.                 ^/as
already in the vehicle. After picking up               from his home
in Widnes the four of us began the journey to Sheffield.


We travelled by way of the M56 and M63 to Manchester and then by
A roads to Sheffield via Glossop and the Snake Pass. Having
travelled this particular route on many occasions in the past, I
would estimate that given reasonable driving conditions, the
maximum time for the journey would be between 1 1/2 and 1 3/4
hours. However, due to traffic congestion leaving the M63 and for
a number of miles through Bredbury and Hyde as far as Glossop,
progress was pitifully slow and the volume of traffic eventually
added something like an hour to the travelling time.


Our party eventually arrived in the Hillsborough district of
Sheffield at approximately 1300 hours and the vehicle was parked in
a side street where I knew there was a walk of about 10-12 minutes
to the Hillsborough ground.


On leaving the vehicle, myself,
            walked to a nearby Public House called The Freemasons
Arms: The pub was busy but not overly crowded. Nonetheless it took
approximately 15 minutes to be served at the bar.   At the
Freemasons Arms I drank two pints of beer and enjoyed the company
of many fellow Liverpool supporters who were all in good spirits,
occasionally singing football songs etc.   I did not see anybody in
the Pub that I would have considered to have been drunk.
                              -   2   -




Just after 1400 hours                            and I left the pub
to walk to the ground,               had left several minutes
previous to us as he had arranged to meet somebody else at
Hillsborough. The three of us then walked through the shopping
area en route to the stadium. Many of the Liverpool supporters in
the Pub had already left also, or were preparing to do so.


We arrived in Leppings Lane near to the visiting supporters'
entrances somewhere between 14.15 and 14.25 hours.   I do not recall
looking at my watch to be any more precise than that. The first
thing that I noticed at this end of the ground was that there
appeared to be no direction with regard to queuing for the
turnstiles. There was just one mass of humanity milling about in
the ante-area between the turnstiles themselves and a set of high
entrance gates at the roadside. More and more people were arriving
by the minute. Reflecting on the events that were to come later, I
can only recall seeing three or perhaps four mounted Police
Officers in the area and when I arrived these were positioned
outside the high gates in Leppings Lane itself. There were none
stationed in the area between the gates and the turnstiles, or if
there were, I have no memory of seeing them there. I then,
together wit]                  moved towards the block of
turnstiles on the left-hand side which were shown as the entrances
to the North Stand. There were 8 turnstiles in all and I saw only
two Police Officers on foot positioned immediately by them. They
obviously had no hope of trying to order any formal queues and as a
consequence the hundreds of people who were there by now were
trying to maintain some order themselves. There was some
considerable crushing and jostling for position, it was quite a
tight squeeze; so tight in fact that until I actually reached the
turnstile aperture at something like 14.50 hours, I was unable to
get my hand into my trouser pocket to take out my ticket. In this
crowd there were obviously people already in a distressed
condition; many voices were heard imploring a lessening of pushing
and emotive requests to the two Police Officers to get help to sort
the situation out.
                              -   3   -




Being a fairly robust person I did not suffer any undue discomfort
personally. I have, in fact, experienced similar situations at
many football stadia over a number of years. I do recall, however,
getting a distinct feeling of uneasiness about the situation, which
seemed to be getting more perilous rather than slackening off as
people eventually got through the turnstiles.     When I got into the
ground I had lost contact with                                  but
knew that I would meet up with them at our designated seats. What
I saw on going through the turnstiles, however, more than slightly
surprised me.


Inside the ground I saw several groups of Police Officers standing
together; it would be difficult to put an exact number on the
contingent, but certainly there were 30 or more. I had already
determined to myself that a problem existed outside the ground, the
turnstile operation had seemed exceptionally slow and, of course,
this was probably due to the lack of proper queuing. I felt
relieved that I was now actually inside but still had a gut feeling
that things were not as they should be. As I walked past the
Police Sergeant and a group of Constables I made a comment to them
that is now only too clear in my mind, I said "You lot would be
better off outside, its murder out their".      I cannot recall exactly
but I think it was the Sergeant who responded to me "It's nowt to
do with us".


I then entered C Block of the stand to find my seat,
and             were already there.        greeted me and indicated
towards the Leppings Lane enclosure and commented on how full the
centre section was compared with the two outer wing sections.
When the match commenced, which was almost immediately, I went to
sit down. It was then obvious that there was an extra person in
the row as a number of youths, three in fact, were trying to
squeeze onto two seats alongside me. I questioned their right to
be there and asked if they had got tickets, I pointed out quite
strongly that if they did not have the appropriate tickets for
those seats they had better move on.      All three then left the row.
Given that the time was now just gone 1500 hours it may be possible
that these people had come through one of the gates now known to be
                               -   4   -




have been opened and overtaken me on the way to the stand, as I had
paused briefly to purchase a match programme and then relieve
myself.   I seem to remember that just about kick-off time a large
number of people seemed to have gathered on the gangway at the
end of the row of seats I was on.


The next 50 minutes or so from the time I had seen a Police Officer
run onto the pitch to instruct the referee to adjourn the game were
quite harrowing.   Whilst, like many others around me I was aware
that there were problems with over-crowing in the centre sections
of the Leppings Lane terrace, the reality of fatalities occurring
only dawned on me when I saw firstly a group of supporters running
with a makeshift stretcher carrying an injured person and then
seeing a second group with a similar burden, but these people were
walking and the face of the person on the stretcher had been
covered with a coat. I said to 1              nainly, but generally
as an expression of disbelief, "Christ, he is dead". I then stood
and watched the procession of stretchers. I gave up counting them.
The dilemma I had was should I try to do something personally to
help or stay where I was.   The growing confusion on the pitch and
the arrival of what I thought at the time was an adequate medical
response i.e. ambulances, decided me to remain where I was. Only
after I had heard the full extent of the casualty list did I think
that me decision was the wrong one.


After the official abandonment of the game, I looked for and found
              who had been sat some dozen or so rows of seats behind
me.   I went to him and suggested that we, as officials of the
Football Supporters' Association, should make ourselves available
to assist in whatever way we could.        To do what exactly had not
been fully considered, just to do something seemed imperative.



*ootball went down onto the pitch and walked towards the now emp
Leppings Lane terrace. Near to the fence and seeing the
devastation and also shoes, clothing and scarves littering the
steps I, perhaps wrongly but emotionally, accused a group of Police
Officers of being party to murder.         The only foundation for this
                              -   5   -




allegation at the time came from seeing so many Police Officers
stood on the pitch, either in a line across the ground or
individually or in groups and apparently doing little or nothing to
relieve the chaos that had been in progress a short time before.


I then walked across the terrace and out through the tunnel behind
the centre sections of Leppings Lane.     A Liverpool supporter,
having recognised either              or myself because of our FSA
involvement, then came to our group and told us that he had heard
allegations that a gate had been broken down by fans.     I went with
this fan on his imploring to check the gates near to the turnstiles
that I had entered 1 1/2 hours or so earlier. I personally checked
the operation of them and they were completely undamaged   Mr
            a Football League Official had also by now joined us
and was present when the gate was examined.     After a discussion
with other Liverpool supporters still in the vicinity and trying to
comfort a totally distressed Police Inspector, I and the rest of
the party aforementioned, made our way to the main entrance of the
stadium and went to the press box to try and gain more information
about the exact nature of the tragedy. At some time well after
1800 hours, myself,                         driven back to Liverpool
by                |
