  E.R.
                                                         cc   Hr Nagler
                                                              Miss Stewart
         Mr Malone-Lee

         CONTINGENCY FUNDS
         1.   Thank you for your note of 4 May.     I have also seen
         Mr Nagler's response of 9 May.
         2. Because of the issue of principle to which you refer in your
         note and for the reasons set out in Mr Nagler's, I doubt that any
         approach to the Treasury seeking to establish a Departmental
         contingency fund would be successful. It might be more
         profitable to seek to persuade the Treasury to be more willing to
         accept requests for a Supplementary Estimate to meet emergency
         expenditure of the kind involved in the Hillsborough Inquiry.
         Whether other Departments would join us in an approach to the
         Treasury on this must, however, be a matter for conjecture.
         Large though it is in budget holder's terms, in Departartenfcai :
         terms the £1 million which we have had to find represents a verjr
         small proportion of the Vote as a whole. I wonder whether we and
         other Departments, if they joined us, would find ourselves on
         rather weak ground in claiming to be unable to find such a sum so
         early in the financial year. The natural Treasury response would
         be to say that they would look at every case on its merits and
         that they might tend to be more generous towards the end of the
         year if it is clear that a Department's expenditure is running
         close to provision.
            3. Mr Nagler suggests in his note that we treat the cost of the
         ^police inquiry into Hillsborough as, in effect, part of the
            Taylor Inquiry as far as payments are concerned. I do not think
  \ r      we should do this. The inquiry was actually launched by the
_■*,       Chief Constable of South Yorkshire for his purposes, which
     Jj <?/1«winclude, presumably, deciding whether or not there is any
      f ^/criminal or disciplinary liability for what happened. The Taylor
            Inquiry has decided to feed off the report by the Chief Constable,
            of taiesWest Midlands who, indeed, has indicated a willingness.
            be guided in his approach to the investigation by the Inquiry •
            itself. Nevertheless, as I understand it, the report will
            eventually be made to the South Yorkshire Police although it will
            be made available also to the Taylor Inquiry. Responsibility for
            payment must rest, therefore, primarily with the South Yorkshire
            Police Authority subject to whatever special arrangements are
            made to meet part of the cost.




                                    G K SANDIFORD
                                     22 May 1989
         Finance Division 1
         Queen Anne's Gate
         FIN 89 2/29/1
