From:       Mrs Sue McDougall                cc    Mr Maclean
            Operational Policing Policy Unit       Mr Kirkhope
            Room 525, Ext 2621                     Permanent Secretary
            19 December 1996                       Mr Boys Smith
                                                   Miss Loudon
                                                   Mr Pugh
                                                   Mr Evans ABCU
                                                   Mr Clifford
                                                   Mr Granatt
                                                   Mr Rock
                                                   Miss Whetstone




Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH - NEXT STEPS

Issue

This submission covers proposals for handling the commitment to
consider representations calling for a reopening of the inquiry
into the Hillsborough disaster.

Timing

2.   Relatives would appreciate an early reply to their letters;
drafts are attached. Timing of the substantive response about
whether the inquiry should be reopened is discussed under
timetable below.


Recommendation

3.   That you agree to the handling arrangements set out below
and that you write to the bereaved families and to Mr Kilfoyle
as attached.

Consideration

4.   In the adjournment debate on Tuesday, Mr Kilfoyle argued
that ten questions surrounding the Hillsborough tragedy were
still unanswered. These were the same questions that the makers
of the programme raised in their letter to Mr Maclean on 27
November. (A copy of the questions is attached) It appears that
the majority of these issues were fully examined by the Taylor
inquiry at the time. Some, such as why Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield was put in charge of a major semi final when he was
relatively inexperienced^are probably unanswerable.

The two issues the programme raised which,        though not included

K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
amongst the ten questions,         appear to have caused the greatest
concern a r e :

         •       the allegation that the Taylor inquiry did not see a
                 relevant video tape because the inquiry was wrongly
                 told that the tape was not working. It has been
                 implied that in withholding this evidence the police
                 were engaged, and continue to be engaged, in a cover-
                 up .

         •       the suggestion that some of the victims were still
                 alive at 3.30 pm on that afternoon, when the coroner
                 decided that he would not hear evidence about events
                 after 3.15. The Coroner is reported in the press to
                 have said that he thinks he might have been mistaken
                 in insisting on the 3.15 deadline. This has increased
                 the demands for a fresh inquest.


5.   I understand from the Attorney General's office that, at
present, the Attorney General does not consider that any new
evidence has arisen as a result of the programme. In particular,
he believes that the issue of whether the Coroner was right in
his decision to impose a 3.15 deadline was thoroughly examined
by the Divisional Court. The fact that the Coroner is reported
to have changed his mind, possibly under media pressure, is not
in itself likely to be considered a significant factor by the
Attorney when he comes to make a decision whether or not he would
support an application to the High Court to reopen the inquest.

6.   You have already indicated that you would only call for a
reopening of the inquiry if it emerged that there was new
evidence and that evidence was so significant that the outcome
of the Taylor inquiry, or of the inquest, might have been
different had it been available to them. If there were evidence
to suggest that there had indeed been some kind of police
conspiracy or cover-up this too would appear grounds for re­
opening the inquiry. You will therefore wish to satisfy yourself
that the points raised were either considered by the Taylor
inquiry, or the PCA supervised investigation, or were available
to be so considered, or, if they were not considered and not
available, were of no significance.


Timetable

7.    If you come to the conclusion that there is no new evidence,
and therefore that it will not be possible to re-open the
enquiry,   this will inevitably cause disappointment to the
families.    It   is   important   therefore    to   ensure   that
representations are properly considered and, furthermore, that
the bereaved families should believe this to be the case. This
process should not therefore be rushed. Nevertheless if too great
a time were to pass before a decision were made, it could add to
the families' frustration and in itself become a cause for
dissatisfaction.

K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
8.   We have already written to Stephen Wells, Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire, formally asking the force to investigate the
issues raised by Mr Kilfoyle in the adjournment debate; We have
also asked for a copy of the relevant video tape and the
transcript of that tape which was sent to the Taylor inquiry. I
understand that the Complaints and Discipline Department have
already started work; they have told us that they should be able
to undertake a thorough investigation of the points made by the
end of January. This will include checking the transcripts of the
Taylor inquiry to examine which issues the inquiry addressed.
Allowing a further fortnight to follow up any additional points
you would wish answered, suggests that it should be possible for
you to reach a decision about re-opening the inquiry by the
middle of February.


Handling

9.   Mr Kilfoyle asked in his letter of 6 December to meet you
in order to discuss what legal options were now open to the
families of the victims. We suggest that Mr Kilfoyle should be
sent a Private Secretary response promising that you will see him
once you have received the Chief Constable's comments.        If,
having received the Chief Constable's views, you are of the
opinion that the inquiry should not be reopened, this would
provide an opportunity to explain in person to Mr Kilfoyle why
you have made that decision and it might be helpful in persuading
the families that the matters raised have been properly examined.

10.  The programme continues to attract media interest.          We
suggest that, if needed, the line to take would be:

        The Home Secretary has given a commitment carefully to
        consider the representations made to him that the inquiry
        into the Hillsborough tragedy should be reopened. He has
        emphasised that he would not take the decision to reopen
        the inquiry lightly; he would need to be convinced that it
        would be in the public interest to do so.

        In coming to a decision he will consider whether there is
        any new evidence. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
        has undertaken to provide a report on the questions raised
        in the programme Hillsborough. The Home Secretary has said
        that he will take a decision as soon as he has been able to
        consider all the issues.




                                 SUE McDOUGALL




K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
DRAFT LETTERS FOR THE HOME SECRETARY'S SIGNATURE

Mr and Mrs S Roberts




Thank you for your letter about the tragic events at Hillsborough
in which you called for the inquiry to be reopened. I would like
to say first of all how saddened I was by this terrible disaster
and      I        fully      understand         your    desire       to    reach       a     better
understanding of how it was that Graham met his death.


In    the     House         of    Commons   I    gave    an    undertaking        to       consider
carefully the representations that have been made to reopen the
public inquiry. I emphasised that I would not take the decision
to reopen the inquiry lightly: I would need to be convinced that
it would be in the public interest to do so.


I explained that in coming to a decision I would consider whether
there        is    any new evidence,            and    if so,       whether   that         evidence
appeared to be of such significance that had it been put before
Lord Taylor or before                    the coroner,       either the outcome of               the
Taylor        inquiry        or    the    verdict      of     the   jury   wold    have        been
different.


The television programme Hillsborough made a specific allegation
that a video camera trained on the central enclose was working
when the Taylor inquiry was told that this was not the case. It
was further suggested that this film might have represented vital
evidence.           The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has informed
me that both the video tape and the transcript of that tape were
made available to the Taylor inquiry.                          This is a matter that I
have promised to look into. I have specifically asked that South
Yorkshire should provide me with a copy of this videotape.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also undertaken to
provide me with a detailed report of all the points raised                                      by
the programme. I will consider his report carefully. I fear that

K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
there may remain matters about which we will never be certain.
In a tragedy of such a magnitude I feel it is sadly inevitable,
though deeply distressing,          that there will be confusion about
some aspects of what occurred. What I must consider is whether
a further inquiry,          if it were to take place,   would be able to
provide greater certainty about what happened than we have at
present.


I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken as
soon as I have been able to consider all those issues. Meanwhile
I would like to offer you my deepest condolences for your sad
loss and the knowledge that my thoughts will be with you and all
the bereaved families during what I know must be a particularly
difficult time of the year.




K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
    Donna Carlile




    Thank      you      for      your      letters    about          the    tragic     events     at
    Hillsborough in which you called for the inquiry to be reopened.
    I would like           to say       first of all how saddened               I was by        this
    terrible disaster and I fully understand your desire to reach a
    better understanding of how it was that your brother Paul met his
    death.       I   found       your      letter    in    which      you    described     Paul's
^ ^ c h e e r f u l n e s s and joy of life deeply moving.


    When I met you in Liverpool and later in the House of Commons,
    I gave an undertaking to consider carefully the representations
    that have been made to reopen the public inquiry.                                I emphasised
    that I would not take the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly:
    I would need           to be convinced that                it would be      in the public
    interest to do so.


    I explained that in coming to a decision I would consider whether
    there     is any       new evidence,        and       if   so,    whether   that     evidence
    appeared to be of such significance that had it been put before
    Lord Taylor or before                  the coroner,        either the outcome of             the
    Taylor      inquiry         or   the    verdict       of   the    jury   would     have     been
    different.


    The television programme Hillsborough made a specific allegation
    that a video camera trained on the central enclose was working
    when the Taylor inquiry was told that this was not the case. It
    was further suggested that this film might have represented vital
    evidence.         The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has informed
    me that both the video tape and the transcript of that tape were
    made available to the Taylor inquiry.                        This is a matter that I
    have promised to look into. I have specifically asked that South
    Yorkshire should provide me with a copy of this videotape.



    K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also undertaken to
provide me with a detailed report of all the points raised            by
the programme. I will consider his report carefully. I fear that
there may remain matters about which we will never be certain.
In a tragedy of such a magnitude I feel it is sadly inevitable,
though deeply distressing,          that there will be confusion about
some aspects of what occurred. What I must consider is whether
a further inquiry,          if it were to take place,   would be able to
provide greater certainty about what happened than we have at
present.


I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken as
soon as I have been able to consider all those issues. Meanwhile
I would like to offer you my deepest condolences for your sad
loss and the knowledge that my thoughts will be with you and all
the bereaved families during what I know must be a particularly
difficult time of the year.




K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
The Rt Rev David Sheppard
Bishop of Liverpool
Church House
1 Hanover Street
Liverpool L1 3DW


Thank you for your letter about the tragic events at Hillsborough
and the calls for a public enquiry.


In    the    House          of    Commons   I   gave       an   undertaking      to   consider
carefully the representations that have been made to reopen the
public inquiry. I emphasised that I would not take the decision
to reopen the inquiry lightly: I would need to be convinced that
it would be in the public interest to do so.


I explained that in coming to a decision I would consider whether
there     is any       new evidence,            and   if    so,   whether   that      evidence
appeared to be of such significance that had it been put before
Lord Taylor or before                    the coroner,       either   the outcome of        the
Taylor       inquiry         or    the    verdict     of    the   jury   would    have    been
different.


The television programme Hillsborough made a specific allegation
that a video camera trained on the central enclose was working
when the Taylor inquiry was told that this was not the case. It
was further suggested that this film might have represented vital
evidence.         The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has informed
me that both the video tape and the transcript of that tape were
made available to the Taylor inquiry.                           This is a matter that I
have promised to look into. I have specifically asked that South
Yorkshire should provide me with a copy of this videotape.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has also undertaken to
provide me with a detailed report of all the points raised                                 by
the programme.              I will       consider his report carefully.               I fully
understand that, as you say, the drama documentary has revived
a great many feelings. I fear that there may remain matters about
which we will never be certain. In a tragedy of such a magnitude


K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
I feel it is sadly inevitable, though deeply distressing for the
families, that there will be confusion about some aspects of what
occurred. One factor which I must consider is whether a further
inquiry,       if    it were   to take place,   would be able   to provide
greater certainty about what happened than we have at present.


I shall reach a decision on any further action to be taken as
soon as I have been able to consider all those issues. Meanwhile
I hope you will pass on to the people in Liverpool the assurance
that my thoughts will be with all the bereaved families during
what I know must be a particularly difficult time of the year for
them.




K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
DRAFT LETTER FOR TREAT OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE



Thank you for your letter about the tragic events at Hillsborough
in which you called for a reopening of the public enquiry.


The Home Secretary has seen the television programme Hillsborough
and found it deeply moving and harrowing. In the House of Commons
he gave an undertaking to consider carefully the points which
were raised in the programme and the representations which have
been made to him by the bereaved families and by others. He has
emphasised that he would not take                 the decision to reopen         the
inquiry lightly but would need to be convinced that it would be
in the public interest to do so and that it would stand a chance
of providing a better understanding than there is at present of
what happened on that terrible day.


In    coming      to    his   decision   the   Home    Secretary     will   consider
whether there is any new evidence; he will also consider whether
that evidence appears to be of such significance that had it been
put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome
of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been
different.


The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has undertaken to provide
the    Home     Secretary     with   a detailed       report   of   all   the points
raised by the programme. The Home Secretary has promised that he
will reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon
as he has been able to consider all the issues.


He has emphasised that, whatever decision he comes to make, his
thoughts will remain with all the bereaved families.




K:\CRIME\L0NGSUB\SMD-0050
DRAFT LETTER FOR PRIVATE SECRETARY SIGNATURE TO MR KILFOYLE


Thank you for your letter to the Home                         Secretary    in which you
asked if he would meet you in order to discuss what options were
open to the families of the victims who would like to see a fresh
inquiry into the disaster.


As   you     will     be     aware,   the   Home    Secretary     has     undertaken     to
consider carefully the points which were made in the programme
Hillsborough,           by    yourself,     and    in   the    letters    which   he   has
received.        The Chief Constable of             South Yorkshire will          make   a
report to the Home Secretary on the separate issues. Once he has
received this report, and had an opportunity to reflect upon it,
the Home Secretary would be happy to meet you and discuss the
findings. We will be in touch at that point to arrange a meeting.




K:\CRIME\LONGSUB\SMD-0050
                       THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:

                        TEN UNRESOLVED QUESTIONS


ONE

Why was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a major semi-final
only 21 days before the game, when he was relatively inexperienced at policing
football matches?

TWO

Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and prevent a build up
outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if, as the fans insist, there were the
previous year?

THREE

Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers thought it should have
been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to get all the Liverpool
fans safety into the ground before the 3pm kick-off?

FOUR

Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane terrace when eye
witnesses, including football commentator John Motson, were aware of the problems
fifteen minutes before kick-off?

FIVE

Why wasn’t the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became full, the
procedure adopted at the previous year’s semi-final?

SIX

Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA by telling
him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the officer knew he had given the order
for it to be opened?

SEVEN

Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull down the 10 foot
spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were the gates which led on to the pitch
too small to be effective in an emergency evacuation?
EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made - either informing the fans as to what
was happening, asking for their help or for any medical personnel at the ground to
help - until 3.30pm?

NINE

Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on to the pitch where
the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained medical help?

TEN

Why did only 14 of those who died get to hospital?
