                                                       3743




        POL/89 850/4/30
        RCJ/VS




R C Johnston Esq BA IPFA
Clerk and Financial Officer
South Yorkshire Police Authority
PO Box37
Regent Street
Barnsley
South Yorkshire
S70 2PQ                                   6 November 1989




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER : COMPENSATION CLAIMS

Thank you for your letter of 27 October asking under what
circumstances and to what extent the Home Office will consider
giving   further special assistance to South Yorkshire Police
Authority in connection with uninsured compensation liabilities
which might arise from impending civil actions against the Chief
Constable.

I am afraid that it is not possible for me to give any very helpful
guidance at this stage.  We would of course consider a request for
special payment in addition to the normal police grant at any time.
But since the level of grant was raised to 51% only one such
payment - that already agreed for South Yorkshire following
Hillsborough - has been made.   I can therefore give no indication
whether a further application would be successful or not.

The two criteria which loom largest when we consider requests for
special payment are (a) whether the size of the expenditure is such
that to meet it would involve the police authority in such huge
costs that the viability of the police force would be put at risk
and (b) whether the commitment could have been foreseen (and so
budgeted for).

The problem with compensation liability following Hillsborough is
of course that, although the size and timing of the commitment are
uncertain, the likelihood of the commitment arising is foreseeable.
We would therefore expect the police authority to make provision
for it in its precept and budget, and if the timescale were
extended the impact of this might well be spread over more than one
year.  I appreciate that there are difficult and complex issues to
be taken into account here but they cannot be avoided and, apart
from their being the police authority's responsibility,         the
authority are in a better position than we are here to answer them.

While, therefore, I do not wish to close the door in advance on any
future application from your authority, I have to say that our
expectation would be that it would have taken steps to cover this
contingency from its own resources (including the grant it receives
from the Government).

I have taken your references to the precept and to the budget for
the coming year as meaning that the authority do not foresee any
payments arising in this financial year.    If, however, there were
any question of costs arising during this financial year on a scale
which seemed to the authority to call for further central
government help, we would require an estimate of the costs involved
and of how much would be recoverable from your insurers in order to
consider any application for a special payment.         However, no
guarantee can be given as to the outcome of such an application.

I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful at this stage.




                                          M J ADDISON
