                                            1 5 SEP 1989

                                                                     M/              Cj^
     Office of the Parliamentary Counsel          36 Whitehall London SW iA 2AY
                     T e le p h o n e   D i r e c t l i n e 01 210
                                        Switchboard 01 210 3000



David Russell Esq
Solicitor's Office
Department of the Environment
Room P3/103
2 Marsham Street
London
SW1P 3EB                                                              14   September 1989




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: AMENDMENTS FOR REPORT


1.     Stephen Mason has discussed your first letter of 6 September
with me and has asked me to reply.                       I enclose a set of draft
amendments for your consideration upon which I have the following
comments.      We have discussed some of these on the telephone
already.


Your point 2
2.     We are to hear from you as to whether the Chairman is to be
one of the 4, 6 or 8 members of the Board, or is to be an extra
person.


3.     Presumably the approval of the Secretary of State should
come before the election of the relevant person as Chairman, or
as the case may be to the Board, by the members of the company?
This would of course mean that the Chairman is not elected by the
members of the Board from among their number, but is elected by
the members of the company as Chairman.


4.     Is it right to provide in the Articles that the Chairman
must be independent if he needs to be approved as such by the
Secretary of State?              Would it be better if we said that the
Secretary of State may not approve anybody as Chairman unless he
is satisfied that the person in question is independent?


5.    We agreed that for the moment we should say that the
Secretary of State may withdraw the designation if he ceases to
be satisfied of the two things he must be satisfied of.       You did
not wish to require him to withdraw the designation;       and we
feared that if we said nothing it might be implied that there was
such a requirement, given that he may designate in the first
place only if he is satisfied of those things.


6.    Is the Secretary of State to be allowed to withdraw a
nomination or an approval?


Your point 5
7.    We agreed that Welsh forms should be required only in Wales.


Your point 7
8.    We are to hear further from you on this point.


Your point 8
9.    Following Richard Clayton's letter of 12 September,     the
requirement to consult now includes the local authority.


10.   The second paragraph of your point 8 remains outstanding.


Your points 9 and 10
11.   We agreed that a defence would be provided to the offence in
clause 2(1)    (other than the attempt).   You will also see a
proposed reference to emergencies in clause 5 ( 2 ) (h), and in
clause 10( 9 )(a).   There is no question therefore of the police
overriding the scheme;    if spectators are let into a ground in an
emergency it will, on the contrary, be in accordance with the
scheme.


12.   Clive Osborne has agreed that he will be content if we also
refer to emergencies in clause 9 instead of providing a defence
of lawful authority, which    (as we discussed)   raises difficult
questions which do not need to be answered on this approach.
13.     We agreed that we would do nothing with any defence to
clause 10 for the moment because the matter could       (and in our
view should) be dealt with through the licence conditions
themselves.


Your point 11
14.     In our view a turnstile operator is not a "responsible
perso n ".      A responsible person is someone who is concerned in the
"management" of "the premises" or in "the organisation of the
m a t ch " .   A turnstile operator is almost certainly not someone
concerned in the organisation of the match.        In our view
"management" connotes something rather wider than merely being in
charge of a particular entrance to the ground on a particular
occasion; and "the premises" we think means the whole premises
and not just a small part of them.        Paragraph 5 of Richard
Clayton's letter of 12 September refers to this point,       and we
shall await further instructions.


15.     Finally we shall need to come back to your second letter of
6 September.       We note that further instructions are to come on
two further points.


16.     I have sent a copy of this letter and the accompanying draft
amendments to Richard Clayton.




R J DORMER
                      CONSIDERATION OF BILL




               FOOTBALL SPE C T A T O R S BILL [LORDSj, AS AMENDED




Mr. Colin M oynihan

^   Page 1, line 14 [Clause I ], at end insert—
          ‘( ) The Secretary of State shall not make a designation under subsection (2)
        above without giving the Football M embership A uthority an opportunity to
        make representations about the proposed designation.’.

    Page 2, line 40 [Clause 2], at end insert—
           ‘( ) Where a person is charged under subsection (1) above with an offence of
        entering or remaining on premises, and was at the time of the alleged offence
        not disqualified from being a member of the national football mem bership
        scheme, it shall be a defence to prove that he was allowed to enter the premises
        as a spectator by a person [reasonably] appearing to him to have lawful
        authority to do so.’.

    Page 3, line 5 [Clause 3], at beginning insert ‘Subject to subsection (3A) below,’.

    Page 3, line 11 [Clause 3], at end insert—
          ‘(3A) The Secretary o f State shall not designate any body corporate as the
       Football M embership A uthority unless he is satisfied that its articles of
       association make provision securing—
           (a) [that its Board shall comprise a Chairm an and [four, six or eight] other
                 members, o f whom the Chairm an and half the other members are
                 persons approved by the Secretary of State (before their election as
                 Chairm an or as member, as the case may be,] and the remaining
                 members are persons nominated by the Secretary of State, and]
           (b) that the Chairm an shall be a person who has no such financial or other
                 interest as is likely to affect prejudicially the perform ance of his
                functions as Chairman;
       and he [may] withdraw the designation of that body if he ceases to be so
       satisfied.
         (3B) The Secretary o f State shall, before making any nomination to the
       Board, consult such persons as appear to him to represent the interests of
       football supporters.
         [(3C) The Secretary o f State may withdraw his nomination or approval of any
       mem ber of the Board.’.]

    Page 3, line 34 [Clause 3], at end insert—




                                            14Scpt89.jl84
                                               (2 )


       ‘( ) Where the Secretary of State withdraws the designation of a body as the
    Football M embership Authority, he shall, when it appears to him to be
    appropriate to do so, lay before each House of Parliament a report stating his
    reasons for the withdrawal.’.

Page  3, line 47    [Clause 4],   after   ‘Association’ insert ‘,   the   Welsh   Football
   Association’.

Page 5, line 12 [Clause 5], at end insert ‘and requiring that in Wales any application
   form for membership of the scheme shall also be available in Welsh’.

Page 5, line 15 [Clause 5], after ‘that’ insert ‘, except in an em ergency,’.

Page 6, line 44 [Clause 7], leave out from ‘with’ to end of line and insert ‘the date
   of the conviction.’.

Page 7, line 9 [Clause 7], after ‘c ourt’ insert—
                   ‘(O’.

Page 7, line 10 [Clause 7], at end insert—
                   ‘(ii) shall explain to him the effect of the conviction as respects
                disqualification     from   membership   of the    national   football
                membership scheme; an d ’.

Page 8, line 7 [Clause 9], after ‘prove’ insert ‘either that the spectators were
   admitted in an emergency or’.

Page 8, line 31 [Clause 10], at end insert—
      ‘( ) A licence to admit spectators may also include conditions requiring
    specified descriptions of spectators to be refused admittance to the premises to
    watch designated football matches, or specified descriptions of designated
    football matches or a particular such match.’.

Page 9, line 15 [Clause 10], after ‘that’ insert ‘, except (in the case of the
   procedures) in an emergency,’.

Page 11, line 23 [Clause 13], at end insert—
       ‘( ) Before exercising its power under subsection (2) above to require the
    inclusion of specified terms and conditions in any safety certificate, the
    licensing authority shall consult the local authority, the chief officer o f police
    and either the fire authority (where the local authority is in G reater London or •"
    a metropolitan county) or the building authority (in any other case).
       ( ) As respects those terms and conditions, the local authority need not
    consult the chief officer of police, the fire authority or the building authority
    under section [3(3)] or 4(8) o f the Safety of Sports G rounds Act 1975 [before
    issuing a safety certificate or] about any proposal to amend or replace [one].’.

Title, line 1, after ‘admission’ insert ‘and provide for the safety’.

Title, line 4, leave out ‘by designated agencies’.




                                          14Scpt89.jl84
