INQUIRY     INTO         THE        HILLSBQROUGH

          iXADIUM               D IS A S T E R




                        Before


              LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR




                 MR. B. JOHNSON
    (Chief Constable, Lancashire Constabulary)

                          and

                PROF.    L. MAUNDER.

                   (ASSESSORS)




                          At

                 The Town Hall,

                   Sheffield,

                          on

           Tuesday,     6th June,    1989.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

               (Morning        Session)



     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                     (Morning S e s s i o n )

                                                Page

G. SYKES Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                     1
     Cross-Examined by M r . Hytner              7
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Jackson              12
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Maxwell              13
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Kallipetis           14
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow              17
     Cross-Examined by M r . Woodward           18
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                 26
     By Lord Justice Taylor                     26

R. PURDY Called

     Examined by Mr., Goldsack                  27
     Cross-Examined by M r . Hytner             33
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Muller               36
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Kallipetis           37b
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Glasgow              39
     By Lord Justice Taylor                     43
     Cross-Examined by M r . Woodward           44
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                 49


S. ELLIS Called

     Examined by Mr. Phillips                   50
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Woodward             56
     Re-Examined by Mr. Collins                 61

J. BENNETT Called

     Examined by Mr. Collins                    61
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Hytner               67
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Kallipetis           68
             FIFTEENTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               TUESDAY. 6th JUNE, 1989

                     (MORNING SESSION)


            INSPECTOR GORDON SYKES Called

               Examined by MR. COLLINS:

Inspector Gordon Sykes, is that right? - A. Yes sir.

You I think were the Inspector in charge together with
Mr. Purdy of 16-19 inclusive? - A. Yes sir.

Have you fot Tab 14 of the larger Police bundle please which
is the Operation Order.  If you could find Serial 16 onwards
which is about a third of the way through, the page headed
"Sub-sector 8 Inspector Sykes/Inspector Purdy".  Now you
were in charge between you of four serials? three of them
had specific duties in relation to Turnstiles A-G, 1-8 and
9-16 respectively? - A. Yes sir.

And the third was a sort of spare.  Is that right? - A. That
was to use as coach reception, any coaches or buses that
came to the ground and just general .duties as directed by
me.
Now all these Serials, were they to be located outside the
turnstiles? - A. Yes sir, to supervise the fans coming
through.

You were under the control of the Ground Commanderr is that
correct, that is Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Yes sir.

When you instructed the Serials, 16, 17 and 18 were to     ^
"prevent unlawful access and ensure queues would be formed".
Is that correct? - A. Yes sir, queues insomuch that people
went to the correct turnstiles.

Was it part of   their duty as you understood it to marshal
people so that  they should stand in queues or didn't it go
as far as that? - A. No, on a maximum gate at Hillsborough
it is impossible to have formal queues at individual turn­
stiles.  It is just a general queue to the general turnstiles.

So what actually is their function in relation to the duty
which says:  "ensure orderly queues are formed"? What
actually can they do? - A. Ensure that people go to the
correct turnstiles and they search them as they go through
as best they can and try and prevent crushing or whatever
at the turnstiles.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    It may be my fault, Mr. Collins,
but I have not  <nj4tfe®homed in on this.  It is Serial 16?

      MR. COLLINS:     Sub-sector 8   of Serial 16.
                                  G. SYKES


Mr. Sykes, what I was just exploring with you was precisely
what in the light of a full house expected, what actually
your Officers could do in relation to ensuring orderly
queues were formed? - A. Orderly queues are quite impossible.
If you are talking about one or two people on a turnstile
then on a gate of maximum capacity it is impossible.

So when the Operation Order says:  "They will ensure orderly
queues are formed", you might as well forget about those
last words because they are completely unenforceable.  Is
that right? - A. "Orderly queues" it means people going to
the general turnstile area, which they would.

So are you saying that the words in the Operation Order
"And ensure orderly queues are formed" might as well not
be there? - A. Yes sir.

Is that something you told your superiors that it really
was a pointless part of the Operation Order? - A. No sir,
we just accepted the order.

You just accepted the order but realised that it was wholly
unenforceable? - A. Yes sir.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  That is at the best of times,
is it? I mean even on a league game? - A. On a league game
it depends on the away supporters that are attending.  If
there is only 100/150 then there is absolutely no problem,
you can form a queue, but with the layout of the ground and
the capacity it is impossible.

      MR. COLLINS: What you are saying is if there is going
to be a full house that particular instruction is pointless?
- A. Yes sir.

What about the "maintaining of order". What does that
involve? - A. That involves ensuring that people approach
the turnstiles as best they can with tickets; no missiles;
no banners; people were not too drunk and in the Officers
estimation would not cause a problem*on entering the ground.

That is 16-18.   19 had, I think as you put it, a roving
commission as it were? — A. Yes sir. There are coaches
which get through the road blocks and so forth or from
the coach reception.   They stop at the turnstiles and
they ensure that the people get off the coaches and go
into the ground.

What about monitoring people.   I think you expected, did you
not, that a certain number of fans would turn up having
had drink? - A. Yes sir, from my experience of semi-final
day it is more of a carnival day and people turn out in
large numbers and have been drinking.

Is that something you raised with your Serials? - A. Yes sir,
I made that particular point to my Serials, that normally
                                   G. SYKES


at Hillsborough anyone who has been drinking or shows any
sign of intoxication is not allowed into the ground.   I
told them on this particular day that people would be
arriving under the influence of drink and that we would have
to relax the rules slightly,and that they would have to be
extremely drunk to the state of not being able to look
after themselves or likely to cause trouble before we refused
admission.

I suppose also one of the problems is that if you arrest
 people for whatever, you deplete your manpower? - A. That
is particularly the purpose as to why I gave them that
instruction, sir.

Did you^ive   any instructions as to what they should do in
relation to   the people turning up without tickets if they
came across   them? - A. Yes sir, that the people would be
turned away   from the area the best that we could.

Did you tell your Officers if there was a problem with
people crowding in at the turnstiles it would be the use
of Police horses which would endeavour to deal with that?
- A. Yes sir, I have done that in the past on occasions
like this where there is crushing at the turnstiles and
we put Police horses in there to try and restrict the
flow.  I told them if that occurred on this occasion that
is what I would endeavour to do.

I think you also provided, did you not, large dust bin
bags in order to receive cans of whatever, drink and so
on? - A. Yes sir, there were black polythene sacks and
dust bins outside the turnstiles to put banners, bottles,
cans of beer and spirits which people bring to the turn­
stile and they put them straight into the receptacles
provided.

Are you aware at one stage of a problem inv©lving ticket
touts? - A. Yes sir.  I received a radio message from
Ground Control that ticket touts were in fact operating
in Leppings Lane.  I have no idea where it was and there
were some CID Officers nearby and I asked them to patrol
Leppings Lane to see if they could identify the touts.

The upshot was, I think, that you had one of them arrested
for obstruction? - A. Yes sir. When I identified the tout
I caused P.C. Roberts one of my Officers to arrest the
tout for obstructing the pavement.




                           /Q. That is, is it not, one
                             4




                                            G.   SYKES


Q.   That is, is it not, one of the major problems of ticket-
     touts, that they do cause o bstruction and they also
     e ncourage people to come without tickets in the hope of
     getting tickets?    A.   Yes, sir, that is tnae.

Q    Which adds to the Police problems,   and indeed everyone's
     problems at or around the grounds.     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   The reason I am putting that is that, as you know, there
     are some quarters who seem to think t ic ket-touting is a
     good a pp li cation of market forces.    You would disagree
     p rofoundly with that, I take it?     A.    Well, it may be
     to them, sir, but it is a problem to me, trying to police
     a football ground.

Q.   I think as time wore on we know that problems began to
     arise and that by half past two the situation had got
     such that there was really a crowd and virtually an
     u nm an ageable crowd outside the turnstiles;   is that a
     fair ---?      A.   Yes, sir, a large crowd had built up
     at the turnstiles.

Q    Could you see how that happened or why that happened?
     A.   I could only ---   I saw ---   I had been to the
     ground earlier and I had seen people jumping over the
     turnstiles without paying.

Q.   That is nothing new, is it?   A.   Well, I have not seen
     it before at Hillsborough.   And also coming under the
     legs of people who were in the turnstile, so this was, in
     fact, causing the flow rate through the turnstiles to
     slow down.

Q. And you think that the flow rate partly contri bu te d to
   the b uild-up?  A.   Yes, sir, that is the impression I
   got, that the build-up outside was originally caused by
   the slow rate through the turnstiles.

Q.   Before I come back to that, can I ask you about one
     specific matter?   I think at one stage you went, having
     ejected some fan who had got in without paying, from
     Gate C, you had a word with the gateman, that is the
     Club gateman, at Gate C?   A.   Yes, sir.

Q    And he asked you about some p articular problem, did he
      not?   A.   Yes, sir.  There was a crowd of people outside,
      roughly 30 in number.

Q. 30?    A.   30, yes.     They were all claiming to be stewards
    from Liverpool Football Club.     They had passes showing
    that they were, in fact, stewards of the Club.      The
    Sheffield Wed ne sd ay steward informed me that they had
    allowed a certain number of stewards in.      I understand
    there is an a greement between clubs that they allow
    stewards free entry into the ground, but the numbers
    were such that he did not believe that all of these people
                                  5



                                                      G.   SYKES



     were,   in   fact,   stewards.   He suspected ---

Q.    He thought they were trying it on?  A.    He suspected
     that people were going in with the passes, someone else
     was bringing them out and taking other people in, and
     he sought my advice.

Q.    And you advised him not to let them in?              A.   I told
     him, I said, "Don't let anyone else in on             those grounds."

Q.   We have heard evidence about the state of the crush outside
     from others and I imagine from what you saw you would
     agree that it got to such a stage where the gates e ffectively
     had to be opened?   A.   At that stage, when the gates
     were opened, yes, sir, the crush was so bad.

Q.   Can you help us about this:      what was your impression
     of the demeanour or the approach of the crowd outside?
     1 a ppreciate I am asking you to be general and obviously
     indivi du al s vary but give us, if you can, by the time
     the gates had to be opened your impression of the state
     of mind, as it were, of the crowd outside.       A.   From
     2 o'clock onwards, the crowd who were turning up at
     2 o'clock, in fact, a lot of them had been drinking.
     They were not fighting drunk.       I would more call it
     silly or stupid drunk where they were not taking advice
     or you were telling them to do something and they were
     doing compl et el y the opposite.    From that point onwards
     when the crush built up it got worse and worse and the
     attitudes were changing.       People were coming who were
     even more drunk and obviously they were seeing the crush
     and they were adding to it and it was just impossible
     to stop it.

Q.   I think you saw Gate A opened and you saw             Gate C opened?
     A.   No, sir.   I only saw Gate  A opened.

Q.   B ecause you were on that side,      were you?         A.     I was
     on that side, near the shops.

Q.   You were outside at that point?     A.    Outside, yes, and
     from Gate A the position I was, you could    not see either
     Gate B or Gate C.

Q.    I think you went through the gate when it had been opened
     and you saw Sergeant Higgins inside    and he explained, did he
     not, that he had opened the gate because of the danger of
     people being killed, as he thought, by the crush outside?
     A.    Yes, sir.

Q.   I think after the crowd had cleared  you went into the ground
     through Gate C, is that right?   A.   Yes, sir.   That
     was after the call went up for all Officers to go into the
     ground.

Q.   Yes, and did you go, first of all, round to the playing
     area itself?   A.   No, sir, I didn't get that far.
                                              G.   SYKES


Where did you go?   A.      I went to the Police Control           Box
to see what they wanted    me p ersonally to do.

Did   you   go up to the box?   A.    Yes,   sir.

Did you   speak to anyone there?   A.    No, I got to the
top of the steps and I saw what was   h appening on the field.
I realised it wasn't   a normal pitch invasion and that
people  at the back were pushing and still crushing, you
know, the people at the front.

Can you help us - can you remember whether the game was
still being played when you went up and were standing
on the Control Box platform?   A.   I can't say, sir.
I didn't look that far.   I looked -----   From the top of
the steps I could see straight down on the fencing and
people being crushed and being helped over the top.

So when    you were seeing what you saw, what did you decide
to do? Where did you go?    A.       I ran back round the back
of the West Stand and c ol lected Officers who were still
coming in through the gates and we went through the central
tunnel under the West Stand

What was the purpose of that?   A.To clear people from
the tunnel, from the terracing, so that we could stop the
crushing at the front and evacuate people.    At that stage
obviously I didn't know that people were, in fact, dead.

Were you the first Officers     into the     tunnel?       A.   I was
one of them, yes, sir.

You and the ones you c ollected      together,     that is?
A.   Yes, sir.

When you got into the tunnel were people already coming out
injured or not?     A.  Not at that stage, sir.   They were,
in fact, still pressing forward trying to see what was
happening.    They were totally unaware of what was happening
at the front.

That was the problem, as I u nderstand it - those at the
back did not appr ec ia te what was happening at the front.
A.   Yes, sir.

And were still coming in e ffectively        to look at the
game.   A.   Yes, sir.

Were people   still coming in through the turnstiles at
this stage?     A.   I couldn't see.   I never noticed at
that stage,   sir.   I run straight through into the tunnel.

Did it take you a bit of time to get people to appreciate
at the back that yarwanted them out and why you wanted
them out?   A.    Yes.  AC first they didn't realise what
was happening and we had to be firm with them and literally
push some of the first ones out.
                                 7



                                                              G.   SYKES



Q.   E ve nt ua ll y did you get people to move out of the back?
     A.      Yes, sir.     We cleared a way through to the people
     who were trapped towards       the front of the fencing.

Q. Did you go down into Pen          3?        A.    No,   sir,    I went to the
   l eft-hand pen, Pen 4.

Q.   The left-hand one,    Pen 4.         A.        Yes,   sir.

Q.   Can you help us about this:   was it clear to you that
     there were people injured in Pen 4, the pen you went
     into?   A.     Yes, sir, there were people injured in Pen 4.

Q.   What about dead people, can you help?   A.   I couldn't
     say at that stage.  All I could see - people crushed up
     against the fence and I couldn't tell if they were dead
     at that stage or not.

Q.   You, I think, helped to assist to try to get people out of
      Pen 4?   A.   Yes, sir.   There were three  Police Officers
     struggling with a young girl and I got hold  of her and ---

Q.   I do not think we need go into specific detail.   All I am
     c o ncerned --- A.   We took her back in, up through the
     tunnel back into the concourse area behind the West Stand,
     sir.

Q.   In fact, we know that a number of people were taken out
     the back, some dead, some still alive, and ambulances
     e ventually began to come to outside Gate C.  A.   That is
     true,   sir, yes.

Q.   You were co nc er ne d at that end, as it were, were    you,
     going backwards and forwards through the tunnel?
     A.   Yes, sir.       O bv iously I realised that there was a
     major disaster on our hands and I organised the evacuation
     through the back and the ambulance and so forth to come
     into the sterile area at the side of the South Stand.

Q. Can you confirm one matter, and that is that it was clear
   to you that no-one had actually been injured or had died
   in the tunnel itself?   A.   That is true, sir.  No-one
   was actually injured in the tunnel that I saw when we
   went through.

Q.   It was a question of people being brought out from terraces----
     out through the back.   A.  All the people were dead or
     injured in Leppings Lane where people had been brought
     from the front of the terracing through the tunnel.

                     C r os s- e x a m i n e d by M R . HYTNER:

Q. Mr. Sykes, your view is that once you get a big crowd
   at the Leppings Lane end you cannot form i ndividual queues
   from the t ur ns ti le s? A. Yes, sir, with the maximum gate
>
    i   r

                                         8


                                                          G.   SYKES



               it is i mpossible   to form individual    queues at a turnstile.

            Q. May I i mm ed iately say, of course, that I am not challenging
               that at all.          What I want to ask you is this:     you have
               not any parti cu la r expertise that enables you to see that;
               it is as plain as a pikestaff, is it not, to anyone looking
               at the c o n f i g ur at io n of the gates?   A.    Very difficult
               to answer that, sir.              I can only give my view of what I
               saw and what I know from past experience at the ground.




                                                /Well,   whether   you are a
                             9



                                            G. SYKES



Q. Whether you are a genius or not the fact is it has been
   plain from experience of past games? - A, Yes, sir,

Q. I think you say in your statement:

           "By 2.00 pm the build-up of the fans was such there
           was pushing and shoving at the turnstiles and
           build-up occurred of fans trying to get into the
           ground.

     Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.   By 2.00 pm, when I say
     "build-up" that is the normal expected build-up, an hour
     before the kick-off, when people would be arriving at the
     ground.

Q.   Were you getting or, indeed, on any previous occasion
     when you have policed a semi-final, have you ever before
     received information during the build-up to the kick-off
     from Police control inside the ground, as to the state of
     the ground inside the ground to enable you to know how
     many more are expected to come? - A. No, sir.

Q. That is not part of the arrangement? - A. I have not
   received information directed to me on the state of the
   crowding inside.   The only time you do know that is if
   you pick traffic up on the air when it has been related
   to either somebody in the ground or whatever.

Q.   Have you ever heard that sort of traffic going through
     the air? - A. Yes, sir, on occasions I have at other
     matches.

Q. Obviously it does not matter if you do not get the
   information direct, it is to a senior Officer? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. Of course, that sort of information is essential for you
   to be able to do some forward planning for the control of
   the crowd to come? - A. No.    I have worked down there
   eight years and we control the crowd the best we can
   outside, as to what is coming.     It is not the people
   inside I am worried about, it is people outside.

Q. What you ought to be worried about are the numbers still
   to come, is that not right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. We have not yet heard the precise evidence so what I am
   putting to you may not, in the end, turn out to be
   accurate.   If it is right that at just before two
   o'clock, there were about 8,000 fewer in the Liverpool
   end, than there had been at the same time the previous
   year, that information would have started ringing warning
   bells? - A. If I was given that information, yes, sir.
                             10


                                            G. SYKES


Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   What could you do about it?
     - A. I could ask for more manpower to control the
     situation, more horses and even dogs if it came to that
     situation.

Q.        MR. HYTNER:    You also told us, which is linked to
     Lord Justice Taylor's question, that if you saw a build­
     up at the turnstiles you would call for horses to relieve
     the crowds within the turnstile area? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Once that area - in fact it is two areas because it is
   divided by the stand wall - once those two areas become
   full of people, really control has virtually been lost? -
   A. No, sir.   As I have said before, on semi-final day
   this is a common occurrence.

Q. There is a jam, that is, the entire area enclosed by the
   turnstile wall, the radial wall, and the perimeter fence,
   all jammed? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I can see obviously how you can relieve that situation
   provided no further swarm comes down Leppings Lane behind
   it? - A. On this occasion, sir, the swarm was such that I
   considered we should close the road off and use that as a
   holding area, and this is what I attempted to do with the
   horses and closing the road off to vehicular traffic.

Q. You were hoping to use Leppings Lane as the holding area?
   - A. Yes, sir.   My intention, which I discussed with
   Superintendent Marshall, was to give the fans all of
   Leppings Lane.

Q. That would clearly be sensible provided the newcomers
   were filtered coming into the perimeter fence? - A. That
   is what we were trying to do, sir.

Q. Once they reached the perimeter fence you got another
   crushing area? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. That is, the perimeter fence itself? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. The one place where I am sure you did not want to see the
   Police horses, was enveloped in the crowd within the
   enclosure area or, indeed, behind it on the south stand
   road? - A. I have used the horses there before, sir.  I
   find them a great deterrent.   Personally I am terrified
   of them.   I keep well away from them and on normal
   occasions the football supporters do.   We have found
   that even in that enclosed area when people see the
   Police horses they do not push forward.

Q. What I am saying is that if you are trying to use
   Leppings Lane as the holding area to prevent further
   build-up at the perimeter gate, it is in Leppings Lane
                                         G. SYKES


that the Police horses are going to achieve a successful
operation? - A. There were Police horses across the mouth
of Leppings Lane on the roadway there, supplemented by
Police Officers.

How many up the Lane keeping control of the swarm coming
down? - A. I do not know of any outside my particular
location at the turnstiles, sir.  I had only control of
the turnstile area.

Anything that was being done, however willingly, in
whatever good faith by horse and footmen in the immediate
perimeter fence area, was being destroyed by the
continuing swarm joining the throng at the back down
Leppings Lane? - A. There was quite a crush coming down
Leppings Lane, yes, sir.

Whilst one appreciates the observations you have made
about drink, the fundamental problem was the sheer
numbers?   That is right, is it not? - A. Sheer numbers,
sir, but drink was a big factor.   Normally when you tell
people to stop pushing and not to crowd and they see what
the situation is, they do not.   On this occasion that
did not occur.   They just kept pushing forward and
forward.

They will, of course, continue to push forward if they
are being pushed from the back by sheer weight of
numbers? - A. Well, being pushed from the back, sir, by
sheer weight of numbers, of people under the influence of
drink, and that has a big bearing on it.

Mr. Sykes, so there is no doubt about this, I am not
disputing that some people may have been drunk.   I am
not disputing that some people who may have been drunk
were more than average impatient, and that complicated
things.   However, the basic problem was the sheet weight
of numbers? - A. The sheer weight of numbers, sir, which
was complicated by the influence of drink.   If they had
not been drunk and acted on Police advice they would not
have pushed forward.

      MR. HYTNER:    Thank you.




           Q. MR. JACKSON:   Mr. Sykes
                              12


                                              G. SYKES


                   Cross-Examined bv MR. JACKSON:

Q. Mr. Sykes, on Thursday of last week the Officer in charge of
   this Police operation told me that one of the main tasks of
   Serials 16, 17 and 18 was to assist in the ensuring that
   orderly queues formed outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

O. Do I now understand the position to be as far rejnoved from as
   is possible, that it was never the intention of the Inspector
   in charge of those serials to take any part in the ensuring
   of orderly queues outside the turnstiles? - A. It is all a
   matter of interpretation, sir, of what you mean by an orderly
   queue.  I have already said if you mean an orderly queue of
   two or one or two people at best at each turnstile then that
   is far removed.  That is impossible.

Q. Inspector, let me make it quite clear.   I accept the entirety
   of your evidence.   I accept the obvious nature of the matters
   that caused you to come to that conclusion.   What concerns me
   is the Chief Superintendent did not know. - A. Well, I c a n ’t
   answer for the Chief Superintendent, sir.   I can only tell you
   from my experience of what I have done in the past and what I
   interpret those instructions.

Q. Let me ask you this then.  If you receive an order for
   Serials 16, 17, 18 and 19 which would indicate to anyone
   looking at it that something over 40 men would be involved in
   assisting of the forming of orderly queues, when you receive
   that order and you know it is not going to happen do you think
   you might have told your superior Officers that it was not
   going to happen? - A. No, sir, it is all a matter of
   interpretation on what you mean by queues, and that is what I
   have told you.

Q. What time would you assess your first realisation that the
   crowd outside was unmanageable, was being pushed, full of
   drunks? - A. Shortly after - I went in the ground at
   approximately 2 o ’clock, sir, to the best of my recollection
   as people were climbing over the gate, and it is when I came
   out after that that I could see people were pushing down the
   side towards gate C.

Q. Yes, I accept that you have said.      My question was, at what
   time? - A. Possibly 2.15.

Q. Would you look, please, at composite album No. 1. Would you
   look, please, at photographs in particular MWN 25/A, taken we
   understand at 14.30.   Would you describe that crowd asyou see
   it in that photograph? - A. People queuing up to gothrough
   the turnstiles.

Q. Would you describe it as orderly, disorderly or how would you
   describe it? - A. At that stage pretty orderly.

Q.   That is at 2.30? - A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   I wondered about your   assessment of the crowd at2.15.   Was it
                             13


                                          G. SYKES


   really as you described it? - A. That is the impression I got,
   sir, that people were pushing forward.  Prior to this we had
   moved a lot of people out of this area.

Q. That looks to be a pretty quiet crowd, does it not? - A. Yes,
   reasonably.  Not quiet but they are not causing trouble.  They
   are queuing up to go through the turnstiles.

Q. At 2.30? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. So it would be a little harsh, would it not, for your
   description as to the crowd at 2.15 to be accepted? - A. no,
   sir.  I have already said in my statement when I came out of
   the gate, which would probably be 2.15, there were people all
   milling down this side which I had swept.  It was when I went
   outside that I saw the fans coming towards the gate that I
   caused the traffic to be stopped.

Q. Finally, Mr. Sykes, can I ask you this.   Would you consider
   these factors.  Firstly, people arriving the worse for drink
   at Semi-Finals:   would you accept that? - A. That was my
   expectation, yes.

Q. No orderly queues possible outside the turnstiles on Semi-
   Final day because of the crowd? - A. My interpretation of an
   orderly queue on this particular day is people, as that is,
   photograph 25A, queuing up to go through the turnstiles.

Q. That has been described by virtually everyone in it as a mass
   of people.  Would you not agree with that? - A. That to me on
   Semi-Final day is normal, and that is the normal queue.

Q. Would you therefore agree with me that in anticipation of
   those factors alone, never mind A, C, B or tickets or the
   like, you would anticipate a much slower throughput through
   the turnstiles than on an average Sheffield Wednesday home
   game? - A. No, sir.  On Semi-Final day you expect people to go
   through quicker because there is no exchange of money.  It is
   a straight ticket transaction.  They tear the stub and away
   they go.

Q. I therefore will deal with those matters.  Is it not the
   position that you anticipated a number of people without
   tickets? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you not anticipate a number of people therefore   would slow
   the throughput of the turnstiles because they would   arrive
   without tickets? - A. On my experience before, sir,   they have
   never been down to the actual turnstiles. They have   only been
   milling about outside asking for tickets.

Q. Have you any idea of the time it would take to load, let us
   say 3,000 people through the turnstiles A-G? - A. No, sir.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. MAXWELL:

Q. Inspector, there is a Police representative on the Officer
3
                                14


                                                G. SYKES


         Working Party that advised the South Yorkshire County Council
         on 22nd January, 1986, by the name of G. Sykes.  Was that you
         on that Officer Working Party? - A. On what day, sir?

    Q. On 22nd January,   1986? - A. What was that in relation to, sir?

    Q. It is in relation to an inspection of the ground by Police
       representatives, and particularly to have a look at the
       revised segregation arrangements at the West terrace? - A. i
       have only ever been to one meeting, sir.  It has not been my
       primary task, and I remember filling in at one meeting because
       I was the only Officer available.

    Q. If you were filling in did you take any   active part in that? -
       A. Not that I recollect, sir.  I know I   remember going to the
       football ground and I seem to recollect   it was concerning the
       covering of the new Spion Kop.  That is   my recollection, sir.

    Q. What I want to enquire about is this.  In 1985 the club had
       revised the segregation arrangements by putting in a new
       central fence between pens 3 and 4, an additional fence next
       to pen 4 and some revised fencing and walling in the concourse
       behind the West Stand.  Do you recall that happening? - A.
       Yes, sir, I do.

    Q. Do you recall at an Officer Working Party, the Officer Working
       Party that you attended, that there was any discussion about
       the effectiveness of those revised arrangements? - A. No, sir.
       As I say, I can only recollect going to one meeting, and I
       have only recollection of discussing the covering of the Spion
       Kop and facilities for the disabled.

    Q. I will take it further with another witness.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. KALLIPETIS:

    Q. Mr. Sykes, can you help me, please, with Serial 17.  I notice
       in the Operational Orders that during the match their position
       is to be located in the central tunnel to the Leppings Lane
       terraces? - A. That is during the match, yes, sir.   After all
       the fans have been put through the turnstiles into the ground
       they would be redeployed there.

    Q. Just as a matter of interest, what would they be doing there?
       - A. Just essentially order and be there as a safety valve,
       really.

    Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Would they be standing at the
         pitch end probably watching the match? - A. No, sir, they
         would be at the back of the tunnel.

    Q. At the back of the tunnel? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Would there be others at the front? - A. Inside the perimeter
       fence or on the track?

    Q. No, I am talking about just at the pitch end of the tunnel? -
                              15


                                                 G. SYKES


     A. No, sir.

Q.   We have got a photograph of 1988.   Have you got a copy        of this
     one? It is a one-off photo.   There may be one there.          Do you
     see it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You see a number of helmets just by the tunnel there? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. What serial would that be correspondingly last year for this
   year? - A. Quite obviously that could be the corresponding
   serial. f

Q.   That is what I thought.  There is no reason why they should
     not come and watch the match at that end of the tunnel at that
     stage? - A. No, sir.  I misunderstood you.   I was thinking
     more about the front of the fence.  I did not realise.

Q. But that is the one you are talking about? - A. I would
   surmise so, yes.

Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:      I d o n ’t think there is any other serial
     that has a duty anywhere near the tunnel to the Leppings Lane
     terraces is there? - A. Without looking through the entire
     Order, sir, I d o n ’t know.

          MR. COLLINS:     14 and 15, both do.

          THE WITNESS:   I am only in possession of the serial
     numbers under my direct command.

Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:   Serial 14 ;is also to be located in the
     central tunnel during the match to maintain order as required,
     and 15 is to be located in the tunnel to the north pen, so
     that is not the central tunnel. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Mr. Sykes, you said when you entered the central terraces
   through the tunnel  you took in      Officers from outside gate C
   with you.  Is that   right? - A.     No, sir, notfrom outside gate
   C.  I collected the Officers.    I went through gate C and I
   collected Officers  who were in      the concourse who were making
   their way back round to the playing area.     I took them back
   and we went through the tunnel.

Q.   This is after you had been to the control box? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   Did you see Mr. Hand-Davis, the mounted Police         Inspector,   when
     you went up to the control box? - A. No, sir.

Q. Can you remember when you went to the control box whether you
   saw any mounted Police moving off, going up the roadway behind
   the directors’ car park towards the far end of the ground? -
   A. No, sir.   I believe I was probably the first Officer in
   that area, and then straight back through to the central
   tunnel.   I suspect they moved off after that.

Q. Did you see Sergeant Burns when you went down the central
»

                               16


                                                G. SYKES


       tunnel to the terraces? - A. I c a n ’t recollect seeing him
       there, sir.

    Q. You did say in response to a question from Mr. Collins that as
       far as you were concerned all the injured and ultimately dead
       who were brought up through the tunnel had come from the front
       of the pens? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. I think in fact we shall hear evidence, Mr. Sykes, that a lot
       of the injured in fact were found only 3 or 4 yards in from
       the mouth of the tunnel, actually in the centre of the
       terraces themselves? - A. We had gone quite a way down the
       terracing, sir, before we came across these.

    Q. You went into pen 4, I think? - A. Yes, sir.




                              /Q. The only reason.
                                      G. SYKES


Q. The only reason I put this, Mr. Sykes, is that we know what
   time the first ambulance arrived at the back of Leppings Lane
   end terraces and the evidence of the Ambulance Officers will
   be that certainly within a minute of their arrival there
   were several bodies already present and brought out to them?
   - A. That is possibly true, sir, because after I had given
   the young girl resuscitation then I realised obviously we
   had got a major problem, there was dead people, and I
   immediately requested ambulances then and they were not long
   after that before they came.

Q. Let me make it clear, Mr. Sykes, ther is no criticism at
   all because obviously once you are occupied with trying
   to rescue somebody, quite properly, you don't know what is
   going on around you. That would be right, wouldn't it?
   - A. In those circumstances I cannot recollect everything.

          MR. KALLIPETIS:   Yes, of course.   Thank you,
    Mr. Sykes.


                  Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW;

Q. Mr. Sykes, could you just help us about visiting Stewards?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. It is standard practice, to your knowledge, for visiting
   teams to bring a number, a smallnumber of Stewards with
   them? - A. Yes sir, normally the away supporters the
   Stewards control the trains or the official Club,
   Supporters' Club, they are stewarded.

Q. You don't know the precise number that will be coming but
   you anticipate that it will be what a handful of a dozen
   or so? - A. Normally.  I am never given that precise
   information and that is usually an agreement between the
   Clubs concerned.  It is not a concern of mine.

Q. A general agreement all round the Clubs that that is a
   sensible thing to do? - A. I can't confirm that but that
   is the impression I get.

Q. Yes, even your impression may be valuable.  Could you j*st
   help me as to this, Inspector, they obviously won't have
   on an all ticket match seats allocated to them.  They
   won't have tickets with seats? - A. No sir, they just go
   through the gate and find their own way on the terracing,-

O   Thev arrive with their own fans usually and am I right in
    thinking that from the Police point of view although you
    recognise that they won't have specific duties to
    once they arrive at the ground, it is a sensible thing to
    have Stewards among their own fans? - A. Yes sir, t y
    keep order on the way to the footbf 11 ,g Joun^ T.a^ t^1 **
    that generally speaking we can seek advice or get more
    information if we require it.
                                            G. SYKES


Q.       And they o£ course will wear their own Club tabard.? - A- No
         sir, they normally just have a lapel badge that says Steward

O        But they will obviously be known to their own supporters
         and hopefully will have a general calming influence in the
                where they are allowed into the ground? “ There is
         some debate what influence they do have, but obviously that
         is the intention.
               MR. GLASGOW:   Yes, thank you very much indeed.


                      Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

0. Mr. Sykes, on the question of Stewards coming with the fans
   in theory it would be a good idea? - A. Yes sir.

Q. And there are a number of them who are of “ “ ^ e r a b l e •
   - A. Some are obviously better than others.   Some Clubs take
   it more seriously.
Q. On this occasion I think the crowd of S t e w a r d s that you saw
   or were drawn to your attention by the man at the stile ---
   - A. By a Sheffield Wednesday Steward, yes.

 q   ....... they were accompanied with youngsters, were they?
       A. Yes sir.
    Q. And they were seeking to get in with passes? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. They were about 30 or so in number? - A. That is correct.

    Q. And according to the information you had there ^ad been a
       considerable number of such Stewards who had already gone
       through with their passes? - A. Already gone through Gate C
       into the ground sir.
    Q. May I turn from that, Mr. Sykes.  I think you policed the
       game in 1988.  Is that right? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. Where were you in 1988, what role did you fulfil? - A.
       Exactly the same role as I had this year.

    O. So you were outside the Leppings Lane gates with the same
       Serials and the same number of men? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. Can I just ask you because there has been some ^ i d e n c e ,
       it is not entirely consistent, suggesting that there was
       in 1988 some cordon of Police Officers filtering non-
       ticket holders from ticket holders b e f o r e t h e y g o t to the
       Leppings Lane gates. What do you say about that?             A. I
       have no knowledge of that.   I did n o t incorporate that in
       any plan I did and I am not aware of that at all.

     0    And during 1988 were you making your way around that area?
          - A . Yes sir, doing exactly the same or trying to do the
           sam£ as I did this year.
                            19

                                       G. SYKES


Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am not quite sure how far you
     went from the turnstiles in the direction of Leppings Lane?
     - A. Obviously, my Lord, I am concerned with the turnstile
     area.  If I go on to the roadway then I can see possibly
     200/300 yards towards Penistone Road.

Q. I appreciate you have got a view up the road.   I am just
   wondering how far, looking at the model there, would you go
   out on to the Lane itself or not? - A. Yes sir, I have got
   free access all the way there.

Q. Yes, I know, but I am just wondering where you physically
   took yourself, how far in the direction of the roundabout
   you went, if at all? - A. None sir.  Immediately in the
   roadway outside the turnstile area.

Q. You would not have gone beyond the end of that model, in
   other words? - A. No sir.

Q. Either year? - A. Either year.    My primary role is the
   turnstiles.

           MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, there will be evidence, no doubt,
     enabling the whole of Leppings Lane to be covered.

Q. But your concern was immediately in the area you see shown
   on the model? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. And you were able to tell the Inquiry about what you there
   observed during 1988? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Have you policed this ground on many occasions? - A. I have
   policed Hillsborough Football Ground in various roles since
   1976.

Q. Would it be right to say, Officer, that you have considerable
   experience in the habit and conduct of crowds? - A. Yes sir,
   that is true.  I have policed since 1980, apart from the odd
   game due to annual leave or whatever, I have policed every
   football match at Hillsborough since 1980.

Q. And that includes capacity attendances? - A. That includes
   probably five semi-finals sir and various other matches
   where it is a capacity crowd.

Q. Now you were given the task again in 1989 of policing outside
   Leppings Lane? - A. Yes sir.

Q. If you had had any concern about the Police methods and any
   anxiety as to;,whether or not it would be adequate on this
   occasion, would you have raised it? - A. Yes sir. On the
   Friday before the semi-final I had a briefing at Hillsborough
   for all Senior Officers.   I had a separate briefing with
   Mr. Greenwood, the Ground Commander and we discussed the
   Operational Order and I had not qualms about it whatsoever.
                                   G. SYKES


So you had the opportunity to discuss it, it was discussed
and you had no qualms about being able to do the job? —
A. Yes sir.
May I ask you however about this queueing, this word that
appears. When there is a crowd of more than a few people
at the turnstiles at Leppings Lane, has it ever been the
practice to have strict rigid queues going to each turn­
stile? - A. No sir.  If you get a large number, as you can
see from the photographs, see from the layout, it is impossible
to form rigid queues to the turnstiles, sir.

So when you saw the word "queueing" in your Order, do we
understand that you were acting according ....

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  The word is not "queueing in
the Order, the word is "queues".

      MR. WOODWARD:    When you saw the word in the Order
relating to what you   were expected to do, how did you
interpret that? - A.   I take that as a broader view of
queue and that it is   to try and maintain order down towards
the turnstiles.

And in the past have you had any difficulty in ensuring
that people got to the turnstiles to enable them to take
their turn? - A. No sir.

So the effect of what had been practised enabled people in
the past, fans, to take their turn to go through the
turnstiles? - A. Yes sir, that is correct.

Had their been any problems about ensuring that? - A. No
sir, we have not had problems in the past at all.

On occasions when the crowd had     built up in the past had
you used horses? - A. Yes sir.

For what purpose? — A. I have used horses at the turnstiles
to prevent crushing actually at the wall.  It is to relieve
the pressure at the front.

So the use of that device is to prevent people being
crushed, it is not to order them into lines? - A. That is
true sir, there is just not enough area there to form
orderly queues that people are suggesting with this amount
of crowd.
 I don't suppose you could get a horse between each turnstile
 entrance, could you? - A. No sir.

 So the practice has been not to have a lining up? — A. Not
 on a large capacity crowd.

 Would i^ou have a look please at Photograph MW10/19A and
 MWN/18A in the Composite.   Those photographs are taken at
 14.16 and 14.17? - A. Yes sir.
                                  G. SYKES


Those are views from Leppings Lane looking at the gates
towards the turnstiles? - A. Yes sir.

How does what you see there compare with your ordinary
experience of people attending such an event? - A. There
is a large number of people coming down the road as you
can see. Obviously at that stage I was getting concerned
with the number of people that I could see flooding down
the road.

Your concern was in respect of the people coming to that
scene? - A. Yes sir.

And the volume of it? - A. Yes sir.

You have touched upon the question of closing Leppings Lane?
- A. To vehicular traffic, yes sir.

May I ask you in a little more detail about it. On this
occasion consideration was given by you to closing Leppings
Lane? - A. Yes sir.

At about what time was that? - A. I would estimate, sir,
roughly 2.15 time.

What did you do about it? - A. I asked the mounted section
to put a cordon of horses across the mouth of Leppings Lane,
which they did.  I tried to get through on the radio to
ask for vehicular traffic to be stopped.  I was getting no
response.  I then spoke to Mr. Marshall.  I went to him,
told him what I had got in mind.  He agreed and he got
through on his radio and had the traffic stopped.

Was any other Officer involved in discussing that with you,
Mr. Creaser or anybody? - A. No sir.  I heard Mr. Creaser's
evidence yesterday and I actually discussed it with
Mr. Creaser after I had spoken to Mr. Marshall and informed
him in fact what our plan was.

So you discussed it with Mr. Creaser after you had mentioned
it to Mr. Marshall.  That is on the 15th? - A. Yes sir.

But you put a cordon, a line of horses. Where did you put
it? - A. Between the outer perimeter fence and the roadway
up towards Leppings Lane, across that area.

Following the line   of the curve? - A. Roughly, yes sir.

What was the point of that? What was the purpose? - A.
The purpose is to form a cordon across there of Police
horses to prevent people just spilling down towards the
turnstiles and to try and relieve the pressure at the
front.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:  I am not quite sure how the
closing of Leppings Lane and the placing of this cordon
of horses were related, if they were.  They may have been
                                  G .   S Y K E S




quite separate things? - A. My intention sir was to stop
vehicular traffic comings into Leppings Lane, so I put “ J
cordon of Police horses across the mouth towards the tu
stiles.  The intention was that the people comingc down
Leppings Lane would be held actually on the roadway as
opposed to packing them into the already congested area.

So those two things were related? - A. Yes sir, it was all
part of my interpretation of what I saw as a solution
the problem.
      MR. WOODWARD:  So you would have space for the people
to be held back by the horses? - A. Yes sir.




                        /Q. Was that sort of
                                             G. SYKES



Was that sort of ar ra ngement something you would have
expected to have  relieved any problems towards the
tu rn stiles?  A.   That is the problem that I saw, that
is the solution that I saw and that is the plan that I
put in operation.    I fully expected that to solve the
problem.

Did it?   A.    No, sir.   You have heard evidence from
Mr. Hand-Da vis and other Of ficers of people jumping under
Police horses and so forth.     That has never been my
experience anywhere.

So wherever there had been a cordon or a barrier would have
required that people observe it and did not seek to break
through it.    A.  Yes, sir.

And you did, according to your recollection, have such
an endeavour at this time?   A.   Yes, sir, that was my
intention and that is what I tried to do.

When you formed that line and you took that measure,
was there in fact any crowd or any problem about where
that positi on -- where that line was taken? A.   I do
not under sta nd that question, sir.

It is my fault,   forgive me.        When you took that measu re          ---
A.   Yes, sir.

Was there any throng against which you had to take it or
not?   Could the people have stopped there?   A.   I
thought that the people should have stopped there.   That
it why I pijt it across there.

Were those people against whom you were taking that me asure
people who were in any way embarra ss ed or in any difficulty?
A.    They shou ld n' t have been. There should have been no
problem and it would have been quite safe.      We had stopped
the traffic and we could use all the roadway as a holding
area.

At that time they were not being pressed upon or pushed
on?   A.   Only by obviously people joining from Leppings
Lane but there should have been no crush on those people
whatsoever.

Did the crush   develop   however?     A.    Yes,   sir,   it kept
building.

You have spoken about the number of people arriving.     Did
the number arriving at 2.30 and th ereafter surprise you?
A.     Yes, sir.     We had had a steady flow up to that
point and it suddenly all started to go wrong with the
number of people that I saw conve rg in g down from both
d ir ect io ns In Leppings Lane.

Apart   from the numbers, you have mentioned the element             of
drink   amongst some people.   A.   Yes, sir.
                                        G.    SYKES



It may be said at a football match it is expected that
some people will have taken a drink.   A.   It is not
normal these days, sir, but on Semi-Final day I expect
people to arrive who have been drinking.

But on this oc casion was your expectation in fact of the
numbers or of the amount of people in significant drink
realised?        A.   No, they far exceeded it, sir. The
number of people arriving late and the amount of
i n tox ic ati on did surprise me.

Turnstiles   and people without    tickets,    may    I ask you about
that?   A.     Yes, sir.

You say that people were going ----       What were people doing
at the turnst il es without tickets?      A.    Obviously I
cou ldn't see from the outside and what I saw from the
inside is that my att ention was drawn by one of the
turnstile oper at or s shouting that people were gaining
adm ission without tickets and they were, in fact, jumping
over the t ur ns ti le s and there were people also stood in
the turns ti le s and people was coming un derneath their
legs.

You say, "jumped over the turnstiles", you do not mean
over the roof?    A.   No, sir, over the actual gate, you
know, the re volving gate.

They were    leaping   the gate and people coming       underneath   it.
A.   Yes,    sir.

Was this just odd ones or what?    A.   No, at that stage
there was quite a number coining through the left-hand
or the turnsti les nearest to Gate C and Officers on those
details were ejecting them straight through Gate C.

You spoke of people milling about without tickets.
Were there people milling about without tickets?
A.   Yes, sir.   From shortly after 11 a.m. when I briefed
the serials people were coming to the ground asking for
tickets, shouting, "Has anyone got a ticket?" and that
carried on all through the afternoon.

Of course it is sug gested that it is to be expected you
might get some people without tickets turning up.
A.   That is expected and we always experi en ce that.
What we always do is, when we recognise people without
tickets and people shouting, we pe ri odically sweep them
out of Le pp in gs Lane.

It would seem thsatc on this occasion there was a greate r
number than was expected.     A.   Yes, sir.   I have
never known this amount of people without tickets.

It has been su ggested that there might have been - you
may have heard the ev idence yesterday-- 2£ K ) p e r h a p s —
2,000.    Where do you put it, doing your estimate?
A.    It :is very, very di fficult to assess because
                                             G.   SYKES


obviously you don't know the number of people who you
have turned away and come back.    I would estimate the
2,000 is probably nearer the mark.

In the past you have spoken of people turning up without
tickets but not there going to the turnstiles.   A.  N
sir, generally they mill about on the roadway where I
put the cordon of Police horses across.   They mill around
that area shouting, "Who has got ti ckets?"   They mill
about towards Catchbar Lane, there is a bridge that goes
over the road, they stand on the walls there shouting
for tickets, and they generally mill about that area.

The de sc ri pti on you give of that be haviour seems to be
of people who are advertis ing that they are in the market
to buy tickets.       A.   Yes, sir.

Not people who were en dea vou rin g to get through, despi te the
endeavours of everybody without.       A.   Not at that stage.
There were people end eavouring to purchase tickets.

So you put it at signifi ca ntl y higher than the estimate
that was given yesterday.     A.    In the day, yes, sir,
I would say the 2,000 was nearer the mark.

What was the attitude of people?    We have talked of people
being upset and frustrated because they are being held up.
You have spoken of the ordinary expectation you have of the
crowd.    Do people get held up at football matches?
A.   Yes, sir, it is quite common to be held up at the
turnstiles.    It is one of those facts of life that if a
lot of people turn up at the wrong time, then they cannot
get through quickly through the turnstiles.

In your experience, has the be haviour been like it was in
1989? A.  No, sir.      I have never ever seen that
before.  People generally just queue and wait their turn
to get through the turnstile.

May I move on to the events and the incident that occurred.
You went into the ground and you went into the tunnel.
A.   Yes, sir.

And you orga nis ed there Policemen. A.    Yes, sir,
I got the available men who were in the co ncourse and
were cleared from the back a way through to the people
who were injured at the front.

Can you help about this:     was the si tuation such when you
got to the exit from the tunnel on to the terraces that
there were sp ect ato rs around there who did not want to
move?   A.    Yes, sir, there was a lot of people still
looking forward and trying to really see what was happening
because they didn't know.

Are you ,able to recall whether the game was still going on?
A.   I would imagine at that stage it had definitely stopped.
                                     26



                                                               G.   SYKES



Q.   But there were people there who were ---   A.   They
     were craning forward, really, to see what was hafpening
     at the front.

Q.   You org anised and assisted in the getting out of people.
     A.   Yes, sir.    Possibly the first casualty came out
     of the back which I brought out.

Q.   Are you able to say how far down     the terrace that casealty
     was when you found it?    A.    Itis very, very difficult
     because obviously we were virtually fighting our way through
     a crowd.    I would say possibly half to two-thirds of the
     way down.

Q.   Is that the right-hand pen or the left-hand pen, 3 or 4?
     A.   That is, as I went down, left-hand pen, Pen 4, sir.

Q.   Were ca sua lti es being passed back by              people in the crowd?
     A.    At that stage I am not aware of                that because we
     got the first casualty, a young girl                 who was unconscious,
     and we took her straight back to     the             concourse.

Q.   She was on the ground, was she? A.  There were                      three
     Police Officers just at tempting to lift her when                  I got there.

Q.   So you came upon her on the steps of the terrace.
     A.   Yes, sir.

Q.   In the earlier stages when people were being admitted to
     the ground you went in and out through one of the gates,
     did you?  A.     Through Gate C, yes, sir.

Q.   Did you observe any stewards around at that time?
     A.    Yes, sir, there were stewards there all the time.

Q.   What stage was that that you went in through Gate C?
     A.   2 p.m., I think, sir, when I saw people cli mbing over
     the wall.   It was about 2 p.m.

                         Re- exa min ed    by HR.       COLLINS:

Q.   You have been asked about numbers            without   tickets.     Wtere
     you given any      in fo rma tio n in any     briefing as to any
     exp ect at io ns of people arriving          without tickets?    A.    No,
     I can't recollect that, sir, at              all.

                           By LORD JUSTICE          TAYLOR:

Q.   Just one question.    The line of horses, was it your idea
     to draw that up or the mounted Officers?    A.   No, when
     I saw the cru shing at the turnstiles, then I asked one of
     the mounted Off icers to form ---

Q.   You asked   them to?       A.        Yes,   sir.

Q. Well now, we have had c o nf lic tin g views about this.
   Hr. Hand-D av is thought that despi te the line of horses
   people were br eaking through in significant numbers, I
                                   27



                                                           G.    SYKES


     think.    Hr. Creaser said yesterday that the line of
     horses was achi ev in g some success but by that time the
     gates were opened and there really was not any need for
     that any longer.      Can you help about that?   I think
     he said that odd individuals were getting through between
     the horses or the odd one underneath but essenti al ly it
     was being effe ct iv e but the gates obviated the need for
     it.    A.   You mean when the gates went open?

Q.   Yes.   A.   Well, obviously when the gates went open
     then there would be no need for a line of Police horses
     there but there was definitely a line of Police horses
     there prior to that.

Q.   What I am trying to get at is whether it was ac hieving
     some success.   A.    Not the success that I originally
     hoped, because ob viously I hoped that putting the Police
     horses there would relieve the pressure at the gates and
     that people would stop being crushed but that was not
     happening;  people were, like   you say, going through the --
     round the Police horses and underneath.

                     INSPECTOR      ROBERT    PURDY,    called

                          Examin ed by HR.     GOLDSACK:

Q.   Inspector   Robert   Purdy,    is that    right?      A.      That is
     correct.

Q. Hr. Purdy, you were worki ng in tandem with                  Inspector Sykes
   with overall comman d of Serials 16 and 19.                    A.   That is
   correct, sir, yes.

Q. And I think you located yajself in the general position
   outside the turnstiles.   A.   Eventually, yes, sir.

Q. Did you have tvtj/men standing o u tsi de 'ea ch turnstile
   initially?   A.     That is correct, sir, yes.

Q.   When you put them there, for how long did you an ticipate
     they would be able to mainta in their positions there?
     A.   Until ki ck- off time, sir.

Q.   Had you had previous exper ie nc e of policing outside Leppings
     Lane en trance?      A.   I hadn't worked that positi on before,
     sir, no,       I was aware Hr. Sykes had and that was the
     cont in ge nc y that was laid down.

Q.   I think when you made your statement you had some difficulty
     reme mb er in g ev ery t hi ng in the correct sequence. A. That
     is correct, sir.

Q.   You mention at an early stage in your statement the mounted
     Officers a s s is tin g to clear non-ti ck et holders from the
     Le pp in gs Lane end.     A.   fhat is correct, sir.     I used
     them several times while I was walking in the area and
     round the dif ferent serials and they were used to clear
     them outside the shop area on occasions and also in the
♦   *
                                     28


                                                        ■n.   PURDY


             area between the funnel bar, as I have described it, and
             the river where there were build-ups there.   They were
             using both those areas.

        Q.   Immediately after the reference in your statement to n o n ­
             ticket holders - this is the bottom of Page 1 - you says
             "there seemed to be hundreds, young and old mixed, some
             drunk."   What I am not clear about is whether that is a
             reference to the number of non-ticket holders or to the
             number of people there at that stage.   A.   That means
             to the area outside Leppings Lane, that there were hundreds
             there, as I can read that.

        Q.   It is not a refer enc e to hundreds without tickets? A.   No,
             but having said that, there was a great deal, as I say in
             two amounts where we cleared them from.

        Q. When you say those people were cleared, did you actually
           see them leaving the scene?   A.    Yes, they were moved
           further down Leppings Lane by the horses and would turn
           round.   Having said that, I can recall being out in the
           Leppings Lane area towards the r,oadway and seeing a
           number of people time and time again.

        Q. Well now, there came a time, I think, when you positioned
           you rs elf near to Turnstiles A-G. A.   That is correct.

        Q. Can you help us now as to roughly what time that was?
           A.   From re col le c t io n now afterwards, from piecing things
           together, I would est imate it was somewhere in the region
           of 2.25, s o m eth in g like that, to 2.30.

        Q.   You say at that stage the large perimeter gates were open,
             the funnel was filling, there were others on the river
             side, "I knew they hadn't tickets."   A^ain, can you help us,
             the reference to "on the river side"?    A.   I am referring
             to the area there, sir, between that funnel bar and the
             gates running down at the side of the river.

        Q. Where the Usher is pointing at the moment?    A.  That is
           correct, between there and actually the perimeter fence.
           There were a lot of people standing, again.    It is an
           area where people stand, as has been described as the
           bridges.   People tend to stand on  that area on that side.

        Q.    What sort cf;numbers are we talking about there?   A.  It
             is very di fficult to estimate numbers, sir, at that stage.
             Perhaps 50, perhap s 100.

        Q.    On what are you basing your as sessment that they are n o n ­
             ticket hol ders?   A.   I certainly   spoke to a number of
             them and so did the Officers in that area.      That was
             part of our duty to contain that area and you would go
             to them and say, "Have you got a ticket?      Which gate is
             it for?"    I think reference has been made to di recting
             people and that was one of the functions.
                                                   R.   PURDY



Those non-tic ke t holders by then were      inside the perimeter
gate?   A.    jha t is correct, sir.

Did you have any strategy    for dealing with those people?
A.   Yes, sir.

What was that?   A.    On a number of occasions as
outside where they were seated near the shop and standing,
I had it swept by the horses.    In other words, they were
ushered to the exterio r gate, the perimeter gate to be
removed out and di spersed along Leppings Lane or Catchbar
Lane.

If you were taking non-ticket holders out of the perim eter
gates just before half past two, was that in itself adding
to the co nfu si on? A.  It was another policing problem,
certainly, sir.

You had got people coming against the mainst re am              of people
coming in.   A.   That's right, sir.

You m ai nt ain ed that ap pr oxi ma te position, did you,        over   the
next 20 irinutes or so?       A.     I did, sir, yes.

Observing the build-up.           At what stage did you take the
decision that the Officers outside the turnstiles should
be told to go inside?          A.   As I have said in my statement
sir, it is very difficult.          I was in a position where  I
was m on it ori ng that and time I found great difficu lty with.
I would est imate that it would be in the region of 2.38,
2.40, ap pr o xi ma t el y that time.    I cannot be ---   I would
think 2.40.

Was that de cision taken because they were no longer
effective, because they th emselves were in danger or a
co mbi na ti on of those reasons?     A.   A combination,
really.       I was conc er ned from start to finish with
the safety of my .’Of ficers under the command and with the
general public and the efforts then had gone from a
working oper ati on to becoming futile.       It was at that
point I decided to get them through to redeploy them.

I think you had co nv er sa ti on during this period with
both D e t ect iv e Sup eri nte nde nt McKay and then Superinte nde nt
Marshall ancj you spoke spe cifically to Mr. Marshal l about
the need to open the gates.            A.   I did, sir, yes.

You then go on to say in your statement that you caused
the gate to be opened down the side.   A.   That is correct
sir.

Can we just identify which gate is that a reference to?
A.   C, sir.

You were then outside     Gate C.     A.    That is correct,         sir.

How did you cause that to be opened?          A.        I ap preciate
                                                 R.   PURDY



when I wrote that statement that it physically has to be
opened from the inside.    I had had that order from Mr.
Ma rshall for the gates to be opened and I approached those
gates having made certain plans en route there.    I think
now, having watched the video, I would imagine that was
the same time as the fan was ejected and it is purely
concidence.    I believe that we had reached the gates
at that point but I am aware that the gates opened from
inside at the same time.

Can I just clarify that.         You had understood Mr. Marshall,
had you, e f f ec ti vel y to give you an instruction to open
Gate C?    A.      To open the gates, yes, and I int erpreted
that fcr Gate C, sir.

You had a radio with you,    did you?   , A.     Yes,   sir.

During this period from half two until 3 o'clock,             were
you receiving any messages over the radio?   A.               No, sir.

Were you aware that Mr. Mar sha ll was actually asking Ground
Control to take the decision to open the gates?      A.   I
wasn't, sir, no.      I was aware that he would have to inform
Ground Control or had informed Ground Control.      That would
obvio us ly be a conside ra tio n, yes.

So it was your intention as you approached those gates to
have them opened in the belief that that was Mr. Ma rshall's
order?   A.   That is correct, sir.

And that is at the time when it was opened        anyway.
A.   Unfortunately, yes, sir.

Did you have any part in the gates closing again at that
stage?   A.   I did, sir, yes.   At that same time, as
I say, I had barely reached the -----   Ice rtainly hadn't
reached the centre of the gate when they were opened and
I was pushed in to the left of that same gate towards
Turnstile G, the actual turnstile, inside, and I turned
round and ordered the gates closed.   They were being pulled
to then or had been closed at that stage.




                                    /Since     it had been.
      /■
     X-
n\                                        31


                                                          R t PURDY



           Q.    Since it h a d ’been your intention to ask for the gates to
                be opened why did you then ask for them to be closed? -
                A. My intention when I came back with Mr. Marshall with
                that was that there were a number of people in the area
                between the funnel bar and the river railings.       We had
                got the horses to seal the gates off at the perimeter
                gates.    My opinion then was if we removed the people
                from that area through gate C, we could then deal with
                the tremendous problems we had got of people trapped
                against the funnel bar and we could bring them in and
                feed them out from there, giving them a relief area.

           Q. What did you believe the group of people standing to the
              right of bar at that stage to be? - A. They were a spill-
              out, to my mind, of people from the back of that area of
              funnel attending the game.

           Q. At that stage did you believe any significant proportion
              of them to be non-ticket holders? - A. No, sir.

           Q.   Did you from then on in fact remain inside     the gates? -
                A. No, sir.

           Q. At what stage did you come back out? - A. I came straight
              out, sir.

           Q. Where were you when gate C was opened for the second
              time? - A. I would be in the area outside near the funnel
              bar.   I was pulling people under that bar.

           Q.   Did you have any part to play in the opening of it the
                second time? - A. Not specifically, no, sir.

           Q. Did you know it was going to be opened again? -A. Yes.
              I obviously assumed it would be opened because the orders
              had been given to open the gates.

           Q. Did you then go back inside the ground when the main body
              of people had gone through that gate? - A. I went through
              when there was a call to go on to the pitch.

           Q.   When you went round to the pitch, to which part did you
                go? - A. I went to the right.   Inside there is the
                concourse which is again shaped into a funnel.  I
                followed that funnel round under the control box into the
                south stand and down on to the pitch.

           Q. In front of which pen did you end up? - A. I took serials
              round with me.   There were serials in that concourse,
              certainly one, a Sergeant and probably ten men.   I told
              them to run round.    We ran round, went down on to the
              pitch.   As I got on to the pitch there was obviously
              some confusion at that stage.   I told the Officers to
                                         R, PURDY


line up.   I went to the front.   I went to, I would
think, an area near to gate 3 and it was at that stage I
saw the injuries that had occurred.

As you stand on the pitch,   the left hand side of gate 3?
- A. That is correct, sir.

Whilst you were in that general position and assisting in
whatever way you could, were you conscious of any
particular object coining from the pens out on to the
pitch? - A. Yes, sir.   I went from that location to gate
2 and worked from there.    I took that on as a point
where I could be most usefully deployed.    There was no
other senior Officer there and I took responsibility for
that gate at that time.    I in fact stood on the fencing
looking over there and looking back towards pen 3;    the
reason being that people were being passed over from pen
3 into pen 2.

What was the object? - A. The object that I saw was a
large bar.

Do you know what that bar was? - A. I presumed it to be
the large blue crash barrier bar.

Where did it land? - A. I think - I am not sure really.
It landed on the pitch somewhere towards the goal post, I
believe.

Did you see the person who threw it? - A. No.

Were you able to assess for what reason it had been
thrown out? - A. I have said in my statement, and
probably unfairly, that it appeared to be thrown at the
Police.   That was my state of mind when I looked across.
Policemen were on the perimeter fencing and so were
supporters pulling people out and it just appeared it was
thrown in that general direction.   That is why that
comment appears.

It may be there was only one   piece.   How long a piece of
bar was this? - A. It seemed   to be a piece 10 or 12*
long.   I was just surprised   that no-one was injured.   It
just seemed to come over and   land and then I purely got
on with what I was doing.

I know it is very difficult, but can you   help us at all
as to the approximate time when that was   thrown over? -
A. I cannot, sir, other than I have seen   that video and
know I appeared on that fence, which was   some time after
I arrived...

Have you spotted the bar being thrown over on the video?
- A. No, I have not.   I have watched very little
                            33


                                           R, PURDY


   television in relation to this, but I have seen one where
   I was stood on that fencing.  I do not know what time
   that was.

Q. That is the stage at which it was thrown? - A. I am sure
   it was while I was on that fencing and looking back
   towards pen 3.

         MR. GOLDSACK:   Thank you.

         MR. HYTNER:   Sir, I am very conscious that some of
   the questions I am putting to the Inspectors could, with
   more profit, have been put to the Chief Superintendent.
   The difficulty is, of course, in fairness to all of us
   here that the information has been developing and we
   could not then put those questions.   Sir, I hope it does
   not seem unfair that I am putting questions to more
   junior Officers.

         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    If there is anything crucial
   there is no reason why we should not have the Officer
   back, but I follow you.

                Cross-Examined by MR. HYTNER:

Q. Mr. Purdy, in general if there is an operation, whether
   it is policing a football match or policing anywhere
   else, where there is a large number of Police Officers of
   different ranks involved, each rank  will have their own
   responsibilities? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. If the operation goes smoothly, and according to plan,
   there would be no need for any rank of Officer to report
   what he is doing to a senior Officer? - A. That depends
   obviously on the operation, whether there would be a d e ­
   brief.

Q. I am talking about as the operation is going on.   Do you
   follow? - A. If everything is running smoothly you would
   not make a report, that is correct, sir.

Q. If there is an emergency obviously you would immediately
   report? - A. That is correct.

Q. Between those two, everything going according to plan and
   smoothly and the sudden emergency, there is, of course, a
   whole range, there will be black shading to grey shading
   to white? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Then it is a matter of fine judgment as to every Officer
   as to when and if he reports trouble to his superiors, to
   ask for help or to let them know there is trouble? - A.
   Yes, sir.
                           34


                                          R. PURDY


Q. Can we deal with the problems outside the turnstiles?
   I have a note, it may not be a wholly accurate one, that
   your feeling was that by 2.30 the operation you had
   mounted at the turnstiles was futile.   Is that a fair
   reflection of what you said or have I got it wrong? - A.
   I would suggest it was later than that.

Q. By what time did you think the operation was futile? - A.
   I thought we were fighting a losing battle, if yovi wish,
   perhaps at 2.40.

Q. What time was it when you withdrew your Officers from the
   turnstiles to the concourse within the ground? - A. About
   that time, sir.

Q. It obviously was a developing situation so that prior to
   2.40 you must have been concerned that things were not
   going according to plan and smoothly? - A. I was
   certainly concerned, sir, I always am, both for people
   attending the football match and the Officers.

Q. Perhaps you are mistaking what I am putting to you.
   Naturally you will always have their welfare in mind -
   worried.  There must have been a stage before 2.40 when
   you began to worry that things might not be going
   smoothly? -A. No, sir.   I would suggest there was a
   build-up prior to that that was no more than I thought we
   were coping with.

Q. Is this your recollection that if somebody had come along
   at 2.30 or 2.35 and said, "Everything all right,
    Mr. Purdy?", you would have said, "All is going well.
   No need to worry"? - A. No, sir.   I would have said we
   were busy but coping, which you expect to be at a busy
   football match.

Q. At 2.40 if somebody had radioed through and said,
   "Everything all right?", you would have said, "No.    The
   operation outside the turnstiles has collapsed.    There
   are problems"?   Would that be right? - A. I would
   certainly have said there were problems.

Q. Were you in a position to see whether the same problems
   were occurring other than in the immediate vicinity of
   the turnstiles?   That is, out on the concourse by
   Leppings Lane? - A. As you are probably aware, sir, I
   took a vantage point on top of that funnel bar at one
   stage, but from there my concern was over the immediate
   area and back to the perimeter gate.   I could not see
   further down Leppings Lane.   It is a slight gradient up
   to Leppings Lane.

Q. It must have been as obvious to others as it was to you
   that by 2.40 at the latest the operation to control the
                           35


                                          R, PURDY


   crowd outside the turnstile area had collapsed, or for
   all practical purposes had collapsed? - A. I can only
   make comment as to what I thought, sir.

Q. If your serials were being withdrawn from the front, then
   the battle as far as you were concerned had been lost? -
   A. I would say, sir, they were not purely withdrawn, they
   were merely redeployed.   I had brought them out and
   others came alongside assisting on the funnel bar.   The
   Constables were not in any way stood down.

Q. You are probably too young to recall, but a strategic
   withdrawal was always the polite way of talking about a
   retreat of your own side. - A. That depends, sir.   I
   would suggest if they went further backwards the Officers
   who were withdrawn came through back to the front and
   made gallant efforts out there to regain their position,
   both on the perimeter gates and on that funnel bar where
   people were trapped and injured.

Q. Can you recall whether the radios were operative at about
   2.4? - A. I cannot, sir, no, mine certainly was not.

Q. Yours was not? - A. To the best of my knowledge.

Q. How long would it have taken an Officer to sprint from A
   to G turnstiles to Police Control? -A. Ten seconds, if he
   got through the gates and if he got to the box without
   any hindrance.

Q. Then up the ladder? - A. Yes.

Q. There was no difficulty about somebody - I am not
   suggesting it should have been you, incidentally - there
   was no difficulty about somebody outside the turnstiles
   getting a message to Control at 2.40 that there were
   serious problems in controlling the crowd outside
   Leppings Lane? - A. I certainly did not send a runner as
   you describe.

Q. No, no, I am not suggesting that you should have done,
   but there would not have been a problem that if somebody
   had wanted or thought it right to give information to
   Control that that was the position? - A. That is
   certainly right, there was no physical obstruction.

Q. Similarly, if somebody in Control had thought it sensible
   or wise to let Officers outside the ground know h o w many
   fans were still expected to come, again another 10 second
   dash from the Control to the front? - A. That is
   feasible, sir.

         MR. HYTNER:   Thank you
                                           R. PURDY


            Cross-Examined by MR. M U L L E R :

Officer, can I ask you something about what occurred when
you got into the ground itself, and perhaps you could
have a look at the South Yorkshire Police photographs,
the first volume, photograph no. 28? - A. Yes, sir.

That gives the scene and you have told us you decided to
go to pen 2, as it is marked there? - A. That is correct,
sir.

Am I right in understanding you decided to take charge
because there did not seem to be any senior Officer
looking after that area at that time? - A. There was a
number of senior Officers in the front of the terracing.

However, not actually in charge of pen 2? - A. That is
correct, sir.    There was Inspector Darling who would
move between them.   He was at the side of me at one
stage, I recall.

But nobody as far as you could tell so you decided to
take over in that area? - A. That is correct, sir.

Do I understand from what you say that there were
nevertheless some Officers already within the pen, or
no£? - A. I believe there were odd Officers in there,
yes, sir.

What you were doing was trying to get the people tomove
to the left of the photograph, is that right? - A. If you
see gate 2 it was pulled open and I was positioned to the
right of number 2 and I certainly waved with my arms for
the fans to go back in that area, in pen 2.   The
objective was to go further towards the left.   In other
words, toward the observation post, the objective being
then that I could get serials into that pen and alleviate
the pressure in pen 3 by passing people over the fence.

I think you had some degree of success in moving people?
- A. Initially, yes.   There were a number of fans who
did take notice and moved back.

Of course, that pen was nothing like as full as the other
pens and so there would be room for people to move to the
left? - A. Certainly, sir.   There were others, I might
add, I know it has been mentioned, you would get a move
but you would also get a move contrary coming back.
There were people, and it was similarly on the ground
outside the turnstiles I might add, that if someone was
five yards away they did not really comprehend what you
were doing and I think the same applied there when I was
trying to wave them back.
A '                                  37a


                                                     R, PURDY


      Q. I ask it in this context:   looking at the situation would
         it have been a good idea to have evacuated all the people
         who were in pen 2?    In other words, not just to move
         them to the left but to remove them off the pitch under
         the Emergency Procedure which was available? - A. I do
         not think that the...

                 LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:      On to the pitch?

                 MR. MULLER:   No:

      Q. Off the pitch round the back.? - A. I would say I think
         originally people had been coming through gate 2 on to
         the pitch and to my mind then, making that decision, I
         did not think that was a feasible option to evacuate
         through that gate.   To me that was complicating the
         matter.   I do not think the space we created - I think a
         lot of people naturally moved to the left and I do not
         think it totally hindered our efforts there.   The amount
         that were passed over that railing, I would suggest, were
         adequately coped with by Officers and members of the
         crowd in that area who assisted others.

      Q. You may have misunderstood because I was never suggesting
         to you that anybody should have been evacuated through
         gate 2, but they should have been evacuated through the
         normal exit, which is, of course, at the left hand side
         of the stand? - A. That is correct.

      Q. So you would have had a situation in which the whole of
         that part of the terraces would have been emptied? - A.
         That is right.

      Q.   Would that have been an advantage, to have emptied it
           completely? - A. It is an open option that could have
           been taken and we will not know unfortunately the result
           of that.   What I would suggest is that the movement
           created by the Officers I placed into that pen was
           sufficient for the numbers that were passed over that
           fencing.

      Q. So you could have without getting people out of that pen
         altogether create enough room? - A. Yes, sir.

      Q. Can you help me, looking at photograph 28, were people
         coming over the fence, the radial fence?   Is that how
         people were being got out? - A. That is correct, they
         were were being passed over there bodily.

      Q.   There is a gate at the back, were you aware of that? - A.
           I was aware, yes.
                                            R, PURDY


Were people being brought through that gate? - A. Not to
my knowledge.   The area I was immediately supervising
was that front section.

Can you assist us   as to why if the gate was open, at
least some people   could not come through the gate? - A.
What I said, sir,   was I did not notice that.   I do not
know whether they   did come through or not.

Can you help us as to whether there was any Officer in
the vicinity of that gate trying to get people to come
through the gate? - A. No, sir.   What I can say is that
I saw the front area, I saw the area where they were
being passed out which, I would imagine, as you look at
the barriers there, the middle one of the three, if you
wish, it was from there and below that they were passing
them over.

Were you at that time aware that people were being
ushered back out through the tunnel? - A. No, sir.

      MR. MULLER:     Yes,   thank you.

          Cross-Examined by MR. K A L L IP E TI S:

Mr. Purdy, would you take the South Yorkshire Police
bundle 1, the composite album 1?  - A. Yes, sir.




            Q. Would you turn to photograph
                            38


                                                  R. PURDY


Q.   Would you turn to photograph 29A, please? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   I think we can see you in the middle of that photograph? -   A.
     I have a photograph of pen 2 in front of me.

Q.   No, I am sorry, the composite album. - A. My    apologies. Yes,
     sir.

Q.   And that is one minute before gate   C is opened for the second
     time.  That photograph we are told   was taken at 14.52. - A. I
     will accept that, yes, sir.

Q. If you turn, please, to photograph 32A, that is taken just
   after the gate has been opened.   That is at 14.53.  Is that
   you also in the centre of the picture there? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   The only point is this that I want you help on.   There are
     clearly two gates to gate C, are not there?  It is concertina
     gates, two of them which open from the middle out to the side?
     - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. And when referring to them one could refer to them as gates?
   "Open the gates” could be equally applicable to all the gates
   or just gate C.  Is not that right? - A. It could, sir, yes.
   It could have been A, B and C.

Q. Quite.  It could also be all the gates away up to 0, P and Q
   on the other side of the ground? - A. It would not have been
   applicable, sir, to the decision that was given.

Q. Precisely.    What you are concerned with, mr. Purdy, if one
   looks back to the photographs is the area of evident crushing
   - there is no criticism of the decision to open the gate;
   please don't think that - the area of crushing immediately in
   front of the turnstiles A-G.    Is not that right? - A. That is
   correct, s i r .

Q. And the decision of Mr. Marshall that you interpreted to gate
   C was to relieve that area of crushing immediately in front of
   you which you could see with your own eyes? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. So when the order came which you referred to of "Open the
   gates", would it be right to think that that was in fact
   applicable to gate C? - A. That is how I interpreted it and
   that is how I carried it out, sir.

Q. Indeed.  Absolutely right.    Thank you. - A. Could I just say
   something there, sir?

Q.        LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Yes. - A. It is applicable that I
     did open those.  I appreciate if not criticism has been
     levelled at that, but why it was opened I will tell you.
     Because I thought at that stage that by clearing that area, as
     I said to Mr. Hytner, it would allow if you want a safety
     valve for the people to be brought under that barrier, the
     funnel bar, it would create space for them after the first
*2-   r


                                      39


                                                           R. PURDY


               opening.  The reason I did not consider gate B as an option at
               all was the fact there were neither Police on the outside of
               that gate, and had it been opened then all the people in that
               area would have gone straight into the ground.  Gate C by its
               own location was concealed down the side, and seemed the
               natural one for me to open at that time, sir, and that is why
               I went to it.

          Q. So it was a modified exercise to open C just to clear this
             area this side of the barrier.  Is that it? - A. I appreciate
             the congestion and the crushing that has been described
             outside the perimeter, but my focal point was on those who I
             believed were severely being injured, and in fact I had
             already passed that child from the centre of the crowd that
             caused my concern in that immediate area, sir.  That is why
             I selected gate C.

          Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:   Mr. Purdy, if I may say so, displaying
               superb common sense, because you can see from photograph 32A
               that there you are at the edge of what is clearly a very
               severe crush the other side of the iron bar which leads down
               to turnstile G, and a crush between that and the far wall
               between A and G. Is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

          Q.   At that stage the perimeter gate we can see had been closed
               and there are mounted Police Officers monitoring that? -A.
               Yes, sir.

          Q. And your concern was, quite rightly, was to clear that area
             before you allowed further people to come in from behind the
             perimeter gates? - A. That is correct, sir.

          Q.   And quite clearly your perception was you could monitor that,
               as we can see you did, by having Police Officers stated by
               gate C? - A. And horses as well, sir, yes.

          Q. And horses, indeed.  Which is why shortly after that I
             realised you had appreciated that, because the order to open
             the gates referred to gate C. - A. My apologies, sir.

          Q. No, no, please, Mr. Purdy, d o n ’t apologise at all. One can
             see in fact you achieved that if one follows the sequence of
             photographs through. - A. Yes, sir.

          Q. Follow through from 35A to 36A, 37s, until we get to the next
             photograph which is I think the last one in the bundle at
             14.58, where it appears if one can judge that things are very
             much more relaxed in that area? - A. That is correct, sir.

          Q. Thank you, Mr. Purdy.

                             Cross-Examined by MR. GLASGOW:

          Q. Mr. Purdy, I, too, sympathise with and respect
             your reasons for opening that gate, but I wondered
             if you knew that Superintendent Marshall actually
             told us on two occasions that he intended all
                            40

                                                  R. PURDY


     three gates to be opened.   Did you not know that?
     - A. I did not, sir, no.

Q. Did you also know that C gate having been opened pursuant to
   what he believed to be his request, he was actually waiting
   for A and B gates also to be opened? - A. That I didn't know,
   sir.  He passed me an instruction which I carried out.  It was
   my responsibility once he had given it to me, and I carried it
   out in that area.

Q.    Yes, and again I entirely accept, of course, your
     reasonableness and honesty about it, but the words that he
     spoke to you you understood to be an order from a senior
     Officer to open the gate? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q.   I wonder if you could help clarify a little bit of confusion
     for us that may arise from those who were inside gate C. - A.
     Yes, sir.

Q. If some of the people inside gate C had the impression that it
   was being opened in order to eject supporters, and others
   had the impression it was being opened in response to a
   direct order from you on the outside, coincidentally both of
   them would be right, as you now know? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And as you say, a pure coincidence that I think you now know
   from what you have seen and you accept from what you have been
   told that Officers on the inside were ejecting at the very
   moment you were coming in and ordering from the outside? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. And what mattered to you, accepting of course that you
   believed that you were obeying an order from a superior
   Officer, what really mattered was that you knew that ground
   control had been told of the intention to open C gate? - A.
   Yes, that would be obvious to me if Mr. Marshall had given me
   that order.

Q. You recognise it was of fundamental importance, as I am sure
   we all agree, that ground control should be told before the
   gate was opened? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. That either it was going to be opened or that it was requested
   to be opened? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. And before you carried out what you believed was the order in
   passing it on to the Constables on the inside, you were
   certain in your own mind that ground control knew what was
   going to be done? - A. I did, sir.  When I came back from Mr.
   Marshall, in fact, I spoke to the horsemen who were in that
   area to block the gates, and I also deputed Constables who
   were working for me in that area to go to the perimeter gates
   so that could be sealed, the objective being that no more
   would come into the area so I could alleviate it in that area.

Q. It may be, Mr. Purdy, there were those two quite independent
   coincidental reasons operating at the same time, the ejection
A'                               41

                                                      R. PURDY


          from the inside and your order from the outside? - A. Yes.

     Q. Because the ejection process is one that takes quite a few
        moments.  It is not a sudden thing,s is it? - A. I would
        suggest it would be a relatively quick arrangement if someone
        was being ejected through a gate.

     Q. Well, they have to be physically brought to the gate by one or
        two Officers? - A. My apologies.  I thought you meant the
        actual opening of the gates would be very quick.

     Q . Let us talk about the suddenness of the opening of the g a t es,
         please, Mr. Purdy.  From your position on the outside you also
         knew that whatever the reason for the gates being opened that
         would inevitably lead to an inrush of some people? - A. Yes,
         sir.

     Q. Could you describe in your words what we can only see on the
        film, the inrush that occurred on that occasion? How many
        people did you think came in on that occasion? - A. I would
        again find very difficult to account for a number, but a
        general estimation, I think I have been asked, and I would
        perhaps say it was 100, 150.

     Q. Where did you go as the gates opened in front of you? - A. To
        the left.

     Q. So you just tucked yourself inside on the left-hand wall? - A.
        Yes.  I am not quite sure how far the concertinas were opened,
        but I remember as the people moved in behind me going to my
        left.

     Q. Shall we look together at the photograph? Does it help,
        composite No. 1 again.  Go just two or three back from the
        last page to MWL.10/36A. -A. Yes.

     Q. I d o n ’t want to mislead you, Inspector. This is the second
        time, and a much more peaceful occasion, and d o n ’t be misled
        by it.     We can see through the turnstiles just into the left-
        hand side just outside the first turnstile a Police helmet at
        the back? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. Would that be the approximate position in which you had been
        standing during the first gate opening? - A. I would suggest a
        little bit nearer  to the - if you were to close the gates - a
        little bit nearer  to the middle, because I don't think the
        gates were opened  as far as that, or that was not my
        interpretation.

     Q.   Somewhere just inside on the left? - A. That is correct, sir.

     Q.   And after that inrush of people had been controlled with the
          assistance of the horse as we see on the video and the gates
          were shut, where did you then go? -A. I came straight out,
          sir.

     Q. So as they were shutting you were squeezing out beside the
                            42

                                                   R. PURDY


   horse? - A. It is very difficult to remember instances where
   seconds are passing very quickly.  I recall someone looking
   through the window.  There is a small glass pane.  Someone was
   looking through as to whether we had alleviated the problem
   out there, whether it was clear.  I then came out and I
   certainly spoke to Sergeant Morgan who I believe followed me
   out and we went straight to that funnel bar and started to
   pull people under there, which had been my original concerned
   prior to that.

Q. Yes, indeed as Mr. Kallipetis has pointed out, we see you on
   the photographs within a minute or so of the gates having been
   reshut, but did you think that the gates were just opened the
   once and people came in and you went out before they were
   re-sealed, or that they were opened again in order to let
   you out? - A. They would be opened again to let me out, I
   believe.

Q. So the sequence of events is the gate opened partly for an
   ejection and partly pursuant to your order, you go into the
   inside? Correct? - A. Yes.

Q. You stay there while there is an inrush - I am not holding you
   to it - something between 100 and 200 people? - A. It was
   merely seconds I would suggest t h a t , I d o n 't think any longer
   than t h a t , and then I went straight o u t , because my concern
   was for the people trapped out there.

Q. Yes.  Again, this is not any criticism at all of an area of
   responsibility that was not yours, but while you were inside
   the ground even for those few seconds did you happen to see or
   appreciate where that first inrush of people had gone? - A. I
   did not, sir, no.

Q. To be fair to ;you, having appreciated that the gate had been
   opened on your understanding with the knowledge of ground
   control, did you understand and believe that was somebody
   else's business and not yours after what happened to them when
   they were on the inside? - A. The concern obviously of where
   they went inside was a concern, but my immediate concern was
   to rehouse those people that were trapped into that concourse
   in there.  I didn't take it as my responsibility in there.   My
   responsibility was outside to those people who were trapped.
   Does that answer your question, sir?

Q. Perfectly.   The last matter, Inspector.      After you came out
   and the problem was momentarily alleviated, were you then
   a part of the decision or giving effect to the decision to
   open the gate a second time? - A. I was out there and I
   instructed horsemen to line up ready for that opening of the
   gates again.   I d i d n ’t actually order the gates open.

Q. No, but you appreciated that they were going to be opened? -
   A. That is right.  I would have opened them again myself if
   that need had arisen, but they were opened.  We were joined by
   other Officers and mounted who sealed off those gates.
£   *


                                  43

                                                       R. PURDY


        Q. And again, again without criticism, your understanding was
           that the opening of the gates would be confined to C despite
           the fact that your senior Officer was expecting all three to
           be opened? - A. That is correct, sir.  If I might say, there
           was mention of it yesterday whilst I was sat in the Inquiry
           room, of gate B.  I certainly saw gate B open, if that
           assists.

        Q. You saw it opened? - A. That is correct.

        Q. That was not any business of yours - I don't mean that rudely
           - that was not your immediate concern because the area with
           which you were then preoccupied was the area around the
           turnstile queue to let people out to relieve the crush there?
           - A. That is correct.  It was obviously a concern of mine, and
           when it opened the people who were in there I can surely speak
           for them that they were relieved that the congestion had been
           relieved in there when gate B opened.

        Q. One of the reasons that operated on your mind though for
           making C the most suitable candidate for a safety valve had
           been that there happened to be Police officers around it? - A.
           There were a number of factors, sir.  Obviously it was a
           decision made very quickly, but it was made on the grounds
           that there were Police Officers I knew inside the concourse.

        Q. Did you believe that the same applied to either B or A? - A.
           A, to be honest, I had very little concern at that moment for
           me because it was so far removed.

        Q. So be it.  Let us take that out of the reckoning. Come back
           to B. When you saw that opened did you believe there would be
           Officers inside to receive the inrush from that? - A. I was
           aware there were Officers within that turnstile area, yes,
           sir.

        Q. Both on the inside and the outside? - A. They were certainly -
           no, because the funnel area up to A-G was completely full with
           fans, and that was the problem, so there were no Police
           Officers on the outside of that gate.  There would be no
           control of them other than on the inside.

        Q. Thank you very much.

                             Bv LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

        Q. Can I just clarify that.  At one stage you ordered your serial
           to go inside because they were not having any effect any more.
           Is that right? - A. I ordered them through the turnstiles,
           sir, and they came out I believe through gate C to assist
           outside on the funnel bar and at the end of that queueing.

        Q. Would those be some of your Officers we see on 36A, standing
           at the gate there? - A. No, sir.   If you look at the next one,
           37, the Officers in my serial are interspaced between the
           horseman.   You can see my flat hat in that area and up to the
           funnel bar.
1   •
                                  44

                                                        R. PURDY



        Q. So they were all outside? - A. They were all outside, sir.

                         Cross-Examined by MR. WOODWARD:

        Q. Mr. Purdy, had you policed Hillsborough before? - A. Yes, sir,
           a number of times.

        Q. Had you been there in 1988? - A. I had, sir, yes.  I worked on
           that occasion the mobile patrols to the north of the city.




                                 /Q. So you were away
                                   R. PURDY


So you were away from the ground? - A. That is correct sir.

In 1989 you had this task of dealing with the people at
Leppings Lane? - A. That is correct, sir.

In your evidence, in your statement you describe how there
were a number of people outside Leppings Lane who seemed
to be reluctant to come in? - A. That is right sir, yes.
I can say that a number of people would come along and our
policy and what we had been given from the start was to
get people into the ground early and you wotild say:  "Come
on then, into the ground lads" ease them in and there was
a reluctance to go in, certainly.

So the policy and the endeavour on the part of the Police
was to get people into the ground? - A. That is correct sir.

But for whatever reason there were substantial numbers, were
there, who did not respond to that encouragement and wanted
to stay out? - A. Certainly sir there were a number.  Obviously
I was moving about among the Serials and I can only speak
for those I spoke to, but there were a number, yes sir.

Was this policy of trying to get in not just tried on one
or two occasions but throughout the build-up to the game?
- A. Certainly when you were outside the perimeter gates
that was the policy of that Serial and the other Serials to
usher them towards the gate, to encourage them to go towards
the gate.

In your statement you say that this endeavour was made and
make the observation that "whilst there were ordinary,
normal co-operative elements in the crowds, it was apparent
that the general attitude of some of the supporters was
one of resentment:*? - A. I think there is always - and I
would not class all fans in that - but there is always a
certain element that will resent Police presence.   Certainly
those without tickets that were moved on and reappeared then
you would be more firm with them the second time and they
would be resentful about that.

So apart from non-co-operation, there was also an element
of persistence on the part of some of the individuals?
- A. Certainly sir.  I can recall clearly       the faces,
but I can certainly recall seeing the same time and time
again and telling the same people.

Did you see those individuals or any of them up at the
turnstiles? - A. No sir, not particularly.  They tended to
form in the area outside that shop that has been mentioned.

The sweet   shop? - A. The sweet shop.

Yes. - A. I had that cleared a number oftimes by the horses
and by footmen when I had gone to the other Serials at the
                                    R. PURDY


  other turnstiles and they were forming around the bridge and
  in the area between the funnel bar, as I have described, and
  the river railings.

Q. Were your Officers in the positions that you expected them
   to be working in? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Were they carrying out their instructions to check and monitor
   people? - A. They were sir.

Q. Were they asking them whether or not they had got tickets?
   - A. That would be part of their job, sir, and when I was
   outside the perimeter gates I found it myself that people
   were naturally asking Police Officers for directions to the
   appropriate entrance.

Q. Did you notice the Officers particularly at the turnstile
   ends and how they were coping with their task? - A. I did
   sir, yes.

Q. In the early stages how well did they seem to be dealing
   with it? - A. Very well sir.  I think most of the fans know
   when they approach grounds they are stopped and filtered
   into the turnstiles and it seemed to be done in good
   humour.

Q. Had it ever been your experience to have people actually
   lined up in queues? - A. I have heard mention obviously this
   morning to queues.  You expect them to come towards the
   turnstiles.  The Officers originally are positioned perhaps
   a yard out from the turnstiles which in itself forms a mouth
   then into the turnstile.

Q. Is that how it was practised on this occasion? - A. That is
   correct sir.

Q. But there was this build-up obviously from the back which
   oppressed those who were towards the front? — A. That was
   much later sir, yes.

Q. What sort of time did you really become aware of that
   problem occurring? — A. I have said already, I believe sir
   about perhaps 2.40, just prior to 2.40.

Q. It may be that timing is difficult.  There obviously came
   a point when you realised that you were not going to be
   able to cope? - A. I think there became a time prior to
   that when I found it difficult to cope with the situation
   and we are talking about moments there sir.

Q. To try and get some flavour of what you were experiencing
   and to look at it in the cold light of this room, was there
   an opportunity for you to appreciate that your method was
   not going to work and to do anything more than you actually
   did? - A. No sir, I think by the time we reached the point
                          47

                                     R. PURDY


  where we were ©verrun and certainly Officers at the turnstiles
  were overrun, then it was minutes, seconds or minutes where
  we were overtaken.

Q. There was some suddenness about it? - A. Certainly sir, yes.

Q. And in those moments did you have any opportunity to do
   otherwise? - A. No sir, the opportunity I had was to deal
   with that that was happening there and then and the action
   that had to be taken there and then.

Q. The endeavour was made to relieve the pressure on those to
   the front by use of men and horses in the perimeter gates?
   - A. That is right.  I had worked very closely with the
   horsemen and certainly the Liverpool horseman who has been
   depicted, he was working at the back of that funnel and
   sweeping the side.  It was all part of the same duty and
   alleviating the pressure at the rear of the crowd, initially.

Q. Could you observe any reason why those at the back who were
   coming on should nevertheless have continued to press on
   despite these efforts? - A. I was positioned very well to
   the front, as you are aware sir, and to me it was just a
   tide coming in that we were unable to stop.

Q. Had you expected like that to happen? - A. No sir.  I think
   I mentioned in my statement that I was concerned for the
   Officers who were on the turnstile.  They were exceptionally
   busy and I would say that was the optimum that I expected
   it to reach, that it would continue extremely busy but coping.

Q. Were they at an early stage searching people as they came
   to the turnstiles? - A. They were sir, yes.

Q. Of course that in itself tends to slow things up? - A. I
   think that is part of the method of searching that enables
   the flow into the turnstiles to be comfortable.

Q. So it has a deliberate benefit in fact? - A. That is correct,
   sir, that is why they are positioned that little way out
   from the turnstiles to act both as a slowing and a method
   if you wanted the last yard to be a queue into the actual
   physical turnstile.

Q. So it benefits those who are between the Officers and the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes sir.

Q. It holds back those who are approaching? - A. That is
   correct sir.

Q. And slows them up? - A. That is right sir, and they tend
   naturally when it is not busy to go towards the Officers
   and filter between them.

Q. The element of non-co-operation and the behaviour of those
   who were coming on.  Did you notice any change in it?
                                  R. PURDY


- A. Yes sir. There had been elements of the supporters
from the start who had been drinking that I noticed when
I was outside the perimeter gates.  I would suggest that
the element that had been drinking came later and it certainly
seemed that the crush from the back, f«ism nearer the perimeter
gates to me at the front who had the people who were being
injured at the turnstiles, they were a problem for me by
pushing those people forward.

This element at the rear? - A. That is correct, sir.
Unfortunately I had to deal with the front of the queues
where the problems were.

Did you notice people coming in along the sides and thrusting
themselves into the crowd? - A. Attempts were made to do
that yes, several times, but it was virtually impossible to
get in there.
Despite that people were trying to do it, were they? - A. I
can recall at some stage sir, and I am again vague on times,
you must forgive me for that, that there was a person who
had basically been fighting to get in there with other
supporters and he was removed by a Constable and arrested.

You were concerned for the safety of the people approaching
the turnstile mouths and for the safety of your own Officers.
- A. They were both my concern, sir, the safety for the
supporters and my Officers.

There came a point when you took a decision to cause your
Officers to go inside? - A. That is correct sir.

And they did that, did they? - A. Yes sir.

What happened to them when you brought them out again, where
did you put them? - A. We redeployed them down the side of
the funnel.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: Mr. Woodward, if you don't mind
we have covered this just a few minutes ago. I asked the
questions and we got the answers.

      MR. WOODWARD:  Sir, it has been      covered but may I
ask just one question on it?

       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Of course.

      MR. WOODWARD:  How far out did you take those Officers
when you brought them round? - A. They came along the funnel
bar, sir, and I redeployed some I believe to the perimeter
gates to close them.

 How were their efforts received by the crowd? - A. They
 were mixed,  I would suggest sir. Howards the back the Officers
 who went to the perimeter gates and assisted the horsemen
 had a very difficult task which I think they performed very
 well.
                                    R. PURDY


Those at the front, the people who were close to the turn
stiles were grateful for the relief, but those at the
back responded differently? - A. That is correct, ®~r *
Those who were pressed against the turnstiles and that
funnel bar were at that stage crying and in some cases
screaming for assistance.  The Officers who were with me
attempted to alleviate those who were being injured.

Just one final matter, please.  Did you observe any
Stewards outside in the forecourt? - A. No sir.

To the front of the turnstiles at any time? - A. No sir.

      MR. WOODWARD:   Thank you.


                Re-Examined bv MR. COLLINS:

Mr. Purdy, do I correctly understand that your tactics in
relation to Gate C were to open it for a short period,
let a few people in to relieve pressure and then close it
again? - A. That is correct sir.

That is what happened on the first occasion, as we know?
- A. That is correct.
On the second occasion it in fact stayed open for quite a
long time. Was that out of your control by then? “ *•
That is correct, sir, although I was there and the Officer
I accept responsibility for that gate.     Until I watche
that video I had no idea of the numbers who were coming
b&hind.     To my mind they were being funnelled down there,
w e w e r e controlling that gate and it was a limited number
entering.
 But in fact what appears to have happened is that it was
 treated as effectively the way in for those who were Dammed
 up against the turnstiles? - A. That is what I was using
 it for sir, yes.
 Yes, but not in small bursts but for a fairly long tim®
 on the second occasion? - A. Yes sir.  If I might s«*y it
 seemed as though it was a short steady flow and I think
 I said in my statement I thought it had closed after that
 because I think by which stage I had gone right back up
 to the funnel bar again, so it just seemed a build-up
 behind rae to me.

 The only other thing I would like to ask y o u : U J ^ L r ^ e r
 remember you told us that you saw part of the crush barrier
 or what in fact was part of the crush barrier thrown over
 the perimeter fence? - &. That is correct sir.

. Did you see anything ofi it before it was thrown? - A. No sir,
  I was looking across to that side and the next thing
  saw it©om ing .
                                   S .   E L L I S




So you effectively were just aware of it when it was already
in the air? - A. Yes, or being hurled over.

      MR. COLLINS:   Yes, thank you.

      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   Thank you very much.


              INSPECTOR STEPHEN ELLIS Called

                Examined bv MR. PHILLIPS:

Are you Inspector Stephen Ellis? - A. That is correct sir.

Were you in charge   of Serials 36, 37 and 38 on the   day in
question? - A. Yes   sir.

These involved your going to Wadsley Bridge Station to
collect supporters who had arrived by train from Liverpool?
- A.That is correct.

And you were then, or one of your details at least was to
escort them back down to the Leppings Lane entrance? - A.
Originally sir, yes.   In fact both Serials 36 and 37 escorted
them.

The supporters came with you and I think with a Serial of
horsemen, is that right, from the Station? - A. That is
correct.

Can you remember what time you got to Leppings Lane ground
with the people from the train? - A. Well I arrived last
sir at about 2.20 but in actual fact my Serial was there
several minutes before.

You then stayed I think in Leppings Lane until 3 o'clock
time.  Is that right? - A. That is correct.

And did your Serials also stay in that vicinity? - A. Yes
sir.

The two that had come from the Station? - A. Yes sir.

Were you on the Lane itself or were you in the entrance to
the ground? - A. I was on Leppings Lane itself, sort of
in the area and vicinity of the sweet shop.

Did you have any dealings with the supporters, the public
who were going to the match? - A. Just giving them general
directions and funnelling them into the turnstiles and
giving them verbal directions where to enter.

Did you get a lot of enquiries from people as to where they
should go? - A. Certainly I received a few enquiries sir
and Officers near to me were receiving similar enquiries
all the time.
                            51

                                      S .   E L L I S




Q. N o w ;I think you were there then, were you not, as the
   crowd built-up from 2.30 onwards.     Is that right? — A. That
   is correct, sir.

Q. Did you notice this build-up of the crowd? — A. Well originally
   up to about 2.30 there were no problems whatsoever.   I recall
   a couple of incidents behind nie sort of directly in front
   of the turnstiles, just normal crowd behaviour where young
   lads were hanging around.  I instructed a few Officers to go
   and move them on and I recall a black Capri inching its way
   through the traffic.

Q. Now at one stage before we get to the major build-up of the
   crowd at 2.30, did you have something to do with some counter­
   feit tickets? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. What happened? - A. Three gentlemen approached me from the
   area of Catchbar Lane.  They told me they had purchased some
   tickets and spent every penny that they had brought with them
   from Liverpool on these tickets and they showed to me what
   simply was an ordinary copied ticket done on a photostat
   machine and hastily coloured in yellow crayon.  It was
   apparent from what they said to me that they had bought them
   off a small boy, probably about nine years old. They
   described him as so big, probably 3'6" to 4' tall. They
   were so hastily coloured he had simply gone like that with
   a yellow crayon.  That was not even on the colour scheme.

Q. Were you able to do anything   about it? - A. I advised them
   sir. There was no sign from    where I was of the lad that
   they were referring to and I   advised them to go and find
   him, detain him and give him   to the nearest Policeman.

Q. From 2.30 onwards did you stay in the vicinity of the sweet
   shop or did you move from there? - A. I was all the time in
   front of the turnstile area but in Leppings Lane itself.

Q. Do you recall a time when the Land Rover came along driven
   by Police Constable Buxton? - A. That is correct, sir.  It
   would be about 2.50 p.m.

Q. Did you see where that Land Rover stopped? - A. It stopped
   in front of the turnstiles 1-16, roughly in the centre of
   Leppings Lane.

Q. Can you turn and look please at the model.  Do you see where
   Leppings Lane is shown and the forecourt leading to the
   outer perimeter gates.  First of all was it on the Lane
   itself or was it in that forecourt? - A. As I understand
   it sir it was in the Lane, probably just below the 'L' of
   Leppings there.

Q. Did you hear anything coming from that Land Rover? - A. Yes
   sir.  The driver, P.C. Buxton, gave a couple of appeals for
   patience and to stop pushing.

Q. Where were you when you heard that? - A. As I recall sir
                                     S .   E L L I S




as I was already or trying to speak to a mounted Inspector
that was sat on his horse obviously trying to get his
horses into a line.

How far from the Land Rover were you? - A. Probably 5-10 yards.

I think you went on to the Land Rover yourself, didn't you?
- A. I did sir, yes.

What was your purpose in doing that? - A. Well twofold.
Basically I thought I would be able to, that the confusion
being created with tickets I thought that was the reason
for the crushing and I would be able to visually direct
them.
      LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: What do you mean by the
"confusion with the tickets"? - A. Well I had received
these enquiries about tickets all the time, my Lord, and
I thought that that was probably the reason that there
was some confusion, people going to the wrong turnstiles
and not being able to move away having realised that they
were at the wrong one, so I thought ....

Because of the markings on the tickets and above the
turnstiles, you mean? - A. I could not say, my Lord.
One gentleman approached me and just simply asked me if
it was Leppings Lane.  He had obviously walked the full
length of Leppings Lane and was just going with the
crowd.




                  Q. MR. PHILLIPS:         If you were up
                                                       S. ELLIS


      MR. PHILLIPS:         If you were up on top of the Landrover,
how would you be able to know what the p a r ti c ul a r p ro b le m
of any p ed es t r i a n was?   A.   Well, I thought I could
direct them to the d ifferent stands, the North Stand or
L eppin gs Lane and there was so much noise perh ap s they
were not able to hear the public address s ys te m and I
thought it might assist if I was able to direct them
visually.      I would also have a good vantage point
to see where the p r o b le ms were, perhaps, and how to
r esolv e them.

D i ff e r e n t people would want to go to d if fe re nt entrances,
though, would they not?          A.   They would, sir, yes.

Would you be able to receive any c o m m u n i c a t i o n from people
on the ground if you were on top of the L an dr o ve r ?
A.   Yes, sir.   I do recall s p ea ki ng to P.C. Buxton.
I think he was just telling me gene ra l things.

Did you broa dc as t any m es s ag e s from the top of the L a n dr o ve r ?
A.   I was c o n t i n u a l l y broadcasting appeals, sir.

What I am asking is, was the m i c r o p h o n e for the public
a ddress in your p o s s e s s i o n on the top of the L a nd ro ve r or
was it inside the cab with mr. B u xt on ?             A.   It was in
my posse ss io n, sir.       It is a t e l e sc o pi c wire that I was
able to pull out from inside the cab and e x t e n d up on to
the top of the Landrover.

What sort of mes sa g es did you b r oa d c a s t ? A.    For people
to have p atience and stop pushing;          that we were trying to
delay the kick-off;     that the .North Stand was to the left
and c entre stands and r ig h t - h a n d side, West Stand and
Le pp in gs Lane. Gener al m e s s a ge s to stop push in g all the
time and to have patience.          Just trying to appeal to the
crowd and give them directions.

You said that you were trying to delay the kick-off.
Did you say that to the crowd outside the g ates?
A.   Several times.

What in fact were you doing to try to delay the k ic k- o ff ?
A.     In actual fact, sir, I w asn't aware at that time
that we were t rying to delay the kick-off.            It was just
simply some th in g - I was so a nx ious at the p ro bl em s that we
were having that I was t el ling the crowd, I was r ec ei v in g
appeals back from them from b el ow the Landrover, "Why don't
we get the k i c k - o f f d e l a ye d? Please get the k ic k -o f f
d el ayed" and I did it to a pp ease them altho ug h I conf es s
at that time I wasn't aware w he t he r it was b eing done or
not.

Did you not get in touch with Ground Control or with any
other senior O f f i c e r ?   A.      No, sir, I was so busy on top
of that L a n d ro ve r givin g m es s ag e s and I n at u ra l ly a ss u me d
that this would be done by s o me on e else.             In actual fact,
I did speak to P.C. B u x t o n later and he c o n f i r m e d that he
made three d e f i ni te a ppea ls over the radio.
                                                          S. ELLIS


       LORD JUSTICE     TAYLOR:       To Cont ro l?      A.    To Control,
sir,   yes.

          MR. PHILLIPS:        Did you think that d el a yi n g k ic k -o f f
would be helpful in the s i t u at i on you were in?              A.    That
was my opinion, sir.             I got the i m p r es s io n - in fact, I am
c o n v in ce d - that the crowd was simply d e s p er a te to get in.
They had w aited all year for that football match;                   it was
a p p r o a c h i n g 3 o'clock;  they were d es p er a te arfJ anxious to
get in the g round at any cost.

How long did you stay on top of the L a nd ro ve r?  A.    A
good ten minutes, sir, until the s i t u at i on was csso lv ed
at the front, at the turns ti le s, by what I now know was
o pe nin g the gates.

Did you see any of the gates b eing opened or being open?
A.    No, sir.         the last thing I reco ll ec t of the p ro bl em
being res ol ve d was a space b ehind the crowd in front of
the t ur ns t i l e s - a large space had been c re ated but there
were still s up po r t e r s for the full length of the t u rn st il es
about 5 yards deep trying to get ---              In fact, what I saw
after that, sir, I wa tc he d in d i s b e l i e f and amazement.

Do you recall the line of Police horses b eing formed along
the p er i m e t e r g ates?    A.   Yes, sir.         When I got on to the
top of the L a n d ro ve r     Iwas quite i mp r es s ed how  the horses
had, under great and dif f ic u lt c ir c um s ta n ce s , had in fact
formed t he m s e l v e s into a line= - What a p pe ar ed to me to be
a 'V'-shape p oi nt i n g away from the p e r i m et e r gates - and
trying to p revent s u p po r te r s g e tt in g into those p e r i m et e r
gates.

Was it s u c c e s s f u l ? A. I think perh ap s i ni t ia l ly for a
few s econds they were able to prevent the c rowd m oving
forward but they were not able to s u st ai n it and, in fact,
there was no space at all that I       c ould see, e it he r    in front
or b ehind the horses.

And this c ontinued, you say, until the crowd e m pt ie d as
the gates, you now know, must have been open ed ?               A.  Yes,
sir.      I did see one avenue of access t hr ough the horses,
pro ba bl y the width of anborse, at the, point of the 'V'-shape
for s u p p o r t e r s to gain a ccess through. I b r o a dc a st this
over the p ublic a ddress s ys te m also.

That is e xactly the point.                 Are you s aying that there was,
in fact, a gap left for access into the area in front of the
turnstiles?              A.      I think, sir, that just for ---            I only
saw it the one o c c a si on for a c ouple of s ec onds and people
were trying to get be tw ee n the horses - in fact, were
g e tt in g b et w e e n the horses - going u nd er n ea t h and I recall
s e eing s omeone near the s we et-shop, two or three s u p po r te r s
a c tu a l l y s c r e a m i n g at the m o un t e d P ol i ce m en who had got
the horses rubbed up against the wall to let them thro ug h
and I saw this space and thought if they could go through
that space in an orderly fashion it w ould ease the problem.
                                                S. ELLIS


Where was this space?       In the middle of the line or --- ?
A.    In the m iddle of the line of horses, sir, just
p robab ly a h orse's width.

You were d i r e c t i n g thew, using the p ublic a dd ress system
on the L a n dr ov er ?     A.   Just that one occasion, sir, I
p ointe d out to the crowd there was access at the centre
of the horses and I v isuall y d i re ct ed them.

Was there any space on the other side of the horses at this
time?   A.    Well, the crowd surged through, sir, and I
presume then that the gap was closed.      There was o bv i ou s ly
some space b ecause they werctthrough that little space crea te d
by a horse.

Did you, when 3 o' cl oc k came, I think the L a nd ro ve r was
taken, was it not, into the South road?      A.       That is
correct.

Did you d i s m ou nt       from the top of the L an dr o ve r ?      A.      Yes.

Did you r eceive an i n s t r u c t i o n in r e la ti on to the gates?
A.   I did, sir,        I don't know whet he r it came over my
radio or wh et he r it was a verbal i instruction from someone
inside the g round but a d ef i ni t e i n st r u c t i o n to close
the gates.       I heard all the t u rn st il e doors, the wood en
doors, s la mm i n g shut and then I a s si st ed other O f fi ce rs
to close the p e r i me te r gates.

What time w oul d this be?              A.    That w ould p ro b ab l y be
about 3.10 p.m.

Did you hear the i ns tr u c t i o n for O ff i ce r s to go to the
p itch?       A.    I did, sir.    That came over my radio
c e r ta in ly once, I think p e rh ap s twice - all a va i la b le
Off ic e rs to enter the pitch.

Was that b efore or after your r e ce iv ed the instruction to
close the gates?    A.   That was before, sir.

Did you think that those gates would be r e qu ir ed for
access for a m b u l a n c e s ?      A.    I did, sir.      After clos in g
the p e r i me te r gates I then made my way towards C Gate with
the i n t e nt io n of en te ri n g the pitch and I saw seve ra l bodies
and a p p r o x i m a t e l y 20 inju re d pers on s outs id e those gates
and I rem ai ne d there for the rest of the day, or until about
half past four.

By this time you had c los ed            the p e ri me te r gates,   you say.
A.   Yes.

The r ail ing       gate gates out on to Lepp in gs        Lane?      A.     Yes*

Did you take! any steps to have those open ed agai n?
A.   I did not p ersonall y, sir, no.

But a m b u l a n c e s   did come through,    did they not?         A.      Yes.
                                                            S. ELLIS


Did you see the a mb ul a n c e s c oming thro ug h?  A.  Yes,
there were a mb ul a n c e s coming t hr ough all the time e n te ri ng
at the L eppings Lane e nt ra nc e and l ea ving via P e ni st on e
Road North entrance.

So the route they were to take was a long the South Road and
round the back of the South S tand?   A.   That is correct,
sir.

Was it your task to keep that route c le ar ?                     A.     It wasn't
s p ec i f i c a l l y my task, sir, but in effect that is what I
ass is te d in.          I d i r e ct e d O ff i ce r s down the South Stand
lane to make sure that the exits for the a mb ul a nc e was
clear.           I also know that S u p e r i n t e n d e n t Mars ha ll
simi la rl y d i r e ct ed some O f fi ce rs also.

                   Cross-examined        by MR.   WOODWARD;

Mr. Ellis, I am not sure that you have dealt with this so
bear with me for a moment.      Do you recall, in a dd i ti o n
to the Lan dr ov er being present, h e ar in g the tannoy b eing
used?   A.    Yes, sir, a coup le of appe al s came over the
tannoy above the tur ns ti le gates for people to stop pushing.

     L O R D J U S T I C E TAYLOR: Can you give any idea to what
extent that w ould be a udib le to people in the ---
A.   C lear ly audible, my Lord.

D es p i t e the noise,      that was c l ea rl y a ud i bl e ? A.        I was
in L eppin gs Lane.           I c ould hear it quite clearly.

      MR. WOODWARD:    At what time, Mr. Ellis, did you
get t here?   A.    that w ould be b e tw ee n 2.40 and 2.50
p.m.

And I think if one           looks at the South York sh ir e Police
D oc ument 1, P ho to g r a p h 9, one can see at least one of the
tannoy s peakers which is m ou nt ed a lmost c en tr a ll y b et w ee n
that arc of turnstiles.            A.   Yes, sir.

And then again if one looks at P ho to g ra p h 8 one can see
an other tannoy speaker on the Gates A-C just to the right
of the sign, " Hi llsboroug h" . A.      That's correct, sir.

You were out at the Leppings Lane, you were some d i st an ce
from those sp ea ke rs when you heard them. A.  Yes.

Are you a b l e to say how many times you heard that m e ss ag e
being b r o a d c a s t ? A. Twice, sir.

Clearly    a udible   to you?       A.     Clearly    audible,     sir.

So far as you can tell, did anyb od y appe ar to heetf those
m es s a g e s ? A. Well, not at any time did I see it, even
when I was on the roof of the Landrover.

Where was the L androver pos it io ne d, are you able to help
us?   A.     As I said, sir, under the 'L' of Lepp in gs Lane,
                                                         S. ELLIS


as I recall    in about    the centre    of the road.

Under the *L ' of Leppings, about where the p oi nter                  is on
there?   A.    That is correct.

About in the centre of the mouth of the t u r ns t il e s?
A.   Yes, sir.

And was it there     for very long?         A.        Ten or fifteen
minutes, sir.

And you came    upon it.      Mr.   B ux to n was b ro ad casting.
A.   Yes.

And then you gave what       help you could by c li m bi n g up?
A.   That is correct.

At the time that you were up on the L an dr o ve r and o bs er v in g
the situation, people were c om in g down Lepp in gs Lane, were
they, and c om in g over the bridge still?    A.    Yes, sir,
in huge numbers.

Is the public address s y st em on such a L a nd ro ve r very
effective?        A.  I would say so, sir.   The only time I
ever saw the c rowd take any noti ce of my a pp ea ls was when I
ind ic a te d that there was a space betw ee n the horses, so I
am s a t is fi ed that they could hear it but quite clea rl y they
were not t aking any notice.

There was a line of Pol-ice h o r s e s .        A.      Yes,   sir.

There was the b r o a d c a s t i n g on the Landrover.          A.    Yes.

There were    some tannoy m es s ag e s c om in g over.          A.     Yes.

And yet the people coming along were still p re s si n g forwards.
A.       Yes, sir.          I w ould jwst simply d e sc ri be it as
i r r a ti on al beh aviour.        I am no football s up porter, my
Lord, and I have not w or ke d this match befo re but I
co ul d n' t u nd e r s t a n d it.

O b v i o u s l y p eople wa l ki n g along and along L e pp in gs Lane
were in the c om pa ny of other p eople ahead of them and behind
them.           A.    Yes.

But g iven those loud messages, those clear m essages, apart
from choice was there any th i ng to cause those p eople to
carry on g oing?        A.   Nothing, sir.      As I say, it was
just i r r at io na l behaviour.   It was d e s p e r a t i o n to get
into the match.

You d e s c r i b e d having feelings of amaz em en t and disbelief.
A.    The one thing that I will never forget is after there
had been a space c reate d from the p e ri me te r gates up to the
back of the p eople left w a it i ng to enter the t u r n st i le s
after 5 yards deep and they were simply d i vi ng over them
                                                        S. ELLIS


as if there was a s wimm in g pool on the other side and
c l am b e r i n g over them any way they could.

     LORD J USTICE TAYLOR:       I am sorry, over the p er im e te r
gates?   A.    Over the t u r n st i le s itself.

Over the t u r n s t i l e s ?   A.      Yes.   I just c ou l dn ' t   u nd er s ta n d
that either.




                                  /MR.   WOODWARD:      You are    speaking.
                                           S. ELLIS



      MR. WOODWARD:    You are speaking of a time when
there is no pressure because the Leppings Lane blue gates
are closed? - A. I do not know whether the gates were
closed, in fact I would assume the gates were still open.
The horses were still there.    There was a space behind
the horses, then there were the perimeter gates.    There
was even more space behind the perimeter gates towards
the turnstiles and clearly there was no problem at all
then;   the problem of entry had been resolved and it was
just...    Well, I could not understand it at all.   It
was like there was a panic for them to get in, yet there
was no reason for it.

So that we have it clear, working from Leppings Lane you
are describing the situation when there is space from -
do we come to the gates first or the horses first? - A.
The horses first.

The horses,   then space,   then gates? - A. Yes.

Then space between the gates and the people approaching
the turnstiles? - A. That is correct.   I would envisage
probably there were about 200 supporters sort of milling
around in front of the horses, between me and the
landrover, which I presumed to be non-ticket holders.
There were no other people coming down Leppings Lane at
that time or anyone wanting to get past the horses, as
such.   There was simply no reason for it and I just
could not understand it.

So there is no pressure on these people.   What were they
doing? - A. The ones in front of the turnstiles?

The ones you could not understand. - A. Yes, the ones
immediately in front of the turnstiles, they were
obviously waiting to gain entry.   Whether they were n o n ­
ticket holders I would not be able to hazard a guess.

What were they doing?    To get it clear, let's start at
the turnstiles and work out towards the Leppings Lane
gate. - A. Yes, the ones left at the turnstiles I assumed
were the ones that had been trying to gain entry prior to
the C gate being opened.    The main bulk of the crowd had
gone through that gate from behind them and left these
few remaining supporters still waiting to gain entry.

What were they doing?   Relieved of the pressure, what
were they doing? - A. Well, they were just simply still
fighting to get through, or pushing, to get through the
turnstiles.   Some were literally diving over without
even touching the turnstiles.   Others were clambering
over.   They were getting through any way they could.
                             60



                                            S. ELLIS


Q.         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   They could have gone round
     through the gate at that stage? - A. If they had been
     aware of it, sir, but I just assumed they were not aware
     of it, they were that intent on getting inside.

Q.         MR. WOODWARD:   No pressure on them?   No physical
     pressure from the rear? - A. No.

Q. Not a great number of them there, fighting and struggling
   still to get in? - A. Yes.

Q. And diving through? - A. Yes.

Q. Now you have described their behaviour, there was space
   behind them.   What is the next object that we come to?
   Is it horses, gates or something else? - A. Well, behind
   them there is nothing at all other than horses which are
   still outside the perimeter gates and then about 200
   supporters still milling round in front of the horses.

Q. What were they doing? - A. Well, they were hoping to get
   in but obviously the horses were able to control them.
   I recall one mounted Officer shouting at them that if
   they had not got tickets to get away and they sort of
   moved back but did not go any appreciable distance, just
   a couple of yards, and then tried to move round the horse
   again towards my right.

Q. In your statement you describe people running underneath
   the horses and pushing between them? - A. That was during
   the main crusTiing several minutes earlier.

Q. If what you are describing is correct, it would seem that
   at no time were people having very much regard for the
   presence of the horses? - A. Well, I have never seen it
   before.   It was something I have never witnessed before
   or since.    There was just no way they were going to
   stop.   I could not think of anything, looking at the
   vantage point I had from the top of that landrover,
   anything that anyone could have done to have prevented
   the crushing that took place.

Q. They were so intent? - A. That is the impression I got,
   my Lord.   I dare say that people coming down Leppings
   Lane were not in that same sort of mood to begin with but
   as they approached the turnstiles time was passing, it
   was getting nearer to kick-off, and they were realising
   that there was a crush and it was just a desperation to
   get in.

Q. Was it your impression that there was nothing that would
   stop them? - A. I cannot - honestly, I cannot say whether
   I thought about it at the time, but since there was just
   nothing anyone could have done.   I could have thought
                                                   S. ELLIS


     about asking for more men, more horses, or moving the
     horses from where they were, but there was just no way
     from the time the crowd built up, which to me was between
     ten to and three o'clock, there was no way anyone could
     have moved in Leppings Lane to have been of any effect.

           MR. WOODWARD:    Thank you.

                  Re-Examined by MR. C O L L I N S :

Q. You did actually tells us you thought of one way which
   might have stopped it, which was getting the kick-off
   postponed?  - A. That was because I felt the mood of the
   crowd was such and they were making that type of appeal
   to me that it was obvious to me that was the only thing
   that would have appeased them.   They did arrive late,
   sir, and there was nothing anyone could have done about
   that.

Q.   Sadly that was not done? - A. No.

Q.   For whatever reason.     I know that has nothing         to do with
     you. - A. No.

           MR. COLLINS:     Thank you.      Inspector Bennett
please.

                      JOHN BENNETT C a l l e d :

                    Examined by MR. C O L L I N S :

Q. Inspector John Bennett? - A. Yes,        sir.

Q. Inspector, I think you were in charge of property stores
   at the ground? - A. That was one of my duties.

Q.   One of the stores, that is the one for the Liverpool
     supporters, is situated behind turnstiles 1 to 16? - A.
     That is correct, sir.   Behind the turnstiles there is a
     fence which separated fans going into the north stand
     from those going into the terraces and the property store
     was immediately behind that fence.

Q. At what time was it that you went up to that store
   approximately? - A. It is a little difficult to estimate.
   I had previously been on the pitch at the Spion Kop end
   at about twenty past two.   I would estimate I arrived at
   the property store perhaps about twenty to three.

Q. Having checked there, I think you were approached by the
   gateman on gate A? - A. Yes.   I left the property store
   intending to return to the gymnasium where the rest of
   the Officers were that I was commanding.   I was
                           62




                                          J. BENNETT



  approached by one of the gatemen from the gate.   He was
  obviously having problems there.   What happens normally
  in football matches is that that gate A is used to allow
  access to the ground to either Police Officers or other
  people who are authorised to move in and out of the
  ground.

Q. What did the gateman tell you was the trouble? - A. He
   told me there was a great pressure of people behind the
   gate and that had made it impossible for him to allow
   people in or out.   He was afraid the crowd would flood
   in if he opened the gate to allow anyone out.

Q. I think he told you he had therefore locked the gate? -
   A. He did indeed and I told him that was the correct
   course of action.

Q. At about this time were you aware of some fans appearing
   above the gate having obviously climbed up? - A. During
   the course of our conversation several fans appeared on
   top of the gates, and we are talking of a height probably
   15 or 20 feet from the ground.    They obviously saw me
   when the got to the top of the gate.    They stayed there
   for a short time, I shouted to them and signalled to them
   to get down and in fact they did.

Q. You were obviously aware there were problems outside and
   wanted no doubt to get a closer look? - A. That was the
   first indication I had.   Of course, the Police operation
   had been running for many hours.   I had just arrived at
   the Leppings Lane end.   I was not aware of any great
   problem.  I had heard over the radio requests to close
   Leppings Lane to traffic and that was the only
   information I had there was any sort of problem at that
   end of the ground.

Q. Can I take this fairly shortly?   I think you went to
   look through - there is a little spyhole effectively in
   gate A? - A. Yes, there is a small window in the gate and
   through that window I could see obviously there was a
   great crush outside.

Q. Then you went to the turnstiles and you found only one
   Police Officer who could not leave his post? - A. Because
   the gateman had asked for Police assistance, I went to
   see if there were any Officers available but at the
   turnstiles adjacent to gate A there was only one Police
   Officer.

Q. You went through the gate in the wall between the two
   parts of the concourse round to A to G? - A. Yes, that is
   right.
                           63



                                          J. BENNETT


Q. Did you there see Inspector White, who was in charge of
   Serials 14 and 15?    Did you have words with him and I
   think he indicated that his Officers were fully engaged?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. And could not help with gate A? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you make a request to Police Control? - A. I did.

Q. Was that via the radio? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you ask? - A. I asked for Officers to come to
   assist people to gain access through turnstiles 1 to 16.

Q. Was that request acknowledged? - A. It was acknowledged
   and Officers attended very shortly afterwards.

Q. Was that one of the reserve serials with, I think,
   Sergeant Higgins? - A. Yes, and Inspector Delaney.

Q. I think you went back to turnstiles 1 to 16 and you say
   in your statement you think it was about 2.45, but you
   could be wrong, five minutes either way? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. You could see still the large crowd of people, is that
   right?    Were you aware there seemed to be problems with
   people getting through the turnstiles? - A. It became
   apparent whilst I was at the turnstiles and trying to
   organise Officers who were there, to encourage people to
   get in.   Some of these things I experienced personally,
   other things those Officers reported to me.

Q. Tell us about both, so that we know what the problems
   were that were arising. - A. First of all, there were a
   couple of minor problems on the turnstiles themselves.
   There was one particular turnstile that was manned by
   quite an elderly gentleman and he was working rather
   slowly - within his capacity but rather slowly.   One
   stage another turnstile operator left his turnstile in
   fact and chased into the ground and remonstrated with one
   man who had just gained access.  I do not know what the
   problem was but there was a short argument before Police
   Officers took over and the man returned to his turnstile.

   There were obviously problems with people reaching a
   turnstile and finding it was a wrong turnstile, either
   they wanted to go on the terrace or the north stand and
   they were at the opposite turnstile to the one they
   should have been at.   There was just no room for them to
   move to alternative turnstiles.   I saw people trying to
   pay at the turnstiles and also there were people trying
   to gain unauthorised access, either by climbing over the
   turnstiles or by several people crowding into the
                                         J. BENNETT


turnstile and trying to get in,   three people,   say, with
two tickets.

When you say "climbing over", you mean inside the
turnstile but over the actual mechanism rather than over
the roof? - A. Not over the roof.

When such people did get in were they stopped by Police
and ejected? - A. This was a sort of interim period.
The people who were coming in quite lawfully were
approaching Police Officers and complaining about the
crush outside.   In fact some were abusive and quite
offensive, but there were some people who were quite
reasonable people who were obviously in fear.   They were
in some of panic because of the strength of the crush
outside.   As a result of what those people told me, and
told the other Officers who reported to me, it was quite
apparent that we had to take some action very quickly to
relieve the pressure outside.

What action did you take? - A. I instructed all the
Officers who were there to encourage everybody to come
through the turnstiles, whether they were authorised or
not, whether they had tickets or not.

What would happen to them when they got in?   Would they
be held by Officers with a view to ejecting them or would
they simply have to be allowed in? - A. No.  I feel that
the problem was behind the turnstiles as far as the
Police Officers were concerned, that when I arrived there
at first there was only one.   I think there was only one
Officer there because they had been ejecting people, or
perhaps arresting people, and taking them to the Police
room.   If all those Officers were deployed in that
manner there was nobody left to man the turnstiles.
Therefore, I instructed that everybody should be allowed
in without interference.




       Q. You yourself decided
                          65


                                                  J. BENNETT


Q. I see.  And you yourself, I think, decided you could get a
   better view of what was going on outside? -A. No, it was not
   particularly the case, sir.  What happened was when I thought
   there was sufficient Officers on the turnstiles to get
   people in at a quicker rate I was able to take stock of the
   situation, and I saw people were climbing in over the roof of
   the turnstiles.

Q. And you thought there might be some danger in that because of
   electric cables and so on? - A. That was certainly the case,
   sir.

Q. So you decided you would climb up yourself? Is that right? -
   A. Yes.  There was a small brick structure that was about half
   the height of the turnstiles that I used to climb on to the
   turnstile roof.  My intention had been to gain access to the
   turnstile roof to stop them climbing up because clearly the
   way they were gaining access, they were shinning along the top
   of gate B where the cables and the electric lamps were, and
   they were clearly in some danger.

Q. Incidentally, before you went up did you take some action to
   see if you could get reinforcements to Leppings Lane to deal
   with the situation outside? - A. In addition to calling for
   men to man the turnstiles I radioed through to Police control
   asking them to relieve the pressure.  I reported there was
   great pressure at the turnstiles, and asking them to arrange
   for some relief of the pressure.

Q. How many times did you send that message? - A. Certainly once,
   possibly twice, but I d o n ’t recall any acknowledgment.

Q. I take you back now.  You are on the roof.  You have fans
   climbing up and you can see the state ofaffairs outside. - A.
   Yes.  It would initially be my intention to stop them climbing
   up because I felt they were in danger, but when I reached the
   roof, although I had seen previously through the turnstiles
   the state of affairs - I had seen through the small windows in
   gate A, and supporters had reported to me what the conditions
   were like outside - in fact when I reached the roof of the
   turnstiles conditions were even worse than I had previous
   envisaged. People were packed so tightly behind the
   turnstiles that I felt it was illogical for me to turn people
   back from the roof of the turnstiles, but rather it was better
   to show them a safe way down to the ground, which was the
   route I had taken up to the roof of the turnstiles.

Q. Those attempting to climb over, can you help us about this.
   What sort of proportion were in possession of tickets? - A. In
   fact a large proportion.  Even before I climbed up to the roof
   of the turnstiles the majority of them in fact were waving
   their tickets in their hands as they climbed over the r o o f ,
   obviously with the intention of not being immediately ejected
   as soon as they reached the Police Officers inside the ground.
   I would say perhaps two-thirds, even three-quarters of those
   fans, had tickets in their possession.  I was not in a
   position to check they were the correct tickets, but they did




          V"   '            ^                 ^                 &    .1 1
*   *


                                    66

                                                          J. BENNETT


             have some tickets.

        Q. What about the others.   There were some who apparently did not
           have tickets? - A. There were certainly some who did not try
           to produce a ticket to me, but I certainly was not asking.

        Q.   It may be they had tickets but they simply   did not have them
             in their hands? - A. I just don't know.

        Q.   Did you ask why they had climbed up, or was it simply not
             necessary, and obvious? - A. It was so obvious.  When I looked
             over the wall I could see the enclosures behind turnstiles 1-
             16 and behind turnstiles A-G, and they were absolutely crammed
             with supporters.  In fact, those two enclosures are divided by
             a fence, and fans were sitting astride that fence all the way
             back to the perimeter gates, probably about 30 sitting astride
             that fence.

        Q. You I think were absorbed effectively in what you were doing
           helping or concerned with people coming over in the way you
           described? - A. Yes, I felt that my first duty was to make
           sure that these people, rather than try to put them back into
           the crowd and add to the crush was to remove them from the
           crowd and get them to safety.  What happened in fact was that
           some of them having gained access to the roof tried to pass
           their tickets back down to the crowd outside the turnstiles,
           but as far as I am aware I stopped those people doing that.

        Q. We know that the gates were opened at some stage.  Were you
           aware of the gates being opened or any of them being opened? -
           A. I must have been aware, but I honestly can't remember.
           Whilst I was on the roof of the turnstiles the crowds reduced
           significantly.  First of all that happened to the crowd on my
           left which was that crowd behind turnstiles A-G, so that means
           gate C must have been opened.  Immediately below me was gate
           B, and at some stage I did see in fact after the crowd had
           been reduced significantly that that gate was open and I saw
           about 40 or 50 people, the remnants of the crowd, in fact,
           going into the ground through gate B.

        Q.   And A? - A. Gate A I did not actually see open.  I did not see
             people coming in, but the size of the crowd waiting outside
             those turnstiles was reduced at least by half, and the only
             way that could be achieved by was by opening gate A.

        Q. Because you were standing at the gate B end of turnstiles 1-
           16? - A. I would imagine it was immediately over turnstile 16,
           over the top of gate B.

        Q.   Over the top of gate B, effectively.   I think when the crowd
             had reduced itself by means of the gates you managed to direct
             an Officer to stop any further people climbing up and over the
             turnstiles? - A. That is right.   I attracted the attention of
             the Inspector in charge of the mounted section, and he sent a
             mounted Officer who positioned his horse immediately by the
             side of I assume turnstile 16, on the outside of gate B.
:> *   4   *
                                          67


                                                               J. BENNETT


               Q. Yes.   I think that is all I need ask you about that afternoon.

                                 Cross-Examined bv MR. HYTNER:

               Q. Mr. Bennett, just going back to something you have not been
                  asked about, about 2.15 you were inside the ground and you had
                  an opportunity to observe how the crowd was filling up? - A.
                  Y e s , indeed.

               Q. We know about the Spion Kop, and I think your evidence is
                  consistent with everyone’s, that was about two-thirds full by
                  2.15? - A. That is correct, sir.

               Q. At the other end, the West Stand, very few people were in? -
                  A. There were only a few people dotted about in the stand.

               Q. Did you notice the North Stand? - A. Not from the position I
                  was standing in.  In fact it was immediately on my right and
                  slightly behind me, so I did not notice how many people were
                  in the North Stand.

               Q. But the West terraces were very interesting, were not they? -
                  A. Yes, sir.

               Q. By 2.15 the two centre pens were two-thirds full? - A. About
                  two-thirds full, yes.

               Q. But the two side pens were again just people dotted about? -
                  A . Correct.

               Q. So it would not at all surprise you to hear that one lady from
                  a similar position to yours at 2.45, half-an-hour later,
                  thought that those two centre pens were full? - A. It would be
                  purely conjecture on my part, to be honest, because the
                  arrangement of the access to all the pens, it was open access
                  to all the pens.  I only saw what happened at quarter-past,
                  20-past-2.  I have no idea what happened after that.  The
                  supporters could go into any of those pens.  I am aware the
                  two centre pens are the most popular because they are behind
                  the goal mouth, but I really would not have been in any sort
                  of position to estimate how many people were inside the
                  ground.

               Q. Bearing in mind that you know, as everyone seems to who police
                  Hillsborough, that the two centre pens are the most popular. -
                  A . Yes.

               Q. Bearing in mind your observation at 2.15 that the two centre
                  pens were two-thirds full, if you had been asked for a view by
                  a senior Officer, say a Superintendent, as to when you thought
                  those two centre pens would be full, I dare say you would have
                  said, "Oh, in 10 minutes, quarter-of-an-hour"? - A. I was not
                  in a position because I was at the opposite end of the ground
                  to assess how quickly the crowd was coning in.  It was some
                  time before I went round to the Leppings Lane end.  I had no
                  way of estimating how many people were entering at that time.
                  I am sorry, sir.
                             68


                                                   J. BENNETT



                  Cross-Examined bv MR. KALLIPETIS:

Q. Would you help me on one matter.  On the last page of your
   statement, Inspector, you refer to a message from Police
   Constable Burkinshaw.  Do you know what serial he
   belonged to or where his position was in the ground? -
   A. I don't know, but normally he would be positioned in
   front of the Leppings Lane terrace.  I assumed that is
   where he was on the day.

         MR. COLLINS:     He is in fact in Serial 1.

Q.        MR. KALLIPETIS:  And you said, "I passed a message to a
     senior Ambulance Officer using the radio in the Ambulance
     Service Range Rover"? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you actually speak to an Ambulance Officer in the ground?
   - A. The only Ambulance Officer I spoke to was the senior
   Officer in the Range Rover.

Q. You spoke to him in the Range Rover? - A. Yes.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:    Would you rather cross-examine at
     2 o'clock, Mr. Glasgow?

          MR. GLASGOW:    At your convenience, sir.

          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:     We will break until 2 p.m.


                         (Luncheon Adjournment)
