HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - E N D OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS

Accusation

The bereaved families are still fighting for justice m ore than 10 years after the disaster.
The G overnm ent should order a fresh public inquiry into the H illsborough disaster.

Facts

The Hillsborough Family Support G roup began a private prosecution against former
Chief Superintendent D uckenfield and form er Superintendent Murray, the m ost senior
officers in charge at H illsborough on the day o f the disaster. Murray was acquitted o f
m anslaughter and the jury was discharged after failing to agree a verdict against
Duckenfield. O n 26 July, the Judge ruled against an application from counsel for the
Support G roup that Duckenfield should face retrial, bringing an end to the criminal
proceedings.

T he families continue to call for a new public inquiry into the 1989 disaster and
allegations that police statements were altered to cover up police failures on the day.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was asked by the current H om e Secretary to carry out a
scrutiny to determine w hether there was significant new evidence n ot available to the
original public inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor into the disaster and the later inquests. His
report, published in February 1998, considered all the material allegations about missing
or concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and the altering
o f statements, as well as concerns about the use o f the 3.15pm cut-off time at the
Inquest. His conclusion was that the evidence subm itted to him did n o t add anything
significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor inquiry and the
inquests.

Lines to take

U nderstand the abiding pain felt by those who lost loved ones.

T he original Taylor Inquiry into the disaster was very thorough and was unequivocal in
identifying the main cause o f the disaster as a failure o f police control.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out a thorough scrutiny at the H om e Secretary’s request
to determ ine w hether there was any significant new evidence n o t available to the original
inquiry and inquests. The conclusion, which the H om e Secretary accepted, was that there
were no grounds for a further inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered all the material evidence, including the alteration o f
statem ents and allegations about missing or concealed videotape evidence.

A num ber o f statements were altered by police officers following advice from the force
solicitors. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny investigated this m atter in detail. H e was
satisfied that the procedure was legitimate, that the Taylor Inquiry was aware that the
statem ents had been vetted in this way, and that it had no material effect on the outcom e
o f the Taylor Inquiry, the Inquest or the conclusions o f the D irector o f Public
Prosecutions.



::ODMA\Meridio\EDRM#9()221#l
