   From:        Paul Pugh                       cc: MrHowarth
                Head of Operational Policing        Sir Richard Wilson
                Policy Unit                         Mr Boys Smith
                Room 539                            Mr T Middleton
                Queen Anne’s Gate                   Mr Butler
                ® 0171-273-3141                     Mr Bone
                14 July 1997                        MrGranatt
                                                    Mr Edmundson
                                                    Mr Owen




  Home Secretary


 HILLSBOROUGH: LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


 Further to my submission of 11 July, I attach a draft letter for you to send to
 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith about the disclosure of evidence submitted to him during
 the course of his scrutiny on Hillsborough.




                                         PAUI




f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\pp0280pd.doc
                   DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY



   The Right Hon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
   Royal Courts of Justice
   Strand
   London WC2A 2LL




   I am glad that you have been able to begin work on Hillsborough, and I have seen
  the helpful statement which you issued to the press.       I understand that you have
  discussed with Paul Pugh some concerns about the disclosure of evidence
  submitted to you, and I thought it would be helpful to set out my understanding of the
  position.



  As you know, one of the main concerns of the families has been what they believe to

  be concealment of material evidence.       It is important therefore that all interested
  parties can be reassured in relation to your work that no material evidence will be
 withheld from them. The outcome of your scrutiny, and the reasons for whatever
 conclusions are reached, should be as open as possible.



 For that reason, I have given a commitment to publish your report and as far as

 possible make public documentary evidence considered by you.               Much of the
 documentary evidence is already in the public domain; but even for material which
 is not already public, including written submissions which may be prepared
 specifically for your scrutiny, my intention is to make that material public as far as
 possible - unless in relation to particular pieces of evidence there are good reasons
why it should not be disclosed.



I know that you were concerned particularly about the transcripts of any meetings
which you may hold. I agree that the records of meetings which are held in private,
with no cross examination of witnesses, should not be generally disclosed, and that
you should include relevant oral evidence in summary form in your report. I assume
that if individuals request the transcripts of their own meetings with you that they w ill'


f:\oppu\hou\shorlsub\pp0280pd.doc
  receive them. Some witnesses may themselves want to disclose transcripts of their
  meetings to third parties, but that is a matter for them.



  When you report to me it is my intention to make available publicly the documentary
  evidence which you have considered, probably by placing a copy of that material in
  the Library of the House of Commons. There may be some material which it would
  not be right to disclose because of its potential impact on any proceedings which
  might follow, or because it is of a purely personal nature, or for other reasons in the
 public interest. When you submit your report, therefore, I would be grateful if you
 would identify any documentary material which you believe should not be disclosed
 and your reasons for recommending that it should remain private.



 If you would find it helpful to meet to discuss any issues arising from your work,
 please contact my office and they will make arrangements.




f:\oppu\hou\shortsub\pp0280pd.doc
