                                                      METROPOLITAN POLICE
                                                      CHIEF ENGINEER'S DEPARTMENT,
                                                      ONE DRUMMOND GATE,
                                                      LONDON,
                                                      SW1V 2JJ

                                             S *A -
                                                      4th April 1990
■k *
                                                          Ct.
       Mr. J . \jfVay,
       F9 Division,                                              h*    C <^«-
       Home Jsffice,
       50 Queen Anne's Gate,
       London,
       SW1H 9AT




       RADIO FACILITIES AT SPORTING STADIA


       1.   As you know, the reports by Lord Justice Taylor on his Inquiry into the
            Hillsborough disaster made a number of recommendations. These included
            the provision of radio equipment for police at sporting stadia; HO
            Circular 68/1989 urged that the required action be taken without delay
            to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's recommendations.

       2.   The implications of Lord Justice Taylor's report were referred to by ACTO
            at a meeting of the Policy Committee on 7th February; the Committee asked
            me to prepare a paper outlining current priorities and possible options.
            The paper, which had been discussed and agreed with Management Support
^           and Finance Departments, was considered by the Policy Committee at its
            meeting on 21st March. A copy is enclosed for your information.

       3.   The Policy Committee agreed to the installation of UHF communications
            at 13 sites and 4. mobile units within the budget and timescale proposed.
            The Committee accepted that a U month delay to the WARC programme would
             ensue but noted that the delay was likely to be recovered as the programme
            progressed.

       K-   On the question of finance, the Committee noted that the cost of providing
            the necessary equipment for sporting stadia was estimated at £1.8m and
            that this could be met from within the capital allocation for vehicles,
            plant and equipment for 1990/91 by re-phasing expenditure associated with
            the WARC programme. It would then be necessary in later years to make
            a PES bid to replace funds taken from the WARC programme to cover this
            immediate requirement. It will be seen from paragraph 12 of the
            accompanying paper that it is considered control of the equipment, and
            therefore ownership, should remain with the police.
The cost of implementing Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations is however
considerable and although it seems that we shall have to meet the cost
of the hand-held sets and of the vehicle installations, the Policy Committee
considers that urgent attention should be given to the view that the
sporting clubs should be responsible for the cost of fixed equipment to
be installed at their stadia, even though its use will be entirely under
the control of the police. In view of the national implications and the
decision announced by the Chancellor in his Budget Statement in respect
of the reduction in betting duty paid by pools companies, I would be
grateful if you could let me know whether it is intended that the cost
of installation of radio equipment should be met from sources outside police
budgets, e.g. The Football Trust.

In the meantime, we are pressing on with plans to procure and install the
necessary equipment. I have copied this letter to the Director of Finance.

                            Yours sincerely,




                            N. Boothman
                            Chief Engineer
