From:   Mrs P A Lee                  ^ ' vi^-                              ^
        I Division                              , f   *       I*
        Ext?nU3 2 6 8 1991               W      M         ^        ^   '* * *




                                         cc     Mr Clayton
                                                Mr Cogbill
                                                Mr Hall
                                                Miss Wooldridge
                                                Miss Rex
                                                Mr Harnett




Mr Goddard


BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES
May I take up some points which seem to us in I Division to
arise on the draft instructions Mr Clayton has prepared, and
on his covering minute?
2. I can accept that, to persuade the draftsman that what is
proposed is a genuinely new offence, it is necessary to show
how if differs from the existing Public Order Act offences,
particularly perhaps Sections 4 and 5, since the threshold for
Section 18 is much higher. But in doing this, the
'Instructions appear to have lost sight of the genuinely
offensive nature of the behaviour the offence is to catch, and
the whole context of race relations in this country in which
members of the ethnic minorities, without being unduly
sensitive, may reasonably take racial offensiveness seriously
as - what it often is, and certainly in the football gang
context - an expression of deep seated hostility or contempt
for them, not as individuals (or footballers), but for their
inherent ethnic characteristics.       i

                                     \
3. It is this context, especially th history of hostile
behaviour directed at non-white players at football matches,
v^hich makes banana throwing offensive.  As the draft
instructions recognise the banana is a symbol, not just a
missile; and there is an intent to cause offence, and to
stimulate the laughter and calling out which demonstrates that
at least part of the crowd is at one with the banana-thrower
in his view of the player's race. I think one could say the
same for leeks - leek jokes were clearly a casus belli to the
Welsh in Shakespeare's time. While reasonableness may be an
appropriate test, is it for the thrower to show he had a
sensible reason for throwing the banana, or to show that this
would not be likely to cause offence to a reasonable person -
ideally a not oversensitive person of the recipient's racial
origin? Or both? The fact that behaviour may be childish
does not, in an adult, remove the offence it may cause.

4. I would hope this part of the draft instructions could be
rewritten to reflect these points - and perhaps to raise in
the draftsmans mind the possibility that "reasonableness", as
a defence, might be spelt out more fully to include both the
offender's intent, and the response of a reasonable person of
the same race in the same circumstances as the 'target'.

5. On gestures, where I am not sure whether it is the
intention to legislate, it seems worth making the point that
gestures can be racially or nationally offensive as well as
obscene.    (Isn't 'rus|e' rather a low threshold?)   A Hitler
salute is a symbolic act that a German player or team would
findL offensive, and Jews or members other minorities
thickening.

6. A point worth bring out in showing how what is intended
differs from eg Section 5 of the Public Order Act might be the
impracticality of operating the warning procedure before
making an arrest in the noisy and excitable atmosphere of a
football match. Some racially offensive behaviour might come
within the ambit of that section, but either arresting or
asking for names and addresses for future action just aren't
practicable - and isn't this part of    the problem?

7. On para 3.18, though not an I Division matter, Iwondered
if "offensively indecent" might be the meaning to aim at. It
is the aim to offend which is objectionable, (as in the racial
context). And if there were also to     be a test of
reasonableness here, itwould be for the accused toshow   that
his behaviour was reasonable and not such as to cause offence
to a reasonable person.




                                         MRS P A LEE


LC/7
