              '\ j A e-£w h-> ft
                                                   &




                                             METROPOLITAN POLICE OFFICE
     Mr Margaret WITHERS
     Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry Team
     Room kk8                                NEW SCOTLAND YARD
     Home Office                             BROADWAY LONDON SW1H OBG
     50 Queen Anne's Gate                    Telephone 01—230 1212 Extn.
     London SW1                                Your ref.:            Our ref.;



Form 7110



                                                                 21st December 1989


     Dear Mrs WITHERS,

     I am writing in response to your request for police comments On the effect on
     crowd behaviour by opposing players fighting, as reported in the media on the
     occasion of the following matches:

            Arsenal -v- Norwich on 4th November 1989
            West Ham -v- Wimbledon on 22nd November 1989

     Arsenal -v- Norwich

     It is confirmed that three police officers, including a Superintendent, did go
     onto the field of play to assist in restoring order among the opposing
     players. Tljere was an increase in tension on the terraces as a result of the
     fighting on tHe'pitch which influenced the decision oy police to intervene.

     It is known that two spectators ran onto the playing area and reached the
     group of players involved in the disorder”; It appeared that one spectator was
     attempting to pull the other away. Both spectators were removed by police but
     were not charged with any offence. A further spectator reached the touch line
     but was directed back onto the terraces by police.

     No actual fighting among rival fans or serious disorder took place as a direct
     result of the incident on the pitch. However, much pushing, and badbehaviour
     was observed on the south terrace.        Overall, it ~was difficultin the
     circumstances to assess objectively the extent of crowd problems as a result
     of the incident.     There was a total of k2 ejectments at this (36 home
     supporters) and 2 arrests (1 home supporter); which is not unusual for games
     played at Highbury.

     West Ham -v- Wimbledon

     Police did not find it necessary to enter onto the field of play, but allowed
     the referee to resolve the situation.    No spectators were observed to enter
     onto the field of play during the fighting between opposing players.

     Immediately following i-.hp -fnm'Honf- a number of crowd surges were observed on
     tne standing fler^arfts. apparently aim^rl at-, inrrpapi no- t-gnsinn- cnnsi nerahl e
     tension wasrKfElteable amongst the West Ham supporters, but not among the
     Wimbledon supporters.
No coin throwing was observed bv police, however, this is quite possible since
behaviour of this nature is not unusual at West Ham. There was a total of 61
ejectments (60 home supporters) and five arrests (all home supporters) at this
fixture.


If I can be of any further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.


Yours sincerely
           /I




B. EVANS
Chief Inspector
