                                       From R ( K i t R S T O T T , C .H .li.. M.
                                          M e m b e r ot P a rlia m en t to r W'iean                          it

ft 9   Mm


        The Secretary           H Q U S E OF C O M M O N S
        Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry
        Room 662                    L O N D O N SW1A OAA
        50 Queen Annes Gate              T el: 01-219 4141
        London SW1H 9AT                     0942 42047                                       15th June 1989



        Dear Sir,

        I have been asked by a constituent of mine Mr J.L Strickland of DES
        Electronic Systems ltd, Standish Centre, Cross Street, Standish, Wigan to
        pass onto you the enclosed document in connection with the Hillsborough
        Disaster.


        Yours sincere!




                         A l l c o m m u n ic a tio n s to he addressed to the H ou se o f C o m m o n s
                                                       t9JB88
                                                       19 JUH8S
                              isisy
                D.E.S. ElectrwaiSYStemsltd
                Northern Agents for ELS (Electronic Locking System) Ltd.

                Fire Alarms                                                 Standish Centre,
                Emergency Lighting                                          Cross Street,
                Access Control                                              Standish,
                Intercoms, CCTV                                             Wigan,
                Electrical Contractors                                      WN6 OHQ.
                System Consultants                                          Tel. Standish (0257) 427383


                Mr. R. Stott, M.P.,
                Labour Party Office,
                Rodney House,                                              26th May 1989
                King Street,
                WIGAN.


                Dear Mr. Stott,

                Re: Hillsborough Disaster

                Thank you for your hospitality which was extended to me during my
                recent visit to your Wigan offices.
                I wou}d like to confer the points discussed duringour meeting and
                would be grateful if you could pass on this information to the
                Hillsborough Enquiry.

                D.E.S. Electrical Systems Ltd., are leaders in the field of Football
                Attendance Monitoring Equipment.
                Since the Bradford City tragedy, our Company has been deeply involved
                in the development of stadia safety systems.
                With your help at that time we were able to inform the Popperwell
                Enquiry of our Locking System.   Consequently I was personally
                involved with the Fire, Police and County Engineers throughout
                the North.    Many of the authorities showed interest together
                with Football Clubs. However, due to finance, many were reluctant
                to upgrade their stadia.
                However, we have successfully installed our Gate Locking System at
                Everton Football Club and Coventry City Football Club.
                Last season we were approached by Liverpool Football Club to design
                and instal a computerised turnstile counting system to enable the
                Police and club officials to monitor the filling up of the stadium.
                Our Counting System was commissioned in September 1988,

                Liverpool Football Club also invited D.E.S. to design a Gate Locking
                System to be fitted to all the main exit doors.    It was agreed
                in March 1989 that Liverpool Football Club would carry on with the
                installation of the Electronic Locking System during the 1989 closed
                season.

                I would like to draw your attention to the fact that D.E.S. Ltd., have
                not only developed a safe stadia locking system together with a
                comprehensive computerised counting system but we have done this with
                close liaison with the licensing authorities.




<$>
                                                                     cont’d...


international
Professional     Directors: J. L. STRICKLAND
Security
Association                 A. M. T. STRICKLAND                 Certificate of Incorporation No. 148 65 94
                               0.E.5.:                           ;               Systems
                               Northern Agents for ELS (Electronic Locking System) Ltd.
                               Fire Alarms                                                    Standish Centre,
                               Emergency Lighting                                             Cross Street,
                               Access Control                                                 Standish,
                               Intercoms, CCTV                       -   2   -                Wigan,
                               Electrical Contractors                                         WN6 OHQ.
                               System Consultants                                             Tel. Standish (0257) 427383



                   Mr. R. Stott, M.P.,
                   Labour Party Office,
                   Rodney louse,                                                        26th May 1989
                   King Street,
                   WIGAN.

                       I am convinced that if our type of Electronic Locking System is
                       installed in all Sports Stadia to the exit gates from the ground
                       and on to the pitch, we would not have the catalogue of tragedies
                       like Bradford and Hillsborough.

                       Please find enclosed a copy of our General Specification for our
                       Electronic Locking System and Turnstiles Counting System.

                       For your reference budget prices have been put together as a
                       complete package subject to site survey.

                       We feel we can offer a complete stadia safety locking and counting
                       system under £100,000.

                       To a club with an average crowd attendance of 20,000 fans per game
                       the average cost per fan per week would be 10p.

                       I ask the question - what is the cost of safety to the Public?

                       Thank you once again for your help in this matter and I look forward
                       to an early reply.

                       Should you require any further information please do not hesitate to
                       contact me.

                       Yours sincerely,




                p-p.   f   t     ■
                       JOHN X. STRICKLAND
                       Managing Director




Fnternationai
Professional                    Directors: J. t . STRICKLAND
Security
Association                                A. M. T. STRICKLAND                    Certificate of Incorporation No. 148 65 94
             GENERAL      SPECIFICATION


  FOOTBALL   ATTENDANCE       MONITORING   EQUIPMENT


               F   A      M    E


This equipment is designed to keep track of attendances
through the turnstiles.   Every turnstile is identifiable
and can be ^grouped" together to cover segregated sections
of the stadium.

The counting of supporters can be achieved with an
attachment to the

             A)        Foot operated turnstile
             B)        The electronic turnstile

The counting is relayed back to the administration room with
the totals being updated every tenth of a second.

As this system was designed specifically for football grounds
it provides a variety of functions found to be desirable but
not previously available, such as

1.   A floor plan of your stadium can be drawn on the screen.
2.   Segregated areas can be highlighted*
3.   Each area can have its own maximum capacity displayed.
4.   On match day attendances within each area are displayed
     with a percentage figure on display, together with the
      grand total,
5.   As prices for seats or stands may differ, there is a
      facility to calculate the gross income based on attendance
      for any section of the ground.
6.   To avoid overcrowding limits can be set to give advance
      warning in time to send stewards to re-direct supporters,
7.   The attendance figures can be relayed to the ticket office
      again avoiding overcrowding and also under capacity.
                        THE   SYSTEM



The heart of the system is a microprocessor-based out-station which can
control 128 turnstiles.   The connection to this out-station is via a
single cable.   The out-station is connected to a desk top PC (Personal
Computer) which provides a visual display of the attendances as they
occur.

Computer Software

DES have developed   computer software programmes specifically for
turnstile counting   systems.   Once the system has been agreed we will
design a programme   around your specific requirements e„g. diagram
of the stadium and   layout of the turnstiles.

All software supplied with back-up information*

The software will produce a diagram of your stadium on the screen.
Each of the various areas such as members enclosure, season ticket
holders area etc., will be superimposed onto the screen.   Each area
will then be allocated.

1.      Maximum capacity
2.      The turnstiles foe that section
         Price per seat or person for that section
4.      Percentage figure before warning indications

Thereafter all you need to do is switch the PC on prior to the match
and watch as the turnstiles click all around the ground with the
screen giving you the totals as they happen.   The cash take totals
will be clicking over as well and could be used to validate the cash
takings at the end of the match.

A report will be produced as soon as you tell the PC that the turnstiles
have closed and a summary of the season will be produced when you tell
the PC that the season has finished, giving a match by match account of
attendances by area, by total attendances and by percentage movements.
The trends indicated may well give you your food for thought.
        FOOTBALL   COUNTING   SYSTEM



Average ground capacity in the Football League =   30,000

Data.    To fill a stadium the following
         times would ensue


Time to fill       Number through turnstiles in 1 second

    10 min                         50
    20 min                         25


The proposed counting equipment can cater for a
maximum throughput of 120 per second.

The number of turnstiles will increase the potential
for event counting happening concurrently thereby
risking an event not being counted*

This eventuality has been catered for by each turnstile
being equipped with its own counter which is poled to
enable the poled totals to be updated on the PC screen.

Simplicity of installation and maintenance is achieved
by the use of proximity switches at the turnstiles
permitting any type of turnstile to be connected to the
system.

Options to the System

A remote computer can be installed in the Police Control
room to provide additional information e.g<> a print out
can be produced every 5 minutes or on demand to predict
the filling up of the stadia.

The second computer gives the Police overall information
as to the total capacities of each area in the ground.

This computer system is linked via a RS 232 data link.
