                                                                 SPORTS
The Sports Council                                               council.
                                                        16 Upper Woburn Place
                                                        London WC1H OQP
 24 May 1989                                            Tel: 0 1 -3 8 8 1 2 7 7
                                                        Fax: 0 1 -38 3 57 40
                                                        Telex: 2 7 8 3 0 SPORTCG
 R M Whalley Esq                                        Chairman: PeterG. Yarranton
                                                        Vice Chairman:
 Room 662                                               Professor J Allan Patmore B.Litt MA
 The Home Office                                        Director General: David Pickup
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 London SW1H




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


I enclose three copies of a submission by the Sports Council
to the above-named Inquiry.   Officers of this Council would be
very willing to give supplementary oral evidence if this was
thought likely to be helpful.

We have not, for      the present, given any publicity to our
written submission    but would wish appropriately to do in due
course.   Could you   please provide me with guidance as to how
Lord Justice Taylor   would prefer us to proceed in this regard?




David Pickup



PS   Your letter to our Chairman was received to-day*
     I am therefore enclosing six copies of our submission
     as requested.
         THE SPORTS COUNCIL
     SUBMISSION TO THE INQUIRY
INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
              MAY 1989
THE SPORTS COUNCIL

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

INTRODUCTIOJ

1    This report summarises the initial views of the Sports Council in respect
     of the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989.   This submission
     is divided into four main sections:

     (a)     background information;

     (b)     reflections on the physical layout of Hillsborough and perceived
             crowd control difficulties;

     (c)     proposals for the future    in     relation   to   location, design and
             management of stadia; and

     (d)     areas where future    assistance    frcm the Sports Council might be
             considered helpful.

BACKGROUND

2   The Sports Council was established by Royal Charter in 1972 with the
     prime functions of promoting the knowledge and practice of sport in
     general. Technical advice on the planning, design, construction and
     overall management of sports facilities is provided through the Council's
     various technical units. As far as soccer is concerned, in addition to
     general advisory work with the football authorities at national and local
     level, the Council acts in a specific advisory role to the Football
     Trust.

SAFETY AT SPORTS EVENTS - SPORTS COUNCIL INVOLVEMENT

3   The fire at Bradford City Football Ground on 11 May 1985 and the events
     at Birmingham City Football Ground led to the establishment of a Heme
     Office Committee of Inquiry into crowd safety and control at sports
     grounds carried out by Justice Pqpplewell.      The Sports Council was
     invited to submit both written and oral evidence. Written evidence was
     submitted on 28 Jure 1985 and is contained in Appendix A.      The main
     points included in both written and oral evidence were:

     (a)     The Sports Council considered that designation of sports grounds
             for crowd safety and other purposes sQxiuld run wider than stadia
             for association football.      This point was taken up within the
             Pqpplewell findings;

     (b)     The Sports Council questioned the lack of legal prescription in
             this area, advocating instead an approach controlled by statutory
             regulations.    The Council proposed that consideration be given to
             incorporating a revised version of the Heme Office publication
             "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" (known as the "Green Guide") as
             a technical approved document of the National Building Regulations
             (then being revised). This proposal was not adopted. The 'Green
             Guide' remains a voluntary code and has no legal force;

     (c)     The Sports Council identified a need to revise further the 'Green
             Guide' and offered its technical services to assist in this task.
             While seme revisions of the 'Green Guide' were made, the Council
             was not involved in the exercise;
     (d)   The  Council drew attention to the fact that many existing grounds
           provided entrances frcm and exits to the public pavement and
           highway thereby aggravating crowd control problems due to lack of
           circulation space;

4   On more detailed issues, the Council drew attention to two specific
    points regarding future construction and management of sports stadia:-

     (a)   TheCouncil's work on a number of British Standards led us to
           express reservations about the use of synthetic plastic turf within
            enclosed stadia.     For example, if the Bradford pitch had been
            synthetic grass and itself had burned, it may not have permitted
            escape from the stand. This issue was subsequently raised with the
            Fire Research Station but was not pursued because few football
            clubs have had artificial grass pitches constructed.

     (b)   More    pertinently, the Council emphasised the need to evaluate new
           materials and      products,   particularly   proposals   for   pitch
           perimeter/security fences. We identified the need for these to be
            able to be collapsed instantly under the control of management.    A
            sketch (included as the last page of Appendix A) was provided based
           on observations of the Heysel Stadium disaster.      This point was
            taken up generally within the Popplewell Report which it stated
            (Chapter 6 : paragraph A.24) that "Consideration should be given to
            the design of a standard, efficient perimeter fence with proper
            exits." We are not aware of any such subsequent study having been
           undertaken in any depth in the United Kingdom.

REFLECTIONS ON THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Physical Layout

5   By arrangement with the Heme Office and the West Midlands Constabulary,
    technical officers of the Sports Council visited the Hillsborough Stadium
    on 28 April 1989 to assist their understanding of the physical layout of
    the stadium. Fran this first, and necessarily cursory, visit we have a
    variety of concerns about the design of the ground and noted a number of
    features which do not appear to meet the recommendations contained in the
    "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds". The Council assumes that these and
    other features will be the subject of careful review by the Committee of
    Inquiry:

     (a)   Within the external circulation area adjacent to the stand and
            terracing, signposting was poor. In particular access to the left
            hand end of the*terrace is not obvious, being hidden frcm direct
           view by a high security wall;

     (b)   The tunnel to the terrace in question is ramped downwards on to the
            terrace. The ranp appeared to be raked in excess of the guideline
            figure of 1:10, apparently as much as 1:7 or even 1:6 at one point;

     (c)   The access onto the terrace frcm the ramped tunnel was split into
            two with each divided access being oily about 1.5m wide thereby
            liable to cause excessive congestion at this location;

     (d)   The gates within the perimeter fence are less than the 1.1m minimum
            width specified in the Green Guide and therefore appear not to meet
            the need for an alternative escape onto the periphery of the pitch.
            The location of the exit, gates in the security fence was poor,
           being in the corners rather than centrally placed;
     (e)   Elsewhere in the ground, a worrying feature is the narrowness of
           gangways in the north stand. They appear to be about half the
           minimum width (of 1.1 metres) specified in the Green Guide.

Crowd Control

6   The Council has identified five main issues relevant to crowd control
    outside or within the ground. They underline some of the points we put
    to the Popplewell Inquiry:

     (a)   The need for adequate circulation space Immediately adjacent to the
           exterior of the stadium.   Many grounds, like Hillsborough, are
           unsatisfactory in this respect due to their proximity to housing
           and other property;

     (b)   The need    for clear   signposting leading to the ground and at the
           ground itself;

     (c)   The need    for broad entrances and exits to terraces and stands to
            allow relatively free movement of spectators;

     (d)   The need for perimeter fences (where these remain) to be capable of
           being opened or collapsed under the direct and Immediate control of
           management;

     (e)   The need    for efficient systems of communication rot oily between
           the authorities inside and outside the stadia, but between the
            authorities and spectators.    Measures to avoid undue pressure on
            access points (eg. by delaying kick-offs) should be readily
           transmittable to people anxious to gain entry to the grounds.

PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE

7   Within this section the Council raises three principal issues:

     (a)   The need     for further legislation in respect of safety at sports
           grounds providing, inter alia, for a central licensing authority
            for football grounds;

     (b)   The future location and design of stadia; and

     (c)   The standard of provision and management of stadia.

Legislation

8    The Council repeats its concern expressed to the Popplewell Inquiry (as
     reported in Appendix A) that the present building regulations have
     insufficient application to existing sports grounds.        The Safety at
     Sports Ground Act does not specify that Building Regulation control needs
     to be applied by local authorities. The safety certificates awarded by
     local authorities are mostly concerned with crowd numbers, exits and
     crash barriers.    We submit that this current voluntary code of practice
     (appropriately up-dated) should be the basis of legislation for sports
     stadia, including those for sports other than association football.

9   The Council proposes that a     central licensing authority for major
    spectator stadia is established. We are concerned about the perceived
    variety in standards applied by different local authorities (perhaps even
    by the same local authority). Central licensing would go same way to
    providing   co-ordination, consistency     of   approach   rod   improved
    monitoring.
Location and Design
              — -   of Stadia
                           ---



10   One of the key issues raised in respect of stadia is the need for space -
     for car parking, for external and internal circulation, exiting and
     entering the spectator areas. The location of many existing football
     grounds in central city/town sites precludes this provision, which
     implies the adoption of a gradual but progressive policy of disposing of
     grounds in densely developed areas and replacing the facility on the
     urban periphery. The Council believes that opportunities exist for such
     developments on a self-funding basis in many instances. This would also
     provide the opportunity for more than one club to be based at newly
     developed stadia constructed to a high specification and built to meet
     new demands for safety and ocmfart.

11   The Council supports the proposals that stadia should be all-seated with
     tickets sold fear specific seats within the ground. While sane adverse
     reaction should be expected frcm a minority of spectators the objective
     should be steadily pursued.

Standard of Design and Management

12   The Council's earlier submission to the Popplewell Inquiry stressed that
     it was often the nature and situation of the facility rather than
     capacity which gave cause for concern. We believe that in a majority of
      facilities provided for football spectators, the provision is appallingly
     poor.     The design, provision and management of the facilities far too
     often is primitive. Football management needs to be much more conscious
     of the philosophy of customer care.          Its absence must add to crowd
     behaviour problems. Spectators are often faced with hostile control
     systems    outside   the grounds (often due to space constrictions);
     overcrowding in certain parts of the terracing, absence of adequate
     toilet facilities, rudimentary catering outlets; and an all-too-ccmmon
      atmosphere of delapidation in the physical environs of the ground.

13   It is arguable that such poverty of conditions encourages - or at least
      does nothing to discourage - anti-social behaviour by many football
      spectators themselves. Certainly a major change in their behaviour and
      attitudes will be required if more disasters or less serious problems are
      not to arise in the future. The Council submits that it is now necessary
      to experiment with the provision of radically improved facilities which
      place much more responsibility on managers of grounds to provide
      spectator acccnmodation of a substantially higher standard, with more
      space for circulation, all-seated facilities, vastly improved toilet
      facilities and increased catering outlets.

14   Consideration should also be given to a more professional approach to the
      management of these facilities. The majority of football stadia are
      managed by the clubs themselves with much of the stewarding within
      grounds provided on a part-time or voluntary basis.          The use of
      specialist companies to manage facilities should become more common with
      the management skills of those companies being an integral element of
      assessment prior to a licence to operate being provided.

Financial Implications

15   The cost of improved facilities and management necessarily will have to
      be passed on to the customer.   However we believe that a review is
      required of the taxation of football clubs and, at least in the short­
      term, some allowance made to assist in redevelopment of facilities.
                                                                                      5


    FUTURE SPORTS COUNCIL ASSISTANCE

    16   The Sports Council can provide extensive technical advice on stadia
         design and management frcm an objective stand-point.     The Council is
         anxious to assist the Ccrmittee within the resources it has available. In
         the immediate future this assistance could take five main forms:-

         (a)   Assisting in revising the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds";

         (b)   Advising    on relevant issues arising frcm current work in drafting
                BS 5588, Fire Precautions in the Design, Construction and Use of
                Buildings, Part 6 "Means of Escape in Places of Assembly". This
                advice would relate to design standards fear, and associated
                problems within, all-seated stadia, whether open or covered;

         (c)   Organising a seminar of experts relating to the safe design of
                modem stadia. The Council would draw on its extensive contacts in
                this field both nationally and internationally to compare British
                guidance and practices with other legislation and recommendations.
               Preliminary discussions already are taking place towards European

•               CEN standards including those relating to stadia. In this work we
               would also invite co-operation from the Royal Institute of British
               Architects (RIBA) and the Institute of Structural Engineers (ISE);

         (d)   Bringing forward the publication of a design guide can/new stadia as
                one of its current series can designs of various sports facilities.
                The "Green Guide" is aimed at the upgrading and improvement of
                grounds and not at new stadium design; and

         (e)   Conducting research studies can different designs of perimeter
                fences and moats which provide both protection and safety.

    17   The Council would also be prepared to consider its position as regards
         any central licensing authority that may be established nationally to
         control   stadium   design,   improvements and management.      Currently
         discussions are being held with local authority associations          and
         professional bodies on quality assurance in the management of sports


•
         facilities - a principle which could be extended to football stadia.




    May 1989
                                                  APPENDIX A




     THE     SPORTS        C O U N C I L




    Written Evidence by the Sports Council


       to the 1985 Committeo of Inquiry


into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds
                                                                               s p o rts '
The Sports Council                                                     aIs council
                                                                       Lo 'Jp o e’ Wou'jrn Place
                                                                       Lorvlon V.ClH OOP
                                                                       T<y. 01 -3 S 3 1277
                                                                       Teie.«: 2 7 3 3 0 SPORTC G.
                                                                       Chairman: Dick Jeeps CoE
                                                                        ice Cttaif man: :an McCaiion
Mr N L Morgan                                                          Director General: Jonn wheane-,
Secretary to the Inquiry
Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety                     Our ref.
  and Control at Sports Grounds                            Your ref.
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                                          28 June 1985




Dear Sir

Conmittee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds

lhank you for your letter of 3 June 1985.

In the time available I have prepared our response in the following way:

(a)   Responses to your questions are set out under the headings and numbers
      which you have put to us.

(b)   Additional responses are set out in appendices as follows:

      Appendix 1:   Relevant Aspects of Present Sports Council Involvement

      Appendix 2:   Products and Ideas (and the need for a focus for enquiries)

      Appendix 3:   A Fence and Division Proposal.

I hope you find this helpful. You may feel that certain aspects need further
discussion or oral evidence, and I or my officers will be pleased to respond
in any way you feel necessary.

Yours faithfully




 J D Wheatley
 Director General


 Enclosure
POPPLEWELL INQUIRY



QUESTION 4:   DESIGNATION:   OTHER SPORTS


4.1 We feel that designation should apply to grounds other than those
    for football. Grounds should be designated where activities are
    pursued on the arena or pitch area which will produce crowd numbers
    and circumstances demanding safety conditions.

4.2   The Sports Council is in favour of sports grounds being used widely
      for sporting and appropriate non-sporting activities, particularly
      where this increases the viability of the facility, thus providing
      greater satisfaction to the cormrunity.

      Examples include:

      (a) Other sports (eg the recent McGuigan boxing match in the Queens
          Park Rangers ground) may increasingly share stadia. Wembley
          Stadium is used for a wide range of events other than football.

      (b) Sports grounds are already used for "pop" concerts and enter­
          tainments which are likely to produce crowd conditions conparable
          with football.

      (c) The Sports Council has just produced (June 1985) a report in
          conjunction with the Football Association and the Football
          Trust on artificial grass surfaces for football: this is
          covered later in more detail in Appendix 1. One of the
          implications for stadia is the possibility of more intensive
          use. The Football League is considering applications from
          two clubs to lay such surfaces this year.

          This aspect should also be covered in expansion of the Guide
          to Safety at Sports Grounds: Football (1976) ie the Green
          Guide (see 7.1 et seq).
QUESTION 5:   LEGISLATION


5.1   The figure of 10,000 spectators as a basis of designation may need
      examination. For example, the Bradford stand held approximately
      3,000. Grandstands of similar size and risk could exist on grounds
      of less than 1 0 , 0 0 0 total capacity.

5.2   High level tiers or elevated spectator provision of any size will
      create greater risks when rapid or panic crowd movements occur.
      It is sometimes the nature and situation of the facility rather
      than the capacity which should demand designation.

5.3   The present Building Regulations have little relevance to existing
      sports grounds. We understand that new reformed Building Regulations
      have been largely re-written and will soon become law. Perhaps a
      section for these, eg "Outdoor Spectator Structures", needs to be
      written. (See also 7.4 to 7.6.)

5.4   The Safety at Sports Ground Act does not specify that Building
      Regulations control needs to be applied by local authorities.
      The safety certificates awarded by local authorities are mostly
      concerned with crowd numbers, exits and crash barriers. The
      Green Guide is more specific on this point: ref Clauses 1.6,
      3.5, 9.6 and 10.1. (Also, British Standards are referred to
      in 3.1, 8.10 and 9.6.1.)

5.5   From Clauses 10.1 and 10.2 of the Green Guide it is apparent that
      an existing stand improvement under the Guide does not require
      full pnilrHng Regulation approval, as would apply to new construct-
      ion. To remedy this we suggest that Clause 1.6 should be amended
      to say that certification of ground improvements should be
      conditional on full approvals of Building Regulations and all other
      relevant legislation (including Town and Country planning aspects
      where appropriate). This will cover parts of grandstand accomm­
      odation and health and safety matters not currently included in
      the Green Guide eg those relating to toilets, snack bars, offices
      and sports facilities.

      Clauses 10.1/10.2 take into account fire resistance of the structure
      but are not decisive about irtprovements. If it is not practicable
      to improve the fire resistance of an existing structure, it should
      be rebuilt or closed to use.

 5.6 When checking a grandstand improvement applications local Building
     Control Officer, who checks applications against the Building Regu­
     lations, cannot insist that other defects are put right where
     unrelated to the improvements being proposed. Likely causes of
     concern not covered by the present Green Guide include aspects which
     relate to existing structures:

       (a) Structures designed before current codes of structural design
           were produced.

       (b) Structural decay: corrosion of steel, crumbling brickwork,
           spalling concrete and decayed timber.
    (c) Inadequate maintenance (eg ingress of water throu<£i roofs, and
        broken or blocked rainwater pipes), the result of which may be
        to hasten structural decay.

    (d) The ability of old structures to cope with sudden crowd movements.

7 A regular inspection or certification of the construction needs to
  be considered; the suggested additions to the Building Regulations
  could be used as a guide (paras 7.4 to 7.6). Such inspection or
  certification, which we recommend should occur annually, would
  encourage a continuing commitment to the proper care and main­
  tenance of the structures.

8   The control of spectators with relevance to hooliganism and control
    of alcohol also needs to be considered immediately outside the ground.
    Space is needed for checking and control, but many existing grounds
    provide entrances and exits immediately onto the public pavement and
    highway.

    We suggest that this aspect needs sane attention. For new stadia
    provision it can be incorporated into town planning requirements,
    but for existing situations other measures may need to be considered,
    eg the pedestrianising of existing streets in the immediate vicinity
    of the ground.

    We believe there should be a statutory obligation to seek town
    planning consent when alterations and change are made to stadia.
    Particular regard should be paid to crowd movement onto the .public
    highway.
QUESTION 7;   GREEN GUIDE


7.1   The Green Guide is not wholly adequate in our view.

7.2   There are two guides:   the first is "Guide to Safety at Sports
      Grounds" (1973).

      The second is "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds:     Football" (1976).

7.3   The second Green Guide refers specifically to football: the status
      of the 1973 Guide needs to be clarified. Is this guide still
      relevant to non-football stadia or is it superseded?

7.4   The introduction to the 1976 guide states that "it is a voluntary
      code and has no legal force". In the time available to us we have
      considered two alternative courses of action,which are indicated
      below.

7.5   One alternative is to review the Green Guide against relevant aspects
      of the Building Regulations (eg criteria for staircases, fire pro­
      tection). Paragraph 5.3 (above) suggests a new section of the
      Building Regulations: indeed the latter could embrace and possibly
      replace much of the present Green Guide.

7.6   The other alternative is to expand the Green Guide to include all health
      and safety (including structural) matters, as covered by the Building
      Regulations but adapted specifically for sports grounds. The Building
      Regulations could then simply contain a 'deemed to satisfy1 clause,
      requiring the Green Guide to be complied with as an "Approved Document".
      Preliminary discussions with the Department of the Environment indicate
      that this is a realistic possibility.
APPENDIX 1


Relevant Aspects of Present Sports Council Involvement


1.    The Sports Council has been concerned with aspects of fire precautions
      in indoor sports centres.

2.    TUS Data Sheet 47.1 (attached) discusses fire hazards relating to
      equipment in such sports centres.

3.    Artificial grass and synthetic surfaces are covered in paragraphs
      6 - 1 0 following.

4.    Information on Indoor Arenas has been prepared which is in illus­
      trated draft form at present. This information would have relevance
      to future stadia which might be covered in, and to very large indoor
      arenas where football and similar spectator sports might take place.

 'Public Entertainment'

5     Indoor spectator seating will care within the requirements of the
      proposed new British Standard BS5588, "Fire Precautions in the Design
      and Construction of Buildings: PART 5 Places of Assembly". Unfort­
      unately, although this BS has been in draft form for several years
      it is stil unpublished, due to corrplications relating to co-ordination
      with the new Building Regulations.

      An early draft overlapped with parts of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
      (1975) and the Green Guide. A re-draft has not been received; this
      matter needs to be re-checked to ensure that the anomaly has been
      corrected or amended.

 Artificial Grass and Synthetic Surfaces

 6.    The Sports Council has produced a general Specification for Artificial
       Sports Surfaces (not aimed at football or spectator venues but for
       multi-purpose sports surfaces).

 7.    In the light of the Bradford disaster the Sports Council has reviewed
       the recommendations of that Specification in relation to fire. At
       present these require that the surface shall conform with any relevant
       national and local building and fire regulations, and specify that it
       shall inset certain conditions when tested in accordance with BS 4790.
       This testing is intended to ensure that surfaces do not readily spread
       fire from a relatively small ignition source, such as a firework or
       flare. In a fire such as that at Bradford, small burning fragments
       ejected from the fire and falling onto an artificial surface complying
       with this test, should not cause significant additional fire hazard due
       to the burning of the surface.
                                                                             2


8.    However, it is felt that further investigation is needed into the effects
      of intense heat from a large radiant source of fire such as occurred at
      Bradford, and in the light of this we have consulted with the Rubber
      and Plastics Research Association, the British Carpet Technical Centre,
      WIRA (former Wool Industries Research Association), the Fire Research
      Station, and the Home Office. Following their response, we are considering
      ccxrmissioning calculations on the basis of which guideline criteria may
      be issued for surfaces to be installed in various facilities. We are also
      considering their suggestion that two additional tests (the ASTM NBS
      Radiant Panel Ttest and the ISO Conical Radiant Heater Ignitability Test)
      should be carried out on products (on the shock pads and bases on which
      they are to be installed) to provide data on the product which can be
      viewed against such guidelines.

      We are also considering having further discussions with relevance to
      the wider potential effects of fire on synthetic surfaces eg toxic
      fumes and their effects on spectators.

9.    Although this work will be carried out as quickly as possible, the
      production of guidelines and long term recorrmendations, not only^
      for sports grounds but also for the full range of sports facilities,
      must be considered carefully and thoroughly. We have therefore
      recormended to the Football League, and to the only firm whose product
      is presently being considered by them, that those who hope to install
      surfaces in League grounds should have the product tested in the mean­
      time in accordance with the additional tests described in paragraph 8 .
      They should also have calculations carried out to establish the circum­
      stances in which the product would be satisfactory from the point of
      view of fire. It would be wise for inspectors to require similar
      measures to be taken in respect of existing installations of artificial
      surfaces in sports grounds which they are assessing. It should be borne
      in mind that existing installations may not have met even the require­
      ments of our Specification referred to in paragraph 6 (above).

10.   The Building Regulations have no requirement in respect of horizontal
      surfaces. We have enquired of sports surfaces firms as to whether
      there has been any other requirement for fire tests to be carried out
      on their products, as a result of any other regulations, either national
      or local. The initial response indicates that there is no evidence of
      any such requirement.
APPENDIX 2


Products and Ideas


1.   We have had a nuntoer of submissions about various materials and products
     which can be used to reduce fire risk. Many are by manufacturers and
     associations, but some are by individuals. No doubt other agencies
     have received similar approaches.

2.   Arrangements need to be made for evaluation of these materials and
     products.

3.   We have received two separate proposals for techniques which could be
     used to instantly collapse security fences under the control of police
     or management. Both are ideas for a prototype which could need develop­
     ment. The potential for a fence to the front of grandstands and terraces
     which could be collapsed in the event of a fire like that at Bradford,
     needs to be examined.
APPENDIX 3


Pence and Division Proposal


1.   An      for fence types which nay -merit investigation is shown in the
     attached diagram. This is based on observations of some of the problems
     seen in the Heysel stadiun in Belgiun arising frcm the -existence of low
     walls.

2.   It nay be       that fences between sections of the crowd should not
     collapse at all, but escape under some circumstances, eg at the edges
     of terraces, might be hindered or prevented by low walls at the base
     of the fencing.
                                                                                CROWD
                                                                                M O M E N T




                                                          ^ Spectators -happed
                                                                         |©w     upshind
                                                              p A r tic u l^ r ly children
          LOW UPSTAND WALL WITH FENCE OVER




    /




                   0
/
>


                                                ■Fence                  sntfe   g n o u r\4
                                                dWovlS

        FENCE OR DIVIDER TYPE STRUCTURALLY PIVOTTING AT GROUND LEVEL
               This allows easy egress in event of collapse
    SUOWCE
                                                          TUS DATA SHEET
          THE FISE EA21AHDS OF                               GJ/ Jan ly'SF
          EQUIPMENT IN SPOKES CENTRES                     r* 2nd Edition               47.1

    BACKGROUND



              SdS^,T 45«. ■*»— . »«•*-•«» *>“ ■"* “ "
              filled.
              rm.        v      K « r * fires at Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
     2*               ^!7^a !q8l        1 9 8 3 involving this kind of equipment and it is
                  S t l S t i n f to ncte that all 3 fires are thought to have been caused
                  by vandalism.
A    3.           It was thought useful to put out these notes, because of the serious
                  nature of this subject.


      general

      If.         The following comments arose out 01 meetings between TUS a_^
                  Home Office in 19§0.
                  Foam plastic Infills are fire risks, particularly polystyrene
      5-
                  and urethane foam.
                                   .         a.     +v.p occasional discarded match or
      6   .       Sources of ignition are not 3        ceH:ain plastics stacked near
                  cigarette but can even result from cert      P     paulty electrical
                   or against central heating pipes and radiators. .Fa ty
                  wiring and installations are a source of dange-.

                   Some fire retardant grades of infill are not truly effective and
       ?•
                   can produce equally dangerous toxic fumes.
%      8 . Current   advice is that upholstery or enclosing ewers shouLd
           i S h B S W S concerning the safe and reasonable degree of l e - t a B U K y

        9-         Attention, in particular, should be ^        %   _    “°“ bS c ^     1   ^   '
                    S ' f S ^ d ^        f f l T i l ’S   d   b e a r e d      or the mats ta*en
                    out of use

          10.       Managers and providers
                    their local fire protection officer, who snouxa oe -u
                    the local Health and Safety Adviser.
          H   .     Vandalism is a real danger to be guarded a g a i n s t b y management.
                    Designers of new facilities should be aware o. tne p-o -




                                                              TtecnnlcalunttforSoort
                                                      16 U'D'oer Wobum Place
                                                      London WC1 E OQP
                                                      0 1 - 3 8 8 1277
•BTTTT.DTWG

12.    New buildings will have to meet the National Building Regulations
       fo aV1 cepstructional and material matters.

        Means of Escape is something over which there are not agreed national
        I S S L S L T S . local fixeprotectian office will Hold his own inter-
        pretation and needs to be consulted.

in      Old and ohselete buildings are asked to cope with new materials and
13-                     w S n ^ i « s e d or known at the date of construction.
        Hxey need to be checked.


WOTOfi FRCM BS 3379 '• 1975, APPENDIX 3
 lit    The following table taken from the above, which reports on the burning
        S ^ p e r S e r S flexible urethane foam, might be found to be useful.
        The^table provides guidance intended to minimise the fire hazards
        presented by these materials.

         Situation         Recommended Actions

         Manufacture,       (a)    Maintain good housekeeping standards.
         storage and        (b)    Observe stringent fire precautions, e.g. no
         fabrication               smoking except in designated areas.
                            (c)    Ensure that employees are fully aware of the
                                   potential fire hazards presented by these
                                   materials.
                            (d)    Consult EM Factory Inspectorate for advice,^in
                                   respect of fire precautions, during manufacture,
                                    storage and handling.
                            (e)     Manuafacturers to contact BSI and Home Office
                                    for latest development and technology.
                            (f)     Maintain well established fire drill procedures
                                    in consultation with the Fire Authority.
                             (g)    Inform the Fire Authority of materials being
                                    used.
                             (h)    Install suitable fire protective systems as
                                     required by the situation.

          Finished           (a)    Avoid the use of covering materials that are
                                    easily ignited by small flame sources or with a
          products
                                    known ability to support smouldering combustion.
                             (b)    Ensure that all users are fully aware of the _ _
                                    potential fire hazards presented by the materiaj
SUDieCT
          tee fire hazards of                  TUS DATA SHEET
          EQUIPMENT in sports centhes
                                               ref
                                                      GJ/ Jan 1985
                                                      2 nd Edition              47.2

gym pits

 16         A recent development has been the introduction of foam filled gymnastics
           tits £ a numbe? of centres and dubs. These "pits" a r e for t r a m n g
           gymnasts and help to overcome the risk of injury on             go®
           S S S t u s . The usual method of filling the 2m deep pits is by
           TjSing scran urethane foam on top of several layers ox foam slabs
           and this loose foam is potentially a serious fire h a z a r d .

            T_ mecialist facilities with controlled use, such as the pitted
            hal?at Lilleshall Hall National Sports Centre, good means of escape
                        toeether vrth smoke detectors and vents, appear to be
            S e S t e io d f 2         potential danger. However in public_centres,
            more stringent measures are bound to be required, and the use 01 fa-e
            resistant grades of foam is almost inevitable. The '*pi«. edges are
            'also protected by foam, but this is sheathed in reimorced p.v.c.
            material which can help to reduce the risk of combustion.

            (TUS Data Sheets 33-5 and 33-6 give details of "pit" facilities,
            design and infill).


  MAYSFISLD T.TTTPnTRT’
                      , CENTRE: REPORT AND DTVESTIGATION

   18.      A report and investigation into the circumstances leading up to the
            fire'on the 1^th January 198^ at the Maysfiela insure Cen„ e in
            •Rplfa^t has been prepared by Hr H R C Boyce. The report comes ouu with
            f S f e r 5 r e f l a t i o n / The ioUowin 6 plication,
            extracted are thought to be those which are unportan, . 0 „ne aesigne.s
            of facilities.
    19. A store separate frcm all other kinds of storage. This s^ore,
     ^ including L y door, should have a one hour fire resistance.
         should be preferably only one door to that store, and this^shoul
                                                                                  ^
         kept locked except when mats are being taken to ana j.rom a -.

             'nviis sto-e should be ventilated, ideally from the roof so that in
             the event of a fire the full width of ventilation openings is
             available. Ideally the ventilator should be                       J
             by a smoke detector, which is also wired to an ala_m      .eception
              or to the fire alarm system.
      ?n          f.-r-e resisting integrity of the building must not be impaired by
      2°-                            A San" should be *ept by the Centre Manager and
              by the relevant client authority, m tae appropria.e f_-=: r ec.-J--e or
              Engineering Section. (Proper maintenance 01 the equipme.^ a^d bu__d_„g
              plant is also imperative).
      21.     Escape routes and main corridors must be kept clear of obstructions.

                                                     Technical unit for Sport
                                            •16 Upper W o burn Place
                                             London WC1E OQP
                                             0 1 - 3 8 8 1277
          OTHER
         SPORTS
         counciL

       PUBLICATIONS
  FROM THE SPORTS COUNCIL
Essential reading for                                 STU0V 30   The Economic impact &
                                                                 importance of Sport in the UK
anyone seriously                                                 An examination of sport’s
involved in sport                          THE«gJ55cElMWV        contribution to the economy.
and recreation                                                    Prepared by the Henley Centre for
                                                                  Forecasting
 Bridging The Cap                                                 Price: £10.00(146 pages) post free
        The results and1
experiences of a scheme                                                     Local Authority Sports
   to stop school leavers                                                  Provision for the
   dropping out of sport.                                                  Unemployed
         By Elaine Wade.                                                    An analysis of current schemes
  Price: £5.00 (20pages)                                                 | and examples of good practice.
         post free                                                         Price: £995 (180 pages)
                                                                          plus £1.00 p&p

                                                                                  into The 90’s
                                                                                 The Sports Council strategy
Fund Raising
                                                                                up till 1993. A state-of-the art
   for Sport
                                                                                facility and participation
 The do’s, don’t’s
  and don’t forgets          :                                                 review.
                                                                              Price: £5.00 (92 pages)
   of raising money.
                                                                             plus 50p p&p
 Essential reading for
sports dub secretaries.                                                    ice PacK
Price: £5.00 (86 pages)                                                    How to plan, design and
          plus 50p p&p                                                    manage facilities for ice sports.
                                                                        I/Price: £25 (post free) 80 pages.
SASH Design Guide — 1
  Indoor Dry Sports Building.                                            SASH Design Guide — 2
 Briefing, design, performance                                           Swimming Pool Option. Briefing,
specification and cost guidance                                          design, performance specification
            notes for the SASH                                           and cost guidance notes for the
     (Standardised Approach to                                            swimming pool addition to the
      Sports Halls) sports centre.                                        SASH sports centre.
   Price: £20.00 (172pages)post                                           Price: £20.00 (244 pages) post free
                               free
                                                                             Available from the Sports Council
                                                                             Publications Department
                                                                             16 Upper Woburn Place, London
                                                                             WC1H OQP (Tel: 01-388 1277).
        A Digest of Sports Statistics                                        Cheques orpostal orders made
            for the UK (2nd edition)                                         payable to The Sports Council.
           Statistics on participation, facilities                           Or send an official order
             and finance in more than 7 0 UK
             sports. Prepared by the Centre for
                                                            tmm              and we’ll invoice you.
                                                                             All publications are listed in the
                                                                             free leaflet Keep in Touch,
                                Leisure Research.                            available from the above address.
              Price: £15.00 (160pages) post free
