From: Sue McDougall                                           Mr Maclean
Operational Policing Policy Unit                              Mr Boys Smith
Room 527                                                      Mr Pugh
8 273 2621                                                    Mr Granatt
                                                              Mr Rock
7 March 1997                                                  Miss Whetstone




Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH M EETING W ITH M R KILFOYLE AND THE HILLSBOROUGH
FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP


You asked for a briefing on our meeting yesterday with Mr Kilfoyle and members of the
Hillsborough Family Support Group. Accompanying Mr Kilfoyle were Mr Trevor Hicks,
whose daughters Vicki and Sarah died in the disaster, Mr Hammond whose 14 year old son
Philip died and Mrs Addington, who came in support of the families.

2.      We had suggested holding the meeting in order to give the families the opportunity to
raise any new point of concern which you could then take into account when coming to a
decision whether or not to re-open the inquiry.

3.      The families brought a number of files of material which they wish us to consider and
which will take some time to read. They have also provided us with a video tape which they
believe supports the testimony of Roger Houldsworth, the video camera technician, who was
reported in the television programme Hillsborough as asserting that a CCTV camera trained
on the ground was working, when the police had said at the time that it was not working well.

 4.      The representatives spent over two hours explaining the points they felt had been
ignored in the past and what they considered to be new evidence. Their primary sense of
grievance appears to be centred round the inquest verdict; they explained that they considered
the verdict of accidental death to be a gross miscarriage of justice. They were forceful in their
expressed resolve to continue to press for further investigations whatever the outcome of your
decision. Apart from the inquest verdict, they also believe that there is a major issue around
police conduct in the aftermath of the disaster. They consider that evidence was suppressed in
an effort to minimise the extent of police culpability to such an extent that this represented a
conspiracy.

5.     In his report Lord Taylor was highly critical of the police and noted that:

       In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must report
       thatfo r the most part the quality o f their evidence was in inverse proportion to their
       rank. There were may young Constables who as witnesses were alert intelligent and
       open...By contrast with some notable exceptions the senior officers were defensive
       and evasive . Their feelings o f grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine. No doubt
       those feelings were intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred
       under their management. But neither their handling o f problems on the day nor their
       account o f it in evidence showed the quality o f leadership to be expected o f their rank.

When you come to consider the evidence you will need to decide whether the information
which has been collected simply supports the view expressed by Lord Taylor or whether it
suggests a more serious attempt to pervert the course of justice which should be investigated.

Handling

6.     The media had been alerted, presumably by Mr Kilfoyle, to yesterday’s meeting and
the families were filmed entering the Home Office; there was a brief report on Granada
Television and on BBC Regional TV news. The attached cutting appeared in the Liverpool
Daily Post. If there are further press inquiries, I suggest the following line to take:

       Members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group presented officials with a
       package o f materials supporting their request to the Home Secretary to hold a
       further inquiry. The Home Secretary will consider the material along with other
       representations when he makes his decision.




                                       Sue McDougall
. CDI Y&H REGION LEEDS        TEL:   0113 2- 83658?   27,02,97                 9:18 N o .001 P 02

       *
           UKLULAUUN
            110,482    (SHEFFIELD)   m iI * *         2 6 FEBRUARY 1997
                                                                                                                  m m
                                                                                                                  CO    6


                       NewHillsborough
                       deafllisevidence
                                                                                                 sS


                                                                                                           \? s
                                                          Bv C h a r l e s    S mith                ^
                                                          A H OSPITA L d o c to r w ho
                                                          treated Hillsborough disaster
                                                          victims has offered fresh evi­
                                                          dence which may help over
                                                          turn the original Inquest ver­
                                                          dict
                                                            Dr Ed Walker, who tended more
                                                          than a dozen fans during the day
                                                          of ilie d is a s te r in A p ril 1980.
                                                          claims, to have new medical evi­
                                                          dence which contradicts -vliat the
                                                          inquest was told.
                                                            Today he aattl he was eoncemcd that
                                                          he had noi teen calkd to ylve evidence
                                                          at the InqiMst - diisnile hrlng refei'rtd
                                                          to as an **unWon*Mifd doctor** at the
                                                          hearing.
                                                            Dr Walker. who now works at
                                                          Dewsbury Hospital In Wm Yorkshire.
                                                          «M: “I can't odlcvr I have          sit­
                                                          ting on rh|* sniff for *eht year*-1 had
                                                          no idea it was ao important"
                                                             The Hillsborough Family Support
                                                           Group pUns to uae the cvMcw* <n pet
                                                           th e o rig in al h e a rin g 's accidental
                                                           deaths V enlkt overturned.
                                                             D r W alker ru*hed to Sheffield*
                                                           JJorrhrm General after wxrlaif TV pte*
                                                           tu re s of the unfolding <rau«dy at
                                                           HlU&boroiifih. which cUlmrd ih* liv «
                                                           of 9® Llverpuul fan*
                                                                            Alive
                                                              The doctor, then ■ ju nio r anae«*
                                                                   at FUtfhrrham hospital, tty s (ha
                                                           firs* victim ha rrcfttad was alive wcU
                                                           after S.lPpm.
                                                              Al the 1990 inquest. Shcfflrld coro­
                                                            ner Dr Steftat Popper refused to hear
                                                            detail* of what happened aflrr that
                                                            time on the gmund* that ihuae W W
                                                            w tre already brain to d
                                                               Some of the vtcttais* fkmtUee Insist’
                                                            many were still alive well «T*«!
                                                               They claim the rulin g w evantcd
                                                            them from submitting evidence that
                                                            South Yorkshire Police faUed#to acU*
                                                          ^vate Its dU***«r pUn In time.
                                                                >r W alker now say* M*year*old
                                                                ‘ lm Philip Hammond w m alive
                                                                  13.40pm.
                                                                 J said: "I was one of the first doc*
                                                                 i attending patients as they arrived
                                                           __i the Northern General Hospital. I
                                                             was th e n in a voluntary capacity.
                                                               •M y m ein eonccrn is that I was
                                                             never asked to give evidence at the
                                                             Inquests. I have recently <tfcM>v«red
                                                             that 1 was referred to several times us
                                                             an ‘unidentified doctor*."
                                                               The Hillsborough Family Support
                                                             Group puns to use his tft**l*e©ny u
                                                             ask the Utah Court to quoth the accl-
                                                          *           desnr e ertfc t W id fo ry hope* a
                                                             new Inquest wooM r.h*n0» tM v«rdtd
                                                             to unlawful killInc




                                                                               A4 to A4
