                                                                                     lP\
   Related Papers                       Subject




 Date first ap
                                 m
  FOR V B ./P R IO R IT Y WRITTEN/                      ANSWER ON
                                                                                   20 APM
 Party :         Con^ab^Lib/Other


               r ony Banks (Newham North West): To ask the Secretary of State for the Home
    ■Mtk                     ^      m.a^e a statement on the progress made in implementing
               each of the recommendations made in the report by the Committee of Inquiry into
               Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds.




THIS FILE MUST BE RETURNED TO
PARLIAMENTARY SECTION BY NOON ON
                                                                                        19 APR 1SG3
                Date                                                    Minutes

                -1
                 1 0fthAtT
                        it t w
                \%




                                 34539- X B D P I 232




           i
           i
in.




       PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR PRIORITY WRITTEN ANSWER ON 20 APRIL


              "Mr Tony Banks (Newnham North West):   To ask the Secretary
              of State for the Home Department, if he will make a
              statement on the progress made in implementing each of the
              recommendations made in the report by the Committee of
              Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds."



      DRAFT   REPT.Y




      The Government's proposals for giving effect to the safety
      recommendations in the Final Report were set out in a
      consultative document produced in June 1986.      All of these

      proposals except amendment to building regulations guidelines
      codes have been implemented.



      The question of structural fire precautions and means of escape
      in buildings (including covered sports stands) is under review as
      part of the government's comprehensive overhaul of the building
      regulations.     it is the intention of my rt hon Friend the

      Secretary of State for the Environment to issue a consultative
      paper by the end of this year seeking comment on a package of
      proposals dealing with these issues.



      The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 which came into force       || ^
      on 1 January 1986 had already extended the police powers of
      search and arrest in ways which help them to deal with

      troublemakers at football grounds.     The Public Order Act 1986      ^
      created a new offence of disorderly conduct to cover hooliganism
      in football grounds as elsewhere.

                                        1
I.R.




       A further recomemndation was to review the provisions of the

       Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 in relation to         ^
       executive boxes.   Following that review a relaxation of the
       controls over the sale and possession of alcohol in executive
       boxes was introduced in the Public Order Act 1 9 ^                  ^



       The Government's existing proposals for a membership scheme are
                                                                               IS
       contained in the Football Spectators Bill [H.L.]     THis follows
       previous efforts to encourage the football authorities to
       introduce membership schemes on a voluntary basis.




                                       2
 POPPLEWELL INQUIRY



1.   The Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at
Sports Grounds was chaired by Mr Justice Popplewell and the Final
Report presented to Parliament in January 1986 (Cmnd 9710).
2.   The Final Report made 15 recommendations - ten of those
related to safety; four to expansion of the criminal law; and the
remaining recommended some form of membership scheme for football
league clubs in England and Wales. The Government's proposals for
giving effect to the safety recommendations in the Final Report
were set out in a consultative document produced jointly by the
Home Office and the Scottish Office in June 1986.
Recommendation 1

3.   "The distinction between sports grounds and sports stadia
should be abolished."

4.   Section 19 of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport
Act 1987 removes the distinction in the SSGA 1975 between a
sports ground and a sports stadium. The provisions of the 1975
Act apply to all sports grounds as defined in section 17(1) of
that Act.

Recommendation 2

5.   "Further designation under the SSGA 1975 of sports grounds
and sports stadia with accommodation for over 10,000 spectators
where Association Football, Rugby League, Rugby Union and cricket
is played in England, Wales and Scotland."

6.   In England and Wales there are 92 designated grounds for
Association Football, including Wembley (Torquay United is the
exception because it holds less than 10,000 spectators); 22 Rugby
League grounds; and a total of 54 cricket and rugby union
grounds. All sports grounds identified as having accommodation
for over 10,000 spectators are used for those stated sports are
designated.

Recommendation 3

7.   "All sports grounds and sports stadia not already designated
under the SSGA 1975 and having a capacity in a stand of over 500
spectators should be designated under the FPA 1971 as premises
requiring a fire certificate."

8.   Designation under the FPA 1971 would permit fire authorities
to certificate the stand only in matters relating to fire safety;
they would not be able to seek improvements to the structural
safety of the stand. Part III of the FSSPGA 1987 stipulates that
a stand at a sports ground which is not a designated ground and
which can accommodate at least 500 spectators under cover must
have a safety certificate if it is to be used to view the
activities at a ground. This is known as a regulated stand.
 Recommendation 4

 9.   "One authority should be given responsibility for securing
 structural safety at sports grounds and stadia not designated
 under the 1975 Act".

10. This follows on from the Inquiry's Recommendation 3 in that
the Inquiry recognised that designation under the FPA 1971 would
be limited in its scope to fire matters only and not to
structural dangers. The introduction of regulated stands has
significantly increased the number of grounds at which local
authorities are now required to carry out inspection for safety
certification of the unit of covered accommodation.
Rggulafelon 5

11. "In England and Wales indoor sports facilities with
accommodation for over 500 spectators should require a fire
certificate".

12. Part IV of the FSSPA 1987, which came into force on 1 June
1988, requires that premises are not used for sports
entertainments except under and in accordance with the terms of a
licence granted by a district or borough council. The 1987 Act
requires the licensing of premises for any entertainment which
consists of any indoor sporting event to which the public are
invited as spectators. This allows for more than just fire
safety to be regulated.
Regulation 6

13. "An urgent review of the existing legislation on indoor
sports facilities in Scotland should be undertaken and if they
are not currently covered by fire regulations such facilities
should be designated under the FPA".

14. Section 44 (within Part IV) of the 1987 Act stipulates that
a licence to be known as an "indoor sports entertainment licence"
shall be required for the use of premises as a place of public
sports entertainment. Again this allows the licensing authority
to deal with safety in general rather than with fire safety
alone.

Recommendation 7

15. "Provision should be made in the FPA 1971 for authorised
officers of a fire authority to have power to issue a prohibition
notice".
and

Recommendation 8

16. "Provision should be made for authorised officers of the
local authority to have power to issue a prohibition notice under
the SSGA 1975".
17. Section 23 of the 1987 Act replaces section 10 of the 1975
Act with provision for a system of prohibition notices. Local
authorities are empowered to serve a prohibition notice where
they are of the opinion that the admission of spectators to a
sports ground or any part of a sports ground involves or will
involve a serious risk. The prohibition notice can take effect
immediately.

18. The emergency procedure under section 10 of the FPA 1971
remains in force.

Recommendation 9

19. "There should be (1) annual renewal of safety certificates
under the SSGA 1975; (2) a duty on the local authority to inspect
the premises prior to reissuing the certificate and (3) power for
the local authority to revoke the certificate".

20. The Government did not accept the need for (1) - and
therefore (2) - nor for (3).

21. The 1975 Act works in such a way that revocation is
unnecessary. A safety certificate can be amended if
circumstances change so as to justify such a course. Local
authorities can be flexible in their approach to remedial works
required to be carried out and can regulate the number of
spectators permitted into the grounds or parts of it, to match
the conditions which exist within the ground.

22. Designated grounds are inspected   annually by local
authorities.
Regulation 10

23. ''The Department of the Environment should urgently amend the
building regulations guideline codes in relation to structural
fire precautions in new stands".
POPFLSWSLL RJ5PORT


BACKGROUND NOTB

1•   It war always accepted that the comprehensive review of the

fire building regulations would take some years to complete*

Thus, the Home Office consultative document "Fire Safety and

safety at Sports Venues” indicated at paragraph 2.49 that the

Department of the Environment would issue interim guidance on the

need for concealed space in the floor of stands to be sealed and

sub-divided where this was necessary to inhibit the spread of fire

within a stand.

2.   This interim guidance was never lsdued.    This was because

it was felt that such new single storey stands as might be built

would not be constructed with a cartkustible floor structure open

to sub-floor voids.   Such a thing was pessible, but for a stand

of any size it would almost certainly be more economical to use

non-cotabustible structural materials.   Voids in multi-storey

stands would be covered by existing provisions in the Approved

Documents which give guidance on compliance with the existing

requirements of the regulations dealing with fire spread.

3.   There are no powers in the building regulations to make

owners improve existing stands by sub-dividing voids.
BACKGROUND NOTE




Recommendation 11 — an unfettered right to search those entering
                    or trying to enter a football ground,
                    conferred by statute.



Police officers at football grounds have a general power, under
PACE, to stop and search a person whom they reasonably suspect
of possessing a stolen or prohibited article, including an
offensive weapon. They have other statutory powers of stop and
search, for example under the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985. In addition they may, as elsewhere, search a
person with his agreement. In the case of football matches,
police powers are backed up by the right of the club to deny
entry, or to eject, a person who refuses to be searched. This
has been set out by the Football League in its ground
regulations.


The unrestricted power recommended by Popplewell would not depend
on there being reasonable suspicion that the person concerned was
committing an offence, and would represent a substantial
departure from the principles which were only recently
established in PACE. It would be difficult to restrict to
football grounds. The Popplewell recommendation therefore has
ramifications extending far beyond football. PACE had only just
come into force at the time the Popplewell final report was
published. The powers available to the police, both statutory
and to search by agreement, are adequate.
Recommendation 12 - an offence of disorderly conduct at a
                    football ground.


The Government had already included in the Public Order Act 1986
an offence of disorderly conduct, subject to the requirement that
alarm, distress or harassment is likely to be caused to another.
Popplewell recommended no such qualification. The difficulty
about that is that the police and courts may have difficulty in
interpreting what is disorderly. Conduct which may be disorderly
in other contexts, may be part of the atmosphere of a football
match (cheering, chanting etc). Care must be taken not to create
offences which are oppressive, or which may give rise to
inconsistent treatment by the police and the courts, whilst at
the same time ensuring that the law is adequate. Experience has
proved the offence of disorderly conduct in the Public Order Act
to be adequate.


Recommendation 13 - a widening of the power to arrest under
                    Section 5 of the Public Order Act 1936.

The recommendation is for a general retrospective power of arrest
where the police reasonably suspect that an offence under Section
5 of the Public Order Act (threatening behaviour etc) has been
committed. The power of arrest, re-enacted in the Public Order
Act 1986, provides a power of arrest only when the person is
committing, or is reasonably suspected to be committing an
offence. But the arrest scheme in PACE provided a general
retrospective power of arrest if one of the general arrest
conditions set out in Section 25 is met. In broad terms the
police may arrest anyone whom they reasonably suspect of
committing, or of having committed an offence, including the
offence of threatening behaviour, if it will not be practicable
to proceed against that person by way of summons, for example
because the person's name and address cannot be obtained, or if
there are grounds for believing arrest to be necessary to prevent
certain consequences - such as the person concerned causing
injury or damage to persons or property. The general arrest
scheme in PACE was subject to careful and critical scrutiny and
had only just come into force at the time of the Popplewell
recommendations. There are no problems in practice so far as we
know.



Recommendation 14 - a review of the provisions of the Sporting
                    Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 in
                    relation to executive boxes.


During the passage of the alcohol legislation it was suggested by
the football organisations that clubs derived a total of ¥4m per
annum from the leasing of executive boxes. Relaxation of the
controls over the possession and sale of alcohol in executive
boxes was introduced in Schedule I of the Public Order Act 1986.
The effect of the provision was to reduce the "dry" period at
designated sports grounds in executive boxes and private rooms
with a view of the pitch from two hours before until one hour
after to a period from 15 minutes before the match until 15
minutes afterwards.
