                                                  HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                  Direct line: 01-273 3 4 7 2
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:
Your reference:

       P Brook Esq
       HE1 Division
       HM Treasury
       Parliament Street
       LONDON SW1                                               25 August 1989




       HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

       Following the Chief Secretary's letter of 19 June to the Home
       Secretary in which he accepted the case for persuading the South
       Yorkshire Police Authority that the additional costs of the
       investigation should fall initially to be met by them,
       Lord Ferrers wrote to the Chairman of the Police Authority on
       27 June making an offer of a special payment on the basis agreed
       between Ministers. The South Yorkshire Police Authority have now
       replied stating that they will reimburse the West Midlands police
       direct and accept the payment of special grant subject to
       clarification of certain points raised.

       2. In their letter South Yorkshire have sought payment of
       special grant on any interest payments which they might incur
       arising from any delay between the rendering of their accounts
       and the receipt of payments from the Home Office. We are
       refusing this request under the long-standing procedure that
       police specific grant and special grant are not paid on interest
       payments incurred.

      3. To assist us in our negotiations with South Yorkshire, it is
      imperative that we can provide financial assistance quickly. We
      shall wish to forward an advance payment to assist them in
      meeting the first West Midlands invoice which amounts to E1.677M.
      If we can make an early payment this will help us to resist any
      political pressure from MPs and local councillors on the interest
      point. The sooner South Yorkshire pays the West Midlands and we
      reimburse them, the less any interest incurred by them can be
      attributed to Government's failure to act. Moreover, as you
      appreciate, the Hillsborough disaster is a very sensitive issue
      and any delay on the Government's part in providing funding to
      assist South Yorkshire to meet the costs would be given wide
      publicity.
4. The Chief Secretary's letter states that the expenditure
which the special payments cover will represent a claim on the
Reserve. As I understand it, there are three options open to us
to making arrangements for payments:

     (a) enter a Supplementary Estimate (winter), but this is
     unlikely to be voted by Parliament before the beginning of
     November;

     (b) bring the proposed payment to the attention of
     Parliament by way of an arranged PQ (again in early
     November);

     (c) agree at official level for payment to be made by way of
     repayable advance from the Contingencies Fund, later
     formalised through a Supplementary Estimate.

As Parliament is in summer recess I consider that, exceptionally,
we should use option (c) because a two month delay in making
finance available would be politically sensitive and encourage
South Yorkshire to pursue the interest question.  I hope that you
can agree to this.
      A.

5. The first invoice received by the South Yorkshire Police
Authority from the West Midlands Police Authority is for
£1,677,402 for the additional costs up to 30 June. The special
payment would commence for costs above the produce of a penny
rate (£1.369 million).  So in respect of the first invoice the
Home Office will have to meet 51% of £1.369M and 90% of the
remaining £308,402.  This gives a total of £975,752 in grant, of
which £120,277 represents the special grant.  Further invoices
are likely to be less as the manpower requirement diminished in
July and August.  I would hope therefore that the overall cost of
the special payment will turn out to be rather less than the
figures mentioned in the Home Secretary's letter.

6. I should be grateful for your very early advice as to the
most appropriate arrangements for enabling us to make an early
payment to South Yorkshire on the agreed basis.




                                   N A NAGLER
                                   FINANCE DIVISION 2
