             I Office of H.M. Coroner
             gi      The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

^C oron er:                                                               South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. D o m e s                                                       (0 1 1 4 )2 7 3 8721




        ,                                                                      18 August 1997
 Your ref:
 Our ref:


Mr C F Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 528
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H9AT

RECORDED DELIVERY




Dear Mr Bone
Hillsborough Inquest
1. Thank you for your letter of the 7th August. I am sorry for the slight delay in replying
   but it was necessary for me to refer parts of your enquiry to my predecessor.

2. I enclose a copy of Doctor Popper’s summing up to the jury as requested.

3. So far as Tony Bland is concerned, the inquest was not dealt with in this jurisdiction.
   Mr Bland actually died at the Airedale Hospital near Bradford. Whilst it might normally
   have been appropriate to transfer the case to Sheffield, in view of my work on the day
   (on behalf of a charity aiding the relatives) and subsequent peripheral involvement in
   legal work (for a Medical Defence Union) it would have been wholly inappropriate for
   me to hear the matter. That would inevitably remain the case should the High Court
   ever order a fresh inquest.
    It was therefore agreed that my colleague in Bradford, Mr James Turnbull, would retain
    the case and deal with the inquest. Mr Turnbull has since retired but I have spoken
    with his successor who would be happy to assist you. Please write to Mr Roger
    Whittaker, HM Coroner, City Courts, The Tyrls, Bradford, West Yorkshire, BD2 1LA.

4. Turning to the question of material available to Doctor Popper’s inquest, this is difficult
   to answer in simple terms as there is no single, comprehensive list of the papers
   referred to my predecessor. Whilst the main core of evidence considered for calling at
   the inquest was apparently drawn from the DPP submission papers and the ‘body files’
   (see below), it is clear the Doctor also received a large number of other papers in a
   more piecemeal fashion. This was often in response to specific requests for
   information on a particular topic.


                                      Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                          Document3
   The ‘body files’ were individual files for each deceased containing statements relating
   to their movements on the day (both ante and post mortem), identification and exhibits
   such as photographs with the location of the deceased marked. The learned Judge
   may find these useful in respect of particular deceased where there is a query.
   Doctor Popper is preparing a further note on the paperwork supplied to him and will
   correspond with you directly in the next few days.
   It would therefore seem quite impossible at this stage for me to give the Judge a
   meaningful or accurate list as to the documents perused. However, as I indicated on
   the telephone, a query as to whether Doctor Popper saw an individual statement or
   exhibit may be relatively easy to answer. I must say that I have always found Doctor
   Popper’s recollection of the paperwork to be exceptionally detailed and accurate.
5. I am sending this letter by recorded delivery because of its bulk and the sensitivity of its
   enclosures. If I can further assist please do not hesitate to write or telephone.
Yours sincerely




C P Dorries
HM Coroner


cc Dr Stefan Popper




                                      Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                       Document3
                                                                0 1.05.1993   15:33       NO.   3    P.   2
FROM




                               MIDLAND REGIONAL CRIME SQUAD
                                                                         Headquarters
       R egional          Co-ordinator
                                                                         341 Bournville Lane
       DET CH SUPT MJ FOSTER QPM                                         Birmingham B30 1QX


       You r r ef ere n ce:

       O u r R efe ren ce :   MJ F/MH



                                                                         5 January 1998




       C F Bone Esq
       Secretary                                         ,f .
       The Hillsborough Scrutiny                   u      '
          om 1106
       ^ Queen Anne's Gate
       London. SW1H9AT




         Dear Mr Bone

         In relation to my analysis of the sampled statements or recollections you forwarded to me, 1
         would endorse the fact the factual accounts removed did not hinder our investigation.

         I do believe the investigation we conducted was extremely thorough and certainly the extent to
         w h i c h we wen. to estallish exactly wha. happened . believe was almost unprecedented m any
         Police investigation before or since, although Lockerbie was another simtlarly exhaustive
          enquiry.
          The evidence removed from those statements or recollections was clearly in evidence from many
          other quarters and an example of that is the evidence of ex PC Bruder.

           Yours sincerely




           M J Foster
           D/Chief Superintendent
           Regional Co-ordinator
