                                                            |lW   ^>-
       vmm
                                       St. Andrew's Ambulance Association
                                                           In c o rp o ra te d b y R o y a l C h a rte r 1 8 9 9
                                                           Patro n: H E R M A J E S T Y Q U E E N E L I Z A B E T H , T H E Q U E E N M O T H E R .
           » m i5


                                                           St. Andrew's House, Milton Street, Glasgow G4 OHR.
D ir e c to r G eneral & S ecretary
                                                           Telephone: 041 332 4031
           FINLAY T. MALCOLM, LL.B.        F.B.I jM.
                                                           O u r R e f.     FIM/ET
A ll correspondence t o be addressed
          ’ The D irector General & Secretary'.            Y o u r R e f.


                                                           If calling please ask for:           MR>       M ALCO LM




                                                                                                 9th October,         1989




     ^R.M. Whalley, Esq.,                                 CC                         ?cLv
      Secretary to The Inquiry,                                      V*   -r" .
      Hillsborough Stadium Dis aster,                                    '
      50 Queen Anne's Gate,                                          'p ^    a .
      LOOT,    SW1H 9AT                                                ^   *H C ^ c l v

                                                                          Nv.
                                                                                                                      RKW
      Dear Sir,

                                         Hillsborough   Stadium Disaster Inquiry
                                                                                                                                   lb[lo
          I refer to letter of 7th June, which the Association sent to you for
      consideration in the preparation of the final Inquiry Report.

          I am just writing further to confirm that the Association now has
      arrangements in force to ensure as far as possible that the appropriate
      number of First Aiders as reconmended in the Interim Report are in attendance
      at all grounds in Scotland covered by the Association.

          I would just add however, that it is the feeling of the Association, and
      particularly of senior experienced First Aiders of long standing, that
      possibly consideration might be given to amending the reconmended requirement
      in certain sets of circumstances.   In particular it is felt that there is a
      need for a minimum requirement to be stipulated, irrespective of the size of
      anticipated crowd, and that this should be of the order of four or six First
      Aiders.

          In addition, it is not considered that the ratio of one per thousand is
     required for a stadium like Ibrox Park in Glasgow, most of which is all seated,
     whe n one considers the average number of casualties which arise on a regular
     basis.    The average crowd at Ibrox Of 40,000 and the Association endeavours
     to have 40 First Aiders in attendance.    What is happening of course is, that
     there is little or nothing for them to do, and whilst it is appreciated that
     they are also there as an insurance against any major disaster occurring, it
     is submitted that this is much less likely in a stadium such as Ibrox, and
     that the probability of such an event happening does not in itself justify an
     average complement of this magnitude.

                It / . . . .




                                        We are now on FAX : No 041 332 6582
                                   -   2   -




R.M. Whalley, Esq.                                            9th October,   1989



    It is understood that Lord Justice Taylor is to be conmenting on the
provision of all-seated stadia in his final Report, and no doubt these conxnents
may be of assistance to him in this connection.




                                               Yours sincerely,
