                 SIIverman* Livermore
                 S O                     L I                   C            I         T            O            R              S
                                 11/13 V ictoria Street, Liverpool L2 5QQ
                 Telephone: 0151-227 1871            DX: 14190          Fax: 0151-255 0216


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,                                                            Our ref:           DRF.JW.HILLSBOROUGH
The Hillsborough Scrutiny,
                                                                                      Your ref:
Room 1106,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,                                                                 W hen calling please ask for:
London,
SW1H 9AT.
                                                                                                         MR FRASER

8 December 1997




I must open by apologising for the delay in responding fully to your letters of the 3rd and
21st November but I have now been able to consider all the issues you have raised in
detail and hope that you find this response of some assistance.

May I firstly clarify my own position as a member of the Steering Committee in relation
to the Taylor Inquiry, the mini Inquests and the main Inquest Hearing itself.

As I am sure you are aware the six members of the Steering Committee were elected from
a group of about eighty Solicitors who attended a meeting at the Liverpool Law Society
Library within days of the Hillsborough Disaster occurring ... our brief was to represent
Solicitors who had themselves been instructed by people directly affected by the Disaster
... we did not directly represent any clients as such.

The Committee elected Liz Steele as she then was (now H.H.J. Steele) as our Chair
Person and I am sure you have been in touch with her as she can give you much more
information about representation at the Taylor Inquiry than I can and as she was much
more directly involved in this aspect than I. It was Liz Steele (through her former
practice) who was responsible for briefing Mr Benett Hytner Q.C. and Mr T.R.A. King
(as he then was) to represent the Solicitors acting for those who had been bereaved or
injured and as such she had a much closer working knowledge than I did of the
documents which were made available for the Inquiry.

I was the member of the Committee delegated to deal with the Inquests and when Dr.
Popper indicated that he intended holding ninety-five “mini inquests” with a view to

                      F .M   S H F L V E Y L L .B ., D R. F R A S E R . J.L. W A L K E R LL .B . , K. W I S H A R T LL .B.
                                           Associates: E. K I N G L L .B ., L . R . M A Y O C K LL .B.

              Also al: R u tl a n d H o u se Ma ll , H a lt o n Lea, R u n c o r n W A 7 2F.S. Tel: 01928 714121. Fax : 01928 718135
                      137 Le at he rs L a ne . H a le w o od . L26 0TS. Tel: 0151-486 O I 3I /2 . Fax: 0151-486 2793
               And in Association wiih L A M B E R T et A S S O C I E S B-I 180 Le A v en u e D ef re 19 Brussels Belg ium
                         T h is firm is A ul ho ris ed by the La w Society in the co n d u c t o f I n ve st m en t Business
 giving each bereaved family as much individual information as was available it was I who
 had direct contact with Dr. Popper and Mr Mervyn Jones and I conducted the vast
 majority of those mini inquests before Dr. Popper in Sheffield but again as a member of
 the Steering Committee representing Solicitors (in effect acting as their Agent) save that
 I did have about fifteen bereaved families as direct clients but for the purpose of
 representation at the mini inquest I wore my Steering Committee members hat for the
 sake of continuity.

  Finally, in relation to the main Inquest it was I who instructed Mr T.R.A. King (junior
•C ounsel as he then was) again acing as a Steering Committee member effectively as
^Vgent for all those Solicitors who had bereaved families as clients.

  I anticipate that you are already aware of much of this background but I have set it out
  again as it is important when you consider some of the rather limited answers which I am
  able to give below.

  I propose adopting the numbering sequence contained in your letters for the sake of
  convenience and trust this is in order thus:-

 V1DEO EVIDENCE

  3.    Noted.

 4.     Noted.

 5.     Some of the material used at the Taylor Inquiry was not used at either the mini
 Inquests or the main Inquest hearing, similarly a great deal of the evidence given at both
 forms of the Inquests had not been before the previous Inquiry.

 I clearly remember viewing the compilation tape on a number of occasions and recall it
 being played to the main Inquest Jury.

  6.     I do not recall watching tapes TB1 or TB2 before or during either the Taylor
  Inquiry or either form of Inquests but this should not surprise you in view of my
  comments above in relation to my involvement with the Taylor Inquiry. I may have seen
’ the tapes in relation to either form of Inquest but I can not now be certain ... I do recall
  watching many hours of video footage but if you would like me to try and clarify my
I memory then I would be perfectly happy to view the tapes now and let you know whether
I recall having seen either of them before.

7.    Noted.

8.    Noted.

 9.     I entirely agree with your impression. It was never my understanding that any
 Officer said that he could not see the general situation in Pen 3 or 4 from the elevated
 position of the Control Box. I had the opportunity to visit the Box myself shortly after
|he formation of the Steering Committee as part of a background fact finding visit to the
ground and my clear recollection is that the large windows of the Box gave an excellent
 view over the terraces at the Leppings Lane end and the only advantage which a camera
 fitted with a “zoom” facility might have given over the naked eye would have been to
 identify an isolated incident in close up. I seem to recall noticing several pairs of
 binoculars in the Control Box at the time of my visit. I am sure that you have already
 seen evidence from Mr Trevor Hicks in which he refers to his conversations with at least
 two Senior Officers who were standing on the steps leading to the Control Box but for
 the sake of completeness I enclose a copy of a Statement which I have. It seems clear
 from this evidence that the Officers to whom he refers seem to have an excellent view of
 the events unfolding in Pens 3 and 4 at the times referred to in the Statement.


THE AFTERMATH

10.   Noted.

11.    Noted. I agree with your preliminary conclusions.

12.    The 3.15 p.m. “cut off’ set by Dr. Popper caused much anxiety amongst the
bereaved families but it was made perfectly clear to them both by Dr. Popper and myself
and subsequently by Mr T.R. A. King that this was done because of the limited terms of
reference of a Coroner’s Inquest. The four issues to be determined were:-

(1)    Who died.

(2)    When they died.

(3)    Where they died.
   (4)    How they died.

   The coronal system is not concerned with the reasons WHY a person dies and Dr. Popper
   made it perfectly clear that from the medical evidence those who died had sustained the
   injury from which they died prior to 3.15 p.m. and thus events after that time were not
   relevant for his purposes.

   Legal and Medical definitions of the words “death” and “died” were the subject of much
Jfcpvidence and in summary my understanding was that where a person had been crushed
^sufficiently severely and for a sufficiently long time so as to cause irreversible damage
   to the brain then even though the heart and other bodily functions may have continued for
   some minutes or even hours afterwards the true cause of death was the crushing which,
   as all the evidence tended to show, was considerably eased by 3.15 p.m. It is therefore
   perfectly possible (as I understand it) for someone to be severely crushed and lose
   consciousness but for that crushing not to be of such an intensity to cause oxygen
   starvation to the brain (even though there is a loss of consciousness) and for a full
   recovery to then be possible.

   PRIVILEGE

   I share your view that non of the information you have asked me for is privileged. I note
   that, in any event, “the families” have waived privilege and insofar as you may require
   any further information from me which is already in the public domain I would have no
   difficulty responding but should specific questions arise about a specific individual then
   I would need an assurance from his or her family that they were one of “the families” to
   whom you refer ... I am acutely aware that there are a large number of people directly
   affected by this Disaster one way or the other who want no further involvement in any
   Inquiry of any sort and I must respect those wishes and I am sure you will appreciate my
   position in this respect.



   I now turn to your subsequent letter of 21st November.


   2.     I regret I have no recollection of questioning Mr Taylor at the main Inquest... if
you would care to let me have copies of pages 78 and 79 I will see if these refresh my
memory but was it not Mr T.R.A. King who questioned Mr Taylor rather than myself?

3.     I regret I can not now recall the detail of my instructions at this stage but if you
can clarify the position concerning the questioning of Mr Taylor by either myself or Mr
T.R.A. King I will happily give this matter further thought.

 4.      Copies of the draft Summaries relating to Sarah and Victoria were seen by myself
 and Mr and Mis Hicks prior to the mini Inquests and I have had the opportunity to refresh
|n y memory by looking again at the Summary relating to Victoria. These Summaries are,
"as their title implies, merely a summary of the evidence available to the Coroner and I
 regret I do not recall having seen any evidence from Paul Taylor prior to the mini Inquest
 hearings so I can not comment on what relevance (or otherwise) it might have had nor do
 I know whether the Coroner had received evidence from Mr Taylor via any of his
 investigating officers and if he had then why it might have been excluded from the
 Summary. I do not recall Mr Hicks raising any queries on the accuracy of the Summary
 insofar as it related to any attempt by P.C. Marshall to resuscitate Victoria in the
 Ambulance on the way to Hospital.


I hope that, where I have been able to help, my observations are of some assistance but
should you wish me to consider any further aspects of this matter or view the tapes
referred to please do not hesitate to contact me.


    0Us**O
                                                              00004-0
  STATEMENT FROM MR T HICKS - HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 15.4.89.
  Myself, my wife arid 2 daughters obtained our tickets from Anfield

  with the 2 girls getting standing tickets on vouchers from their

  Xop Season Ticket.       My wife was allocated a seat ticket, and I

  myself was given a standing ticket, - by the allocation based on

  the Main Stand Season Ticket Serial Number allo-H'cxO'i.
                                            *




  We travelled together in my car to Sheffield making only 1 stop at

  the Woodall Services just after Junction 30 on the M1 .           We then

  proceeded along the M1 and followed the Police signs at the first

  junction, asking us to proceed to the next.        We encountered a long

4^tailback    (1-2      miles in nearside lanejbut I continued in the

  centre lane towards the front of the queue, where I was able to

   leave the motorway down the dual carriageway section of the slip

   r o a d ( T i m e approximately 12.10 pm).   We then followed the signed

   route to Hillsborough and when          got to the Ground, I travelled

   along the A61 Penistone Road towards the city until I was able to

   turn round and return to the car park which was being provided in

   the corner of the large park between the A61 Penistone Road and the

   A616 Parkside Road.      We parked the car at approximately 12.45 pm

  - and we had the picnic lunch which we had brought with us.



   At about 1 .40 pm we left the car, walked along Parkside Road to the

   Leppings Lane end and arranged to rendezvous with my wife outside

   the small tobacconists to the left ot the approach area:             In the

   bridge    approach   area,   I would   estimate peciiaps    o - 10 Police
                                                                          000041
Officers were present (no Police horses) and it »as all fairly M l m

with only small numbers of fans milling aroun-5.


3't«aen the car and arrival at the turnstiles, we were asked by

about 3 people if w, had any spare tickets - normal for such a big

game.


Other than in the approach area, I only remember seeing Police

Officers (2 or 3) near a small Police kiosk on Parkside Road.                I

 do not remember seeing an£ mounted Police at all.


 At about 1 .55 pm, my 2 daughters and I went through the turnstiles,

 our tickets being taken, split and the "retain" section returned.

 Upon entering the yard beyond, I remember small numbers of people

 milling around, with 1 Policeman near our turnstile an* perhaps 1 -

 2 more in the yard area.      There « r e about 2 - 3 stewards in the

 general area plus 2 selling programmes to the left of the tunnel.



 The    "standing"   sign   above   the   tunne.1   was   the   only   guidance

 visible/given to us and there was no indication that it was not the

  only way to the terraces.     My daughters proceeded down the tunnel,

  anrl I bought 2 programmes from the venders to the left of

  tunnel.


  I wanted a cup of coffee and observed a refreshment kiosk
  right of the tunnel - I believe under the stairway into the seating
                                                                           000042
area.   I queued for a few minutes and purchased my cup of coffee.
It was this act that enabled me to see it was possible to go around

the base of the West Stand into the corner Terraces between the

West and South Stands.    This area was sparsely occupied with a wide

choice of positions, I took up a position about 2nd barrier fro*

the rear in front of the floodlight tower and to the left of the
Police box. (See exhibit A).       I stood in this position drinking ray

coffee, reading the programme and listening for Team news etc on

the small transistor radio I had in my pocket.


A little before the kick-off,       (approximately 14.50 pm, I noticed

 there were large numbers of people in the centre sections (I now

 understand these to be known as Pens Numbers 3 and 4).                  From my

 position on the terrace,       I could quite clearly see the dividing

 fence and could see several people crushed against this side fence,

 many clearly in some distress.          One in particular, an old man, I

 believe wearing a light grey coat or possibly suit, had m s                e%«=s

 closed.   People were being pulled from the rear of the Pens up xnto

 the    seating area   of the    West Stand.     People were       also being

 pulled/assisted   over   the    dividing    fence   and   some   youths were

 scrambling     over   the      pitch,   side   fence      but    were     being

 repelled/arrested by Police Officers on the pitch.


  A senior Police Officer was standing on the landing of the Police

  Box, I would estimate some 10 feet away from my position and I

  called several times to him trying to attract his attention to the




                                    80
                                                                                         0000
crushing.   (I believe he had gold braid          on the peak                of his « p and

was wearing a light coloured anorak).                  ignored
continued to observe the scene for some minutes until he wal e
                                              . • n V \,a rri i5 jf   u n d sT n sstii   tn©.
down the steps and round the s e g r e g a t e « . c
south Stana.   (I believe he was the OEEicer who ran on.o t e p

,„d told the Referee to stop the game some few minutes later,.



 X television cameraman with a shoulder held video camera (I think

 the one shown in Exhibit -V, took up a similar position but after

 many shouts from the crowd (and possibly some coin
 then left the landing and went back under the South Stand.


- Another Police Officer who I believe I can recognise facially (I

 believe to have had black braid on the peak of his cap) too                             up a^_

  similar   position     on   the   steps/landing.          I »S«i"                         “
  several times that people were being crushed and coulan - e o
                                         , __ anj th°n after say 3
  something to help.  He initially xgnored me and ^
  of 4 calls to him,          looked down atme and said               "On.      shut      your

  fucking   rattle",     and    then    continued      to    look      in    th-     gene

  direction of Pens 3 and 4.


   *oth   myself   and   the    man    standing   on    my     left      were      extremely

   concerned as I knew this was roughly where my daughters were and
                                            _    i_n        More and more
   this man said he had a son in the same section.
                                     .  r      e p ^ t i o n and* I foscain©
   people were beginning to climb out o
   increasingly concern** for my daughters                  safety.




                                        81
                                                                        000044
The game had just'lcicked off and a Police cordon o f: 2 - 3 nien deep
were put in an arc around the 2 central Pens behind the goal and

it was obvious that their purpose was to prevent anybody clim.oing

over the     barrier.     It   is ray belief   that    several   people were

actually held back'?.*-.! *11 the signs were that the Police Officers

had been given instructions to contain the people within the Pen

area.     Officers along the fence appeared to be pushing people back,

whereas their colleagues standing in the arc were just standing

watching, many with their arms crossed.        I would estimate this took

place for some 5 - 1 0     minutes, bringing the time to approximately

l15 .05   - 15.10.


 It was during this       time that the Officer in the light coloured

 anorak ran onto the pitch a;v! spoke to the Referee, whereupon the

 game was stopped. (I know this to be 15.06).


 I also noticed a large number          (100 - 150 approximately)      Police

 Officers emerged from the opposite corner and they took up lines

 across the pitch at the "centre" and along the North Stand.



  I started to move down the terraces towards the side fence to try

  to find my daughters and to render what assistance I could.

  As I got approximately half way down, I saw the limp form of my

  youngest daughter Victoria,         being passed over the barrier.           I
  therefore     changed   direction   to the   pitch    access   ga^e- from my

  section (which was manned by a Policeman) and pushed my way onto




                                       82
                                                                          0G9045
the pitch.


I carae upon my 2 daughters Victoria and Sarah, laid on the pitch

just at the touchline slightly to the right of the goal.             Sarah was

receiving    assistance   from 1 man and he,         nyself   plus   2 others

started to render mouth to mouth resuscitation to both of them.

One of the men attending to Sarah called for suction (I have since

discovered that this was Dr C K Flenley), while we continued to

resuscitate my daughters I shouted my daughters names into uheir

ears and called to Police/Medics several times for suction but none

was available.       V7e then continued taking turns at mouth to mouth

resuscitation.       One man was called away to help a friend and it

therefore     left    myself   and   1     other   giving   mouth    to   mouth

resuscitation on Victoria with Dr Flenley and a man in a cnecuered

shirt, (who was apparently an off-duty Policeman from the crowd)

rendering assistance to Sarah.            There was no medical equipment or

assistance available to us throughout this time.              V7e continued i_o

give mouth to mouth resuscitation, taking turns for some 10 minutes

 or more, whereupon the first ambulance (the one trapped behind the

 goal) tried to get past us catching my toes         nM   I knelt and uhe xoot

 of someone else laid on the pitch.


 This ambulance had taken up a ridiculous position with its movement

 onto/off the ground'grossly impaired.          Presumably this was to avoid

 cutting up the playing surface.




                                     83
                                                                000046
We continued to attempt to resuscitate my daughters for a few more
minutes when a fireman came over carrying an oxygen bottle with a

face riiask attached (smoke-inhalation device?) but this was no good

as we couLU not get the girls to breath unaided and the pressure

in the bottle./reculator was insufficient to force oxygen into their

lungs.



A second ambulance came onto the pitch area and stopped adjacent

to us.   We agreed to put Sarah and Victoria into this ambulance.

Two of us put Victoria into this second ambulance and were about

to turn around and lift Sarah into it, when a third group of people

put in a nan who had to go onto the floor.    I then was faced with

the awful choice of leaving Sarah, who I was assured would be

placed in the next ambulance which was apparently coming.



The ambulance started to move away so I rejoined Victoria and along

with a ?c.1926 McGuinness, continued to give mouth to mouth.



In the ambulance was the ambulance attendant, a woman, myself and

PC McGuiness.   There was a young man in his 20's on the floor, who

did in fact have a throat tube in his mouth, but the ambulance man

said was dead within a minute or so of us driving        off.    The

Ambulance Attendant and the woman attended a person on the other

seat, but he was also pronounced dead by the ambulance man.      The

ambulance man and myself continued artificial respiration with PC

McGuinuess holding an oxygen bottle and we continued throughout the




                            84
                                                                        000047
                      .             reach the Northern General Hospital.      The
    time it took us   to            reacn t
                      of            the opinion he felt a faint pulse on a coupl-
    ambulance man was of            t    P
    of occasions during this journey.


        Victoria was       then taken straight into the C a s u a l
        because   they       thought     there    was possibly some         life,   re
        immediate medical attention from a'team of doctors and Nurses ai e

        by PC McGuinness.          I observed for so>»e 2 or 3 minutes, wh-reup

        I was asV.i».d to leave the area and was taken into a sid-
        Obviously conditions were extremely hectic with people and bodies

         arriving very                   The Hospital was well equipped and X was
©        given the impression that all possible care was being taken wi

         people who were believed to have a chance.
                                                                                                •«




                                                . . „ ,            pr McGuinness         that my
    r    Alter about10 minutes,          I was informed ay         PC
         daughter had    b e e n   pronounced dead.        I thanked PC McSulnness for his

         assistance and also apologised for the verbal abuse I had poure

         upon him as a representative of the Police throughout our time                         n

          the ambulance and at the Hospital.                Once I was told that V x c t o n a

          W as dead, I then went around the Hospital trying to locate Sara

          on the grounds that I had been told she would

          following closely behind.


          After some 30 minutes of           f u t i l e   searching.   I    was taken to the

          Physiotherapy D e p a r t m e n t by a P s y c h i a t r i c Nurse (Gill Bennett) w

           had come on duty to help with the p r o b l e m s .              I was kept in t i«




                                                 85
