          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOS - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AVGUST 1989


                FSOX EGHQ FOR CQI RADIO TBCHVICAL SERVICES



                     TRAISCRIPT OF PSESS COIFESEVCE

                       GIVEI BT LORD JUSTICE TAILOR

                   IV LOIDOI, 01 FRIDAY, 4 AUGUST 1989




LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       When I was appointed to conduct this Enquiry an 17 April, I

said that I would try to conplete the first stage of it and produce

an interim report by the end of July so that it would be passible to

■alee soae recomendations which could be acted upon before the new

season began.

       I have completed that report,     I handed it to the Home

Secretary on Tuesday, 1 August and it is published today.    You have

got the report.    It speaks for itself and there is not a great deal

that I wish to add to it.

       But I would like to say first at this conference that I

acknowledge the enomous cooperation that I have received from

everybody, without which it would not have been possible to produce

a report in this tiae.    I would particularly like to thank the two

Assessors who have sat with ms, Chief Constable Johnson who is

beside ne today, and Professor Maunder who is on holiday in France.

They have been enoraously helpful and I would like to thank thea
           LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  -   2   -




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

        Also I aust thank the Vest Midlands Police who saved into

action very quickly and conducted the aost enoraous enquiry at great

speed and with great efficiency and provided the evidence which it

was possible to call so quickly after the event.

        I would also like to indicate what the scope of this report

is.   You have only probably received it very recently.         It is in

three parts.    The first part describes ay findings as to what

happened at Hillsborough, the background to it and the sequence of

events on the day.     1 should say that the evidence that was called

was of very high quality and it was amazing just how consistent the

evidence was.    It aay be that the holding of the Enquiry so quickly

aeant that everybody's recollections were fresh whereas very often,

as we all know, cases in court are not called on for a great deal of

tiae after the event.    But that is what the first part is about.

The second part discusses the reasons for the disaster and how it

caas about and the third part draws conclusions and in particular

they are suanarised in as succinct a fora as I could aanage in

Chapter 16 of the report.

       I should just say that there was no intention on ay part, and

I expressed this right at the beginning, of giving any detailed

apportionaent of fault as to what happened at Hillsborough.         That

did not aean to say that I was not going to refer to various parties

and individuals and Bake criticisas.          It would have been impossible

to deal with the causes without doing that.
          LORD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                               - 3 -



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       And so you will find in the report that there are criticises

and I have set out what I have to say about that without

apportioning blaae as between one body and another or one individual

and another.

       1 have not gone into the details of each of the 95 victims

and how each set his or her death.   That is a Batter for the coroner

and that is a Batter which is still the subject of further enquiry

by the Vest Midlands Police.

       But since a consent was Bade at one stage that as that

enquiry was continuing it would not be possible for ae to Bake any

findings of fact, 1 would like to correct that iapression.     Although

the enquiry continues, as I have said it continues priaarily to deal

with the necessary detail as to how each of those 95 victims aet his

or her death, where abouts in the ground that happened, what

happened about the transferrance of the body and the care of the

body and so on, all details which the coroner needed to know but

which were not necessary to the findings that I had to Bake.

       Vow there is a Part 4 to the report and that is the

recoBBendations and I have said in the preaable to those

recoBBendations that they are necessarily of limited objective.     It

is not passible at this stage for ae to deal with all those wider

issues which it will be necessary to deal with later.
                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                      - 4 -



    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOS;

                I have listed the Batters which are still for

    consideration, and there will no doubt be others as well, at

    paragraph 304 of the report.     I do not deal, for exaaple, with

    ■eabership scheaes, with ID cards, with all-seater stadiuas, with

    pre-Batch drinking, any of those matters which are obviously Batters

^   that require a lot of consultation and which one could not answer

    siaply by the experience of one Batch at Hillsborough.

             So those are not being ducked by not having any

    reccnsBendations in respect of thea in this report, they are aerely

    being deferred until the second stage.

             Yhat I have aiaed to do in the recoanendations at this stage

    is siaply to provide for aeasures which aust be taken straight away

    to ensure that in the short-tera, that is to say before the final

    report and its recoaaendations are acted upon, in the short-tera we

    do not have any further crushings or disasters of the kind at

    Hillsborough or anything like it.     And I think there are plenty of

    things that can be done quickly, without undue expense, and which

    ought to be able to prevent that happening again.

              I aa not going to say anything aore about the

    recoaaendations, I will answer any questions that you Bay want to

    put.     But I siaply say this about Part 2 of the Enquiry, that the

    Assessors and ayself will now eabark upon our task in regard to that

    stage.     It will be necessary to look at a great deal of written

    evidence, soae of which has helpfully been put in already, soae

    which is still to coae froa interested bodies and individuals
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOXDOI - 4 AUGUST 1969


                                 - 5 -



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR;

all over the country.    Ve have heard fora local authorities, fro*

police authorities, from Football Clubs, from Football Supporters

Associations, and so on and we will have to consider all of that.

         Sane of those who have submitted contributions we will want

to oeet and hold discussions with.    It will be necessary for us also

to go and have a look at aore football grounds and indeed other

sports grounds because one is not confined in this Enquiry to

football.

         And when all that has been done, 1 hope that about the turn

of the year and I Bake no acre precise promise than that, about the

turn of the year I hope to be able to produce the final report.

         That is all I wish to say by way of opening and I aa prepared

to answer any questions which seem to ae are answerable at this

stage.




                               oooOOooo
                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                     -   6   -




                             <QUESTIOIS AID AISVERS)



    QUESTIOI:

             Lord Justice Taylor, you sake a number of consents in your

    report, indeed criticisms about the conduct or lack of action of

    senior police officers.    YouId you expect disciplinary action to be

0 ^ taken?    Do you think the public would have any confidence in these

    people?



    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

              I can only sake the findings as to what I found happened and

    why it happened.     It is for others to decide what action needs to be

    taken in the nature that you have described, if any.



    QUESTIOY;

              The MPs have been hoping you would be saying something on the

    identy card schemes before they completed the Bill's progress

    through Parliament.     If your final report is not expected until the

    turn of the year, will you be saying nothing before then?



    LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

              Vo I will not be saying anything before then.   The position,

    as I understand it, regarding the Bill or the statute is this, that

    it is going through its various stages in Parliaaent, it will be

    completed in what they call the spillover period I think, but it has

    within it a requireaent that it be brought back for debate in
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                   - 7 -



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR (COIT):

Parliament before any scheme which it contemplates is brought into

existence, if any.     And it is at that stage that anything that I say

will, as I understand it, be considered.     So the fact that I cannot

report on that aspect of matters until the turn of the year does not

■ean that what I have to say will not be available to be taken into

account.     How far it is taken into account is for Parliament of

course.



QUESTIOI (BBC TV lews):

          You do point out that the police did at one stage try to pin

some of the blame on the Liverpool supporters.     Does your report

fully clear the Liverpool supporters of any blame for this disaster?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

          The report I think explains itself on this.   I have said that

there was a minority of unruly supports who had drunk too much and

that their presence and their activity made the problems which the

police had to cope with more difficult.     That is the way in which I

put it in the report and that certainly involves that the behaviour

of that minority was a relevant factor.



QUESTIOI:

       Your report does refer to criticism of police, the local

authority and the Club.    Do you think a reasonable conclusion is

that in fact football supporters at Hillsborough and very likely

elsewhere, have had a very raw deal from the authorities?
                                                   \




»           LORD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  -   8   -




LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       I think as I say in the report, football supporters have put

up with conditions on terraces over the years which, on close

examination, really ought not to be required of them.    And I think

that there has been too little consultation with the view of

football supporters.    But I am quite sure that whether I had

reported on this or not, the fact of Hillsborough would have made a

change and indeed I think that some clubs had already begun to make

a change before the Hillsborough disaster occurred.     I hope that

will be accelerated and be more general now.

       Quite clearly, it is important that those who patronise

football grounds should have their views taken into consideration.



QUESTIQI (Gaby Rodder, Channel 4 lews):

       Could you summarise your criticisms of the senior police

officers?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       I thought I had done that in the report.



QUESTIQI (Hr Rodder):

       Could you do it for the electronic media?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       Can the electronic media not read?     I am not going to embark

upon an off-the-cuff fresh resume which may not agree precisely with

what I have said in the report.
            LORD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  - 9 -



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR (CO*T>:

       I have considered what I have said in the report carefully,

I have expressed it there and     it is there for everybody to see.



QUESTIOI:

       You did actually refer to the possibility of looking at other

sports stadia as well.     Can you enlarge on the i■plications of that,

what sight happen in other kinds of sports?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       The teras of reference I have cover sports grounds in general

and accordingly I will be visiting and taking cognisance of the

probleas and the ways in which those problem are dealt with at

other foras of sport.    We visited Yiabledon this suoner because

although I was under pressure to get this report out, I was not

going to get a chance to go to see Yiabledon before the final report

unless I went then.

       I shall also want to see one or two cricket grounds before

this season ends.     I shall go to rugby grounds, I shall go to other

sporting stadia as well and to a lot aore football stadia than I

have been able to go to at the aoaent in order to get a picture of

the whole football scene throughout the country because up until now

of course ay attention has been concentrated on this one ground and

indeed even one end of one ground at Hillsborough.
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                -   10   -




QUESTI01 (Yorkshire TV):

       Is there enough tiae before the start of the new soccer

season to actually iapleaent all the interim reco— endations like

turnstile flow, review of safety certificates, that sort of thing?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       I have been very anxious about that.     I hope everyone will

understand that it was quite impossible to have got this report out

any sooner than it has been.   It was a considerable effort on

everybody's part to do it in that tiae because it aaant that the

very considerable body of evidence we heard at Sheffield had to be

heard in long days and as evidence was coaing in.

       But given that there was that tiae constraint, I had to

approach the recoBBendations that I have aade on the basis that soae

would be feasible to be carried out before the season began and soae

could not be carried out but should be begun forthwith and coapleted

as soon as possible.

       I tried to deal with that by putting asterisks against those

recaaaendations which it seeas to ae it might to be possible to

carry out before the start certainly of the English football season,

which I think is on 19 August, I believe it is unfortunately a

little earlier in Scotland.    It Bay be that one or two club6 aay

find it difficult to carry all of those asterisked recoaaandations

out quite as soon as that but I hope that they will do it by a week

or two later, if not by then, and that everything that can be

carried out before the season begins will be.
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                 -   11   -




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR (COIT):

         The others «ay involve consultation and take a little longer

   so to those I would simply say forthwith, not pre-season.



QUESTIOI (Granada Television):

         The families have expressed soae concern about the fact that

your Enquiry was of course not a legal proceedings.       Do you think

that there are grounds within your experience for proceedings for

manslaughter in any of these cases?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

         Those are questions for other authorities.   I know that civil

proceedings have been begun and I cannot express any view about

that.    That will be for another tribunal to consider.     Whether any

criminal proceedings should be brought or not is certainly not for

■e to decide, that is for other authorities.



QUESTIOI (Rory Johnson, COI Radio):

         The purpose of the crush barriers on the terraces is to

prevent the pressure of crowds building up so as to cause this sort

of thing.    Why did they not work on this particular occasion in your

vie*/?
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  -   12   -




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       Because there oust be a density of crowd which will be

sufficient to overcone any crush barrier.           Crush barriers are not

intended to accept liaitless pressure.           They are test-loaded at a

pressure which is thought to be higher than any pressure which on

Green Guide densities could be expected to be put upon them by huaan

beings in that area.   If you get a vastly increased pressure which

goes over the test load then of course the barrier will give.



QUESTIOI (Football Supporters Association):

       While recognising, Sir, that you do not wish to nake any

specific reconaendations about fences apart from the gaps, do you

not think that the kind of anti-personnel devices, the spikes and so

on, which are on some existing fences like those at Hillsborough

ought to be reMoved right away?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       I have taken the view that until I have heard a good deal

■ore evidence and seen a good few more grounds it would be

inappropriate at this interim stage to nake any recoaaendations

which involved structural works because one could recoaaend

sonething at this stage and then by the end of the year, because of

evidence froa elsewhere have to say:           "Veil I an sorry that I have

told you to put all that up or take all that down, reverse it".           And

rather than do that, I will wait the extra 4 or 5 aonths and hope to

get it right.
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  - 13 -



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR (COIT):

       I do want to e^>hasise that because there are no

recommendations about perimeter fences and gates in the interim

report, either that they should stay up or that they should be taken

down or that they should be differently constituted, because there

is no recommendat ion of that kind it does not mean that I am content

with things as they are.     It is siaply that one does not want to

«»Vo a premature ill-judged reco— nndation and I hope that the other

safety recommendations that I have made in regard to numbers and

leaving gates open and so on will hold the position until one can

« V p a more considered judgment on what happens about permiter

fences.

          ¥e have to bear in mind of course not only the views that we

may hear in this country but views from Europe as well as to whether

we ought to have permiter fences at all and if so what design they

should be.     Xaybe I will have to go and have a look with the

Assessors at designs elsewhere such as in France where they have

permiter fences with different types of gates which may be more

suitable for providing safety as well as pitch integrity.       These

 will all have to be looked at as possibilities in the coning months.



 QUEST 1011 (Associated Press):

          You have called in the report for a 15 percent reduction in

 the capacity of terraces.    BIFA recently said that it would allow no

 standing area, it would go to all-eeater stadia beginning 1992 for

 Vorld Cup qualifying matches.
          LORD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 198©


                               - 14 -



QUESTIQI (COIT):

       Vould the evidence you have received support such a aove in

the future for English soccer, all-seater stadia?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       I have already said all-seater is clearly an important issue,

yes or no, and 1 aa not in a position at the aoaent to express a

view on it but 1 shall in the final report.



QUEST101 (Yorkshire TT>:

       The first Yorkshire Chief Constable after the disaster took

full responsibility for the actions of his sen.     There have been

calls for his resignation subsequent to that.     Do you now believe

that he should resign?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       I have Bade no criticisa of the Chief Constable of South

Yorkshire but what happens about his position is not for ae.



QUESTIQI (Frank Partridge, BBC Radio lews):

       You did see fit in the report to sake soae strong criticise

of senior officers of the South Yorkshire Force.     Although you do

not want to coanent on the Chief Constable, would you like to

enlarge on those criticisas?
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                - 15 -



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       lo I would not like to enlarge on them.    I have expressed

them in the terns Which I think are appropriate and I do not think

there is any advantage in trying to say the task again off-the-cuff

this naming.



QUESTIOI (ITI):

       Do you feel the balance of responsibility between the police

and the club was right or should that be altered as well in future?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       I an not quite sure what you aean by the balance of

responsibility.   Do you v a n for crowd safety in the ground?



QUESTI01 (ITI):

       That is right, it seeas to be unclear at certain points as to

who is responsible, whether it is the police or the club, for

organising the event?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       I have dealt with that partially in the report, quoting what

Xr Justice Popplewell said about it and also what the Green Guide

says about it and I have described it as a grey area which clearly

is difficult and which will require further consideration.
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  - 16 -



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR (COIT):

          But what I said in the recomaendat ions is that whatever way

be thought in the end to be appropriate so far as division of

responsibility for crowd safety as between the club and the police

is concerned, what oust happen in the short-tera is that there is an

agreeaent as to who for the present is going to look after it.

          One of the probleas at Hillsborough was that in regard to the

Leppings Lane Terraces, the club believed because of the practice

which had existed that the police were looking after that. The

police were soaewhat equivocal about it but on the whole accepted

that it was their responsibility but in the end it was very auch

left for the fans theaselves to sort out whether they were

comfortable or they were not.

          So in the end nobody really dealt with the problem of over­

crowding on those terraces and that aust be avoided in the short­

term until soae aore definitive policy can be laid down as to who

should look after these matters.

          So I have said in the recoaasndat ions that there aust be an

agreeaent in writing between the club and the police in respect of

each part of the ground as to who is responsible for filling the

terraces and for aonitoring them for over-crowding in relation to

each aatch.



QUESTIOI (Sheffield Star):

          lour report suggests that it was a disaster waiting to

happen.    Yhy do you think it happened on that day rather than any

other.    lou do asntion soae factors in your report.   But do
             LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                 - 17 -



QUESTIOI (COIT):

you have any view why it happened on 15 April and not before?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       You are really asking ■e to write part 2 of the Enquiry for

you again.    It is all set out there, there was a combination.   The

reason I quoted the Archbishop of York was because I thought what he

had said was a very wise remark, that one always likes to look for

an individual scapegoat but in fact something as disastrous as this

in a field which has been a field of activity for years is only

going to happen because a number of things coas together on one

occasion, it nay be errors of judgment on the part of certain

individuals, it may be a policy which has managed to get by just in

the past but for one or other reason does not quite on the day.

       All these things coming together produce the disaster and I

hope I have identified them and isolated them and put them into

context in the report.



QUESTIOI (Heather Kills, Independent):

       You said at the beginning that you were not apportioning

blame but you do say in your report that you felt the main reason

for the disaster was the failure of police control.    Are you not

therefore placing the bulk of the blame on the police there?
          LORD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                               - 18 -



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       I suppose you could say that yes.   When I say I aa not

apportioning blane, if a civil case coaes before a court and there

are a nunber of parties who have been at fault the Judge says:

■fell 75 percent = I, 10 percent = I, and whatever the reaaining

percent = Z".

       I ax not doing that but I said at the sane tine as indicating

that I was not going to apportion fault, I Bade it quite clear that

if criticises were Bade, as they were bound to be, I would have to

deal with thea and express ay view about thea and I hope that is

what I have done.



QUESTIOI (Associated Press):

       The 15 percent reduction on the terraces, how did you arrive

at that figure, was it an engineering figure, why not 10 percent or

20 percent, what was the 15 percent representing exactly?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       Any figure that you picked would be plucked out of the air.

I thought 10 percent was too low and I thought 20 percent, which was

suggested by the Football Association, was too high.



QUESTIOI (Andrew Russell, Daily Star):

       fill your recoaaendations begin a new legal backing, will

football clubs be obliged to put these into force or not?
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLQK - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  - 19 -



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       The recosnendations that Z have Bade in this interim report

do not have any legal sanction.    Whether it is going to be necessary

in the long-term to suggest legislation is something to be

considered at the next stage.

       One possibility, and Z say it is only a possibility, is that

the Green Guide, which has not had any legal or statutory force up

until now and which in a nunber of respects m y need to be revised

in the light of Hillsborough, nay or parts of it nay be acre

appropriately applied by way of Statute or by way of regulation, Z

do not know.   That is something Z shall have to consider.   But at

the ament these recoaaendations are not of legal force.



QUESTZOI (BBC Radio lews):

       On the question of self-contained pens, will it be up to the

Advisory Group at individual grounds to decide on the individual

capacities of those?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       Zt will but you cannot lay down any hard and fast rule

because the Green Guide starts at a particular figure, that is to

say 54 people per 10 square asters, on certain assumptions, naaely

that the viewing slope is satisfactory, that the lay-out of the

barriers is satisfactory, various other things.
           LORD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                 -   20   -




LORD JUSTICE TAILOR (COIT):

       Grounds vary in this regard.           For example at Leppings Lane

there were no gangways whereas at the Cop there were.          These are all

factors which have to go into deciding what the capacity of a

particular self-contained area should be and therefore it has got to

be left to the judgment of those who are in charge of affairs at the

particular ground and it seeos to k           that the certificating

authority, the local authority, is ultimately responsible for that.

       What Z have tried to do is to emphasise that although a

specific figure of 54 per 10 square asters is Mentioned in the Green

Guide and it is said that there should be deductions in respect of

unsatisfactory features, those who sake those deductions aist do so

on a realistic basis.   Z suspect that like Hillsborough, other

places, the deductions have not been sufficient.

       So that Bust be done and then Z have suggested that there

should be this safety factor on top of that of taking another 15

percent off.   And if all of that is done and if people keep their

eyes open and Monitor the pens visually for problems and we leave

the gates open, Z hope that in the short-term at any rate we will be

able to Maintain the safety.



QUESTIOI (Exchange Telegraph):

       Zn their submission to you the Football Authorities

recaaaended that alcohol should be freely available inside grounds

again to encourage supporters to turn up early.           Do you have a view

on that?
          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  -   21   -




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       I do not have a view on that and I am glad you mentioned it

because the Sunday Times last week attributed a view to me, indeed

said it was in the report which they claimed to have had leaked.     I

have expressed no view about alcohol sales in the ground.    The

headline in that report said that I would call for a review on the

ban of such sales.     I have done no such thing and I have written to

the Editor of the Sunday Times asking that he make a correction this

week because there may be soae people round the country who think

that I still hold that view despite the fact that the report now

shows nothing of the kind.

       What should be done about pre—match drinking is obviously a

very important matter and it was a factor in this disaster as I have

indicated. A minority of people who drank too mich and were pushing

at the back of an already swollen crowd made problems for the police

very mich more difficult.

       Whether one closes pubs, whether one considers provision of

alcohol elsewhere, all of those matters have to be considered in

depth and I will do that in the second stage of this report with the

assistance of the Assessors.



QUESTIOI (Judd Page, lew Civil Engineer):

       Bad barrier 144 been there, had the tunnel conformed with the

slope requirements of the Green Book, do you think the accident

would have happened?
            LOUD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                  -   22   -




LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

          It is very difficult to say.         I strongly suspect, I put it no

higher than this, that whilst there may have been injuries owing to

the large number who were casing through that tunnel, it may well be

that the other barrier which went would not have gone and that the

injuries would have been higher up the pen and may have been of less

gravity.    But it is speculative.     It was one of the factors, as I

have indicated, of which there were a number which conspired to

produce this appalling result.



QUESTIOI (Tom Mullins, Scotsman):

          I wonder where this report leaves Scottish grounds and in

particular what lessons may have been drawn by you from the Scottish

experiment since the early '80s?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

          I will be honest, I have not been north of the border during

the period of this Enquiry.     I probably will go in the coming

months.     I am aware of the arrangements at Ibrox after the disaster

that occurred there and whether all-seating is something that one

ought to be considering is very much an open question.           But I have

not anything at the     moment specifically to say derived from the

Scottish experience.
             LORD JUSTICE TAILOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                 - 23 -



QUESTIOI (Scotsman):

       Da these recomnendations actually apply to Scottish grounds?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       les they do, yes they do.



QUESTIOI (Central TV>:

       You talk about limiting the number of spectators entering

each pen and controlling the total number there.    How do you

envisage that working bearing in Bind that people tend to wander

around, they go to the loo at half tiae or they buy a coffee if they

can, there is a flow, how do you foresee that being controlled?



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

       Ve have all be conscious I think that you cannot deal with

this as an absolute matheaatical problem with no kind of blurring at

the edges.    But experience at Hillsborough suggests that if for

example you have got a gate in the radial fence which enables you to

go into the next pen, if the pens are pretty full, the number that

are going to do that is very small indeed.    I think probably the

most dramatic single page in the report if you look at it is the

photograph which is Exhibit 5 which shows the state of congestion in

pens 3 and 4 compared with the state of affairs in pen 6 -

absolutely packed out in 3 and 4 and very sparse indeed in 6.    AM

yet there was freedom of movement theoretically through gates at the

back which people could have availed theaselves of theoretically but

they did not.
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                 - 24 -



LORD JUSTICE TAILOR <CO*T>:

       And so I take your point that if you count people into one of

these pens and soaebody wants to go out to the loo or to buy a

sandwich, you oay be 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or a dozen or 20 light

afterwards or heavier.     But I do not think that that kind of number

is going to sake very much difference.

          If one can get the monitoring of the nuotoers going in correct

and one keeps visual monitoring as well then I think we should have

safety.



QUESTIOI (David Owens, Liverpool Daily Past):

          You have told us today that you would like 4 or 5 months to

look at other matters like the possibility of all-seater stadia, you

say that you would like more tiae to look at the question of

government football spectators schemes, you say that the Green Code

m j need Statutory backing.     Would you not feel happier if the

government were to simply postpone their present Bill to allow you

the time you would like so that we could have a proper Bill that

 looked at things like football safety?



 LORD JUSTICE TAILOR:

          Views about the speed at which that Bill is being put through

 Parliament have been very strongly expressed both ways in the House

 and I do not think it would be profitable for me to comaent further
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDOI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                - 25 -



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR (COIT):

       What has been done in response to those who were concerned

that the results of this enquiry night not have any impact on the

final outcome, what has been done about that has been, as I have

said, to put in a provision which will require that the whole matter

comes back to Parliament for a full vote after the final report in

this Enquiry and I think that being so I do not wish to coament

further about the speed at which this Bill will progress.



QUESTIOI (John KcGee, Observer):

       Can I ask whether or not you wholly concur with the Horns

Secretary's expressed view that the tragedy would not have occurred

if lessons learnt in the past had been properly applied?



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

       I          think there are some lessons which have been read in the

past which were not applied.    One was a lesson which I quoted from a

report many years ago saying that control of entry into a football

ground should begin some distance away from it and not just at the

entrance.    But there were other factors here too.   Certainly lessons

had not been fully learned and I hope they will be this time.



QUESTIOI (Football Supporters Association):

       Just to refer back to the talk of the government's

opportunity to consider your final report, what we object to

principally about the situation at the moment is that as we

understand it, though the government will have a chance to
            LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR - PC - LOIDQI - 4 AUGUST 1989


                                 - 26 -



QUESTIOI <CQIT):

look at the Bill, they will not have a chance to wake any

alterations to it.     They will only have the chance to say either yes

or no.    In other words, if they say no they oust go all the way back

to square one and that seens to us a very unsatisfactory situation.



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:

         Veil whether it is or it is not, there is nothing I can do

about it.




(EYD OF TRAfSCRIPT) XIII
