MEMORANDUM


From: CHRIS BONE
      Room 1106
      @ 2512


Date:    1 September 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




You might find this note useful as we talk today.

Your letter to me o f 25 July

2.     In your last letter to me you asked for the Coroner’s summing-up, information about
why nobody was prosecuted, BBC coverage of Leppings Lane and the terraces from 1415-
1530, videos and photos of the 1988 semi-final, and an analysis of common complaints from
those families who have replied separately.

3.     We have all this. The Coroner summed up over four days (ending on Tuesday 26
March 1991). There are four bound volumes of this which the current Coroner, Mr Dorries,
has sent us. We have from the CPS the joint written opinion of Gareth Williams QC and
Peter Birt QC on which they based their decision not to prosecute. We have four videos
from the BBC, with a plan, and a lot of material from South Yorkshire police about 1988.

4.     We have separate responses from 10 families. I suggest you read them all (it won’t
take long) but I have summarised them at A, with indications of what we might do about each
one. I don’t think it is possible to boil them all down into a few sentences, but one thread
which runs through many of them is concern about the way the Inquest was conducted.
There are only one or two places where there is even the suggestion of genuine new evidence
- and even there I doubt whether it will amount to anything.

5.     Also before the summer break, you asked for an analysis of the allegations made in
the Granada TV programme and a schedule of post-disaster events. I attach these at B and C.


Family Support Group

6.      The Group have not yet sent us their submission. Their solicitor Anne Adlington
has told me that they have drafted it (it’s 40 pages long, with some Appendices). She
promised to fax me a draft of the 40 pages (on a without prejudice basis) but so far she hasn’t.
She asked on the phone for a 2-week extension to the 1 September ‘deadline’ which of course




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OO6.DOC
I gave her, albeit with a reminder that you had a tight schedule to finish this job by the end of
the year. I continue to press her on this.

7.     Ms Adlington has asked if she could have a meeting with you, off the record, before
you meet any of the families. I said this was a matter for you, but I was not discouraging.
She gave me an indication of what she thinks the families might realistically get out of this
exercise and I think she would like to expand on that. A meeting could also allow us to set
out our stall, for instance as to the kinds of information we would looking for in the family
interviews. That should mean that these are more productive.

8.       I do not altogether trust Ms Adlington (she gave my phone number to a journalist who
rang and tried to pump me for information about your approach to this exercise). We would
need to keep our cards close to our chest as regards any preliminary conclusions we might
have drawn or we could find them all over the papers. But it seems to me that a pre-meeting
of this sort would on balance be useful (it should be low-key and hence here, not in
Liverpool).


Police relations with the families

9.     There is still an enormous amount of hostility among the families to the South
Yorkshire (and to a lesser extent the West Midlands) police. The Support Group and others
are showing a great deal of concern about the release o f documents by South Yorkshire
police. There are constant rows between the police archivist, PC Greenway, and Ann
Adlington.

10.     The police say their policy has always been to be as open as possible, which means
letting people have statements which they made themselves or which were made by
somebody else if that person has agreed to that, and photographs of the bodies of their
relatives provided that these are decent and that no other dead person is shown in them.
They say they also release material which is ‘in the public domain’, though I am not entirely
clear what they mean by that.

11.     The Support Group, etc., on the other hand say that the police have often been
obstructive. There was a hold-up in late July, while I was away and after you had written
your letters, when the police told people that they wanted to make sure we were content
before they released any more material. As we were both away Paul Pugh’s staff told them
to carry on as before, and they have since been doing that.

12.    I have tried to stay out of this, saying that it is a matter between South Yorkshire and
the families. Some Hillsborough families have rung asking me to use my influence to get
documents released - 1 have passed these requests on to the police without c o m m itment
Ann Adlington told me at the end of last week that families are now starting to get from the
police Coroner’s ‘body files’ and other documentation they have been after for years. I do
not know how true this is. At all events I don’t take (and didn’t claim) the credit for it.




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OQ6.DOC
Phillips report

13.     One document the Support Group are after is a report by David Phillips, who is now
chief constable of Kent. South Yorkshire police commissioned this from him (he was at that
time an Assistant Chief Constable and chairman of the ACPO Football Hooliganism
Committee) to provide them with what he calls ‘professional expert opinion’ in anticipation
of civil actions against the force. It is bulky, but worth reading (but there is in my view a
fair amount of special pleading in it).

14.    South Yorkshire police themselves alerted the Support Group to this document, by
copying them a letter from us which mentioned it. They refuse to let them see it (for
privilege reasons). I have told the group that - having read it - 1 do not think it contains
anything that could be regarded as new evidence.


Roger Cook TV programme

15.      I attach a summary of this (D) - it was shown in June 1994.


Other correspondence

16.     We have had a number of letters from people to whom you did not write. Most of
these are of no interest as regards the scrutiny though you may wish to read them anyway.
The South Yorkshire police have also sent us copies of letters they have received, mainly
from people who believe that the Liverpool fans were drunk and the Sheffield police have
been unfairly traduced.

17.      You should however see the letters from                      Sir John Pestell, and Rob
White. Each has interesting things to say about the disaster - Mrs              and Mr White
were there, and Sir John Pestell writes as a former (colonial) police chief. Rob White has
sent us a book, cThe Day o f the Hillsborough Disaster’, giving eye-witness accounts from
various standpoints (White himself is a contributor - he was caught in the crush in Pen 3).
There is to my eye a clear bias to this book, but I think it is worth the read.

18.    The most important of these unsolicited letters is from Derek Bruder, who has written
through his solicitors. Mr Bruder is a Liverpool PC who was present at the game off-duty
and helped to treat Kevin Williams. He was portrayed in the Granada ‘Hillsborough’
programme. See the Williams material at A.


Visits

19.   I think that I should in the next week or so visit South Yorkshire police, the
Coroners’ office, and the CPS in York to inspect documents held there.

20.    I would also like to discuss briefly the arrangements for your own visits to Liverpool
(and possibly also to Sheffield). I anticipate these happening next month (October).




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OQ6.DOC
Hillsborough project

18.   We can expect a substantial submission from Professor Phil Scraton of the
Hillsborough Project (Liverpool University) who rang me on Friday. He says he has been
working on the disaster continually over the last 8 years, supported by up to three researchers.
Their work has been funded by Liverpool City Council and others.

 19.    Scraton said the project have already put out a number of publications. The biggest
(and most recent?) is called ‘No Last Rites' - it focuses on the Inquests, which Scraton thinks
were seriously defective. He said the Granada TV programme was substantially based on
this book. He will send us it and the project’s other publications.

20.    He said that he is very concerned about ‘emerging evidence’ from the families and
others - some of this indicates that the statements which the police put before Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry and the Inquests had been doctored. He mentioned a list of 15 points of serious
concern, apparently similar to the ‘ten unanswered questions’ posed by the people who made
the TV programme. One o f these, which we discussed briefly, concerns the way in which
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was picked for his new job and allowed to run the match
while his predecessor, Mr Mole, was left out of the arrangements.

21.     Scraton did not say, but I infer, that he has or thinks he has inside information from
police sources. He told me he needs to harden up some of his material before he puts it to
you (I infer again that this means getting people to put down on paper and sign up to what
they have told him informally). He told me his informants were willing to be interviewed
and have their evidence published with your report - but they were sensitive about any leaks,
as they did not wish to be hounded by the press.

22.      I stressed the tight timescale you are working to and the importance of making sure
that this exercise really does, in as far as it can, lay all the ghosts to rest. He took these
points and said we will hear from him shortly.


Other points

23.    There are particular issues about police statements and Dr Ed Walker which we
should discuss.




CHRIS BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OQ6.DOC
Responses from individual families (up to 29 August)


Mr and Mrs Church (two letters)

        want a private interview accompanied by their MP, Joe Benton. They say they
        have new evidence but do not say what that is.

        They fell out with their lawyers. As a result they had no legal representation
        at the Inquest and missed some of what was said about their son, Gary. They
        are seeking a judicial review - for which they have legal aid - of things done
        by the Hillsborough Steering Group (a committee of lawyers which co­
        ordinated legal action on behalf of the families up to 1991/2 but has now
        disbanded). They say it misled the Coroner in some way.

        They did not get the chance to put 13 specified questions to ACC Mervyn
        Jones, who led the West Midlands police investigation. But the questions all
        cover ground that was gone over thoroughly both by Taylor and at the Inquest.

        Recommendation - it seems unlikely that Mr and Mrs Church have new
        evidence to offer. But seeing them will mean that they will not be able to say
        they were not listened to. I suggest a time-limited appointment. Having their
        MP along should help to focus the discussion.


Mr Glover

        Son Ian died (featured in Granada TV programme). Police kept the
        emergency services off the ground. Families were allowed to mingle with the
        Coroner’s Jury when the Inquest went to the ground - says this was a breach of
        the Coroners’ Rules. Coroner allowed police to blow their own trumpets at
        the Inquest and get away with saying the fans were all drunk.

        Wants an interview.

        Recommendation - very unlikely to have any new evidence. Will probably
        be represented in the Support Group material. Wait for this and decide on
        merits of an interview then. See him anyway if he insists.




Mrs Hicks

         Mother of Sarah and Victoria (featured in Granada TV programme). Phoned
         for an interview. She has written to us via the Support Group.

         Recommendation - await her material from the Support Group and decide on
         merits of an interview then. See her anyway if she insists.


G: \HILLSBOR \MAIN\RESPONSE. 074
Mr Howard

        Son and grandson both died - touching letter. Police didn’t do enough to help
        those who were injured. No action.




Mrs McBrien

        Her son John was killed. The police breached the safety certificate when they
        let people in through the exit gate. That should be grounds for prosecution.
        Jack Stone, chief steward at the Leppings Lane end of the ground, told police
        that there would be a disaster if they opened gate C. He was not called by the
        Coroner.

        Recommendation - even if Stone’s evidence bears out what Mrs McBrien
        says it seems unlikely to be significant for the scrutiny. But we must look it
        out.


Mrs McEvov

        The police ran the match differently in 1988. Nothing new here - no action.


Mr & Mrs Roberts (two letters)

        PC Yates found their son Graham, and thought he was dead - later, PC Best
        thought he was breathing (but later found him dead). Format of the mini-
        Inquests meant that they could not investigate why Yates thought Graham
        was dead while Best thought he was alive.

        Then later on they found out that Yates may not have been dealing with
        Graham at all. Recently, they have seen a statement from PC Wadsworth
        which says that Graham had a pulse and was put on a medical drip.

        Important to examine what happened after the 3.15 cut-off. Police
        suppressing evidence that people were alive and could have been saved after
        3.15. Inquest inadequate - they were denied the chance to see and test all the
        evidence about Graham’s death.

         They ask for an interview.

         Recommendation - u n l i k e l y that there is new evidence here that would justify
         re-opening Inquest or Inquiry. But see anyway - otherwise, liable to claim
         they are being ignored.


G: \HILLSBOR \MAIN\RESPONSE. 074
Mrs Stringer

        Mother of Paul Carlile. Says she has new evidence, but doesn’t say what it is.
        Wrote back asking her. No action unless she replies.


Mrs Thompson

        Police were only interested in how much fans had had to drink. No action.


Mrs Anne Williams

        Phone call - we can expect a detailed submission from her lawyers.

        She says son Kevin died from asphyxiation like all the other victims, but this
        was caused not by his chest being squeezed in the crush but by fractures to the
        voicebox. That would mean that his death would not have been
        instantaneous, as in the crush asphyxia cases, but would have been caused
        slowly as a result of soft tissue around the fractures swelling over time and
        gradually covering the airway. So the 3.15 cut-off point is not right for
        Kevin.

        Dr Iain West supports this view.

        We have also had a letter from PC Derek Bruder, an off-duty Liverpool
        policeman who was at the match as a spectator. The Granada ‘Hillsborough’
        programme showed Bruder saying that he treated Kevin Williams at 3.30,
        when he was still alive, and then in effect being leaned on to change his
        evidence.

        Mr Bruder’s letter does not confirm any of this. He is cagey and says he has
        been misquoted. On the other hand he is clear that his evidence about Kevin
        was not given to the Inquest ‘in its entirety or in a professional manner’. He
        is willing to see you if you wish.

        Recommendation - Mrs Williams has made several applications to the
        Attorney-General to have Kevin’s Inquest re-opened. We need to examine
        her lawyer’s material and check it against earlier material on her son. She has
        not asked for an interview, but we should agree to see her if she does.

        We should see Mr Bruder.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\RESPONSE.074
‘HILLSBOROUGH’, GRANADA TV - SHOWN 5 DECEMBER
1996


Allegations made in the programme


{Note - the programme lasts ju st under 2 hours. The timings shown below are those
on our videotape - which includes 35 - 40 minutes o f News at Ten ’ halfway through
the Hillsborough film. Times given are fo r the approximate start o f the sequences
described).


05.00 -         Superintendent Duckenfield struts about, then addresses his officers at
               the ground - they must be ‘firm but fair’, ‘nobody gets in without a
               ticket’, ‘nobody gets in who is drunk’. But they don’t seem to pay
               attention - some put a bet on the game. Some abuse Duckenfield, say
               he is new in the job.

               Allegation - Duckenfield stiff, remote, inexperienced - his officers
               didn’t respect him.

07.30   -      Technician (Houldsworth) checks CCTV camera - perfect close-up
               pictures of police officers standing on terrace.

               Allegation - video cameras OK.

08.30   -      Trevor Hicks in Leppings Lane says ‘police checked our tickets last
               year - they had barriers all down the road’ - also ‘people who knock the
               police are the first to go running to them when there’s trouble’

               Allegation - policing arrangements significantly different in 1988
               (also makes point that the Hicks family are law abiding people who
               support the police - soon to be disabused).

10.20          Policeman (Superintendent?) in control box gets radio message ‘shall
               we fill the pens one by one?’ - looks to Duckenfield for response, gets
               none, then replies ‘just let them in - the fans will find their own level’ -
               Duckenfield looks uninvolved, as if he doesn’t know what’s going on.

               Allegation - poor leadership by Duckenfield, who didn’t realise the
               significance offilling pens one by one.

11.30          Liverpool fans on way down Leppings Lane being matey with the
               police - happy, cheerful crowd.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
               Allegation - fans not aggressive or drunk, not anti-police.

12.00          Liverpool fans at the Nottingham Forest end of the ground - policeman
               says ‘you’re all going in Leppings Lane’ (whichever part of ground
               they have tickets for).

               Allegation - police action increased size o f crowd at Leppings Lane
               end o f the ground

12.30          Chaos at Leppings Lane turnstiles - fan (PC Bruder?) says to a
               policeman ‘ do what you did last year, form a cordon, get them into
               queues’.

               Allegation - police let situation at turnstiles get out o f hand, didn’t
               do what they did in 1988.

12.50          Police Superintendent (?) in control box sees turnstile chaos on CCTV,
               says ‘we’ll get them in alright’.

               Allegation - police control complacent, didn’t respond to danger
               signs at turnstiles.

13.50          BBC commentator John Motson notices spaces on the Leppings Lane
               terrace - says crowd might be below capacity.

               Allegation - Motson could see something odd about the way the
               terrace was filling up.

14.30          Police Superintendent outside Leppings Lane turnstile tells
               Duckenfield on radio ‘you’ve got to open the gate or someone will be
               killed ’ - Duckenfield dithers - then says ‘if there’s going to be
               serious injury or death, I’ve no option but to open the gate’.

               Allegation - Duckenfield not in control.

15.00          Trevor Hicks stands on half-empty terrace next to packed Pen 3, shouts
               to nearby policeman ‘it’s packed in there, empty here - can’t you do
               something?’. Policeman say s‘shut your fucking prattle’, goes away -
               meanwhile squeals of pain come through the crowd noise.

               Allegation - police on scene treated fans with contempt, didn ’t
               see/care about clear overcrowding in the pens.

15.30          CCTV technician (Houldsworth) watching monitor in club control
               room sees fans streaming through gate, says ‘where are they all going
               to go? - for God’s sake shut the tunnel, it’s packed’.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
               Allegation - technician could size up the situation on CCTV - so
               why couldn ’t the police?

18.30          Fans coming over fence - Duckenfield tells ACC ‘it looks like a pitch
               invasion’. Officer shouts to resting PC’s in canteen ‘Pitch invasion,
               Liverpool end’.

               Allegation - police reacted to a pitch invasion, not what was
               actually going on.

20.40          FA Secretary Graham Kelly asks Duckenfield ‘What’s going on?’ -
               Duckenfield says ‘fans forced the gate, fans forced their way in - this is
               the result’.

               Allegation - Duckenfield lied.

22.00          Fire engine arrives outside ground, fireman says to a policeman ‘we
               got a shout, oxygen and wire-cutters’ - policeman says ‘don’t think
               you’re needed mate’. Ambulance arrives, driver asks policeman if he
               can drive onto the pitch - ‘no, they’re still fighting in there’. Queue
               of ambulances seen outside ground.

26.20          Trevor Hicks gets into ambulance with Victoria, leaves Sarah lying on
               the pitch - is to ld ‘Sarah will follow in the next ambulance’ - but
               on the way ambulanceman sees this hasn’t happened ‘ ‘how come
               nobody is following us up?’.

               Allegation - police incompetent, impeding rescue.

29.00          BBC commentator John Motson overheard ‘there was one moment
               when a section of Nottingham Forest fans did taunt Liverpool
               supporters .... on the pitch. Fortunately that was stopped’.

               Allegation - police did not have any real worry about disorder
               among fans

32.00          Chaos at police information points as Mr and Mrs Hicks
               separately enquire.

               Allegation - loss o f control by police

35.00          speech to camera by Trevor Hicks

                7 spoke to Tony Edwards, the ambulanceman who took Victoria to
               hospital. He described rows and rows o f dead bodies [in the gym -
               CB], He kept on saying, did anyone even try with them? Because
               there’d been no basic medical equipment around, no tubes fo r airways,
               nothing. They told me Sarah would come in the next ambulance.


G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.Q73
               There wasn’t a next ambulance. No other ambulance followed Tony
               Edwards onto that pitch. Outside the ground, an army o f highly
               skilled people, ambulancemen, paramedics. Inside the ground, people
               like me - OK, they were doing their best, but - people died who might
               have been saved - his words, Tony Edwards’s words, not mine ’.

               Allegation - incompetent handling o f crisis meant that even more
               people died.

38.30         police sit exhausted in canteen - officer comes round saying ‘don’t
               put anything in your notebooks’. One PC says ‘put everything in your
               notebooks’.

               Allegation - cover-up under way.

41.30         PC outside gym mortuary tells Trevor Hicks, who wants to see his
               daughter ‘you have no rights - this is designated as a temporary
               mortuary and everything here belongs to the South Yorkshire coroner’.
               They argue.

43.00         Mrs Hicks looks at rows of photographs of dead bodies - Trevor Hicks
              ‘did they have to make us look through them all - they could have
              separated male from female, adults from children’.

45.30         Hicks interviewed by a policeman who asks him how much he had to
              drink - other police put the same question to other relatives/spectators.

48.00          John Glover tells surviving son Joseph ‘they told me you were dead as
               well’.

               Allegation - police crude, arrogant, incompetent, treat
               relatives/survivors with contempt - trying to spread myth about
               drunken fans.

49.00          Trevor Hicks speaks to camera

               ‘they treated us like scum - it’s guilt - all these people dead, thanks to
               them - they don’t think o f them as people, they think o f them as scum \

51.30          Trevor Hicks to camera again

               7 can come to terms with what happened at Hillsborough, ju st about,
               but what happened next, over the next few months, I ’ll never come to
               terms with that ’.

NEWS AT TEN ON TAPE. AFTERWARDS -




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.Q73
 1.38.40       policeman talks to journalist in bar - ‘fans pissed on the dead, attacked
               police, robbed the dead’ - journalist sceptical ‘do you think my editor
               will buy that?’ - then a Sun headline ‘THE TRUTH’ (denounces
               Liverpool supporters as the main cause of the disaster).

               Allegation - police disinformation was behind the Sun’s treatment
               o f the disaster

1.48.00        At inquest - Dr Slater says crush asphyxia very rapid - then PC
               Bruder (Liverpool copper who was spectator at match) is seen at home
               telling somebody (investigating policeman?) ‘I got to that boy at half
               past three’ - the boy was ‘still alive, vomiting, had a pulse,
               convulsing’ - Dr Slater then phones him to ‘clarify medical details’ -
               Bruder then tells his visitor ‘OK I’ll change my statem ent    clarify a
               few points’.

1.50.00        Dr Slater tells Coroner - ‘I spoke to PC Bruder. I’m confident that
               the boy was dead and there is nothing anybody could have done for
               him after that time [unspecified- 3.15? - CB] including PC Bruder’.
               Then Dr Slater says the dead ‘felt no discomfort, no pain’.

1.51.00        Mrs Hicks to camera - this was ‘exactly what I wanted to hear, my girls
               didn’t suffer - it meant less money o f course as we could not claim fo r
               pre-death trauma. But later, much later, I found out that they did
               suffer, other specialists told me that Sarah and Vicky did suffer... ’.

1.52.00        John Glover at families’ meeting - this was ‘the cheapest disaster in
               history - was my lad’s life worthless?’.

               Allegation - medical evidence at the Inquest was wrong on time &
               manner o f death -pathologist distorted it, leant on key witness - this
               spared relatives’feelings, saved the authorities money, got the police
               off the hook.

1.53.00        DPP has preferred no charges - Trevor Hicks says ‘families do not
               accept that justice has been done - we look for a manslaughter verdict
               at the Inquest’.

1.57.00        The resumed Inquest - families’ barrister, Mr King, says ‘ they’ve
               brought in the cavalry, there’s ten of them’ (i.e. ten different lawyers
               representing chief constable, Duckenfield, etc) - everybody testifying
               for the families is going to get a hard time’.

1.59.00        Mr King explains to families that ‘the Coroner won’t take evidence
               about anything that happened after 3.15 ... because the damage had
               been done by then’.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
               Mrs Glover says her son was still alive at 3.35, doctor found a pulse at
               3.35. King - they were all dead by 3.15, that was established at the
               earlier Inquest - Mrs Glover - we never got a chance to challenge that
               evidence.

               John Glover says that only 14 of those who died got to hospital -
               where were the ambulances, why didn’t they go on to the pitch? There
               were policeman taking people’s pulses with their bloody gloves on,
               and that was after 3.15 and that wants addressing.

               Eddie Spearitt - we’ve been stuffed at every stage, we want a
               manslaughter verdict - there were coppers talking about a pitch
               invasion while people were dying and that went on till well after 3.15
               and I want the Court to hear about i t ....

2.03.00        a pub landlord tells Coroner about Liverpool fans drinking - so does a
               WPC, who describes demeanour of crowd as ‘evil’ - senior W
               Midlands officer tells the Coroner that the crowd had a high proportion
               of people who had been drinking and had no tickets, and could only
               gain access by creating a crush.

2.05.00        Eddie Spearitt - talking to camera - ‘the evidence was a bloody
               disgrace. The Coroner said h e ’d tell the jury to disregard it, but how
               could he expect them to - it fe d the myth - a gang o f drunken yobboes
               storm through the gate and crush the people at the jront - that’s the
               myth, isn’t it?.

               Here's the truth - a quarter o f all the people who died went through
               that gate - they were sent through it by South Yorkshire Police

2.07.00        Joe Glover gives his evidence - intimidated by Court - feels he has let
               his dead brother down, again.

2.09.00        Eddie Spearitt gives evidence - he was in pen with son Adam, saw a
               police officer a few feet away and begged him to open the gate - but
               officer didn’t do anything - Eddie couldn’t lift Adam out - nobody
               opened the gate - if the officer had opened the gate Eddie could have
               got Adam out. Adam fainted at 2.55 - but he was in the pen for 25
               minutes before anybody got him out.

               Coroner - ‘that may be true, but we’re not exploring that aspect of the
               matter now’.

               Allegation - Inquest rigged in favour o f the authorities - families
               not given a fa ir chance - couldn’t get their points across.

2.19.00        PC Bichard (police CCTV operator) gives evidence - vital camera had
               been faulty, they hadn’t used it much because of a substandard picture.


G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.073
               Coroner - would it have been recording before 1502 - ‘yes’ - Coroner
               ‘so there ought to be a film of it’ - ‘yes’ - Coroner ‘if I were to tell
               you that we can’t find it would that make any difference to your
               answer?’ - Bichard looks non-plussed ‘I’ve no idea at all where it
               could have gone to, it was part of the tape and the tapes were all sealed
               up at the end of the day’.

               Mrs Glover speaks to camera - ‘that camera recorded the state o f the
               pens just before the police allowed 2,000 people into them. It
               recorded exactly what the police could see. But that evidence
               disappeared. Never mind, they said, that camera was faulty anyway’.

               Mr King (families’ barrister) questions PC Bichard ‘do you maintain
               that it is not possible to zoom in and clearly identify a given
               individual? - ‘yes’ - ‘Are you equally confident about what you can
               and can’t see on the terraces generally, about not being able to pick out
               overcrowding and so on?’ - ‘yes’ - ‘But you can zoom in and clearly
               see facial features, can’t you?’ - ‘I don’t think so, sir’.

               Film then shows a man on terraces sweeping them up - his face is
               seen clearly. Mrs Glover and Houldsworth discuss this - Houldsworth
               says the police had a camera like this on the day.

               Mrs Glover speaks to camera again - ‘this man could contradict police
               evidence - he was never called - he told me he was in the Sheffield
               Wednesday control room, he could see everything the police could see,
               and he knew the pens were chocka. Stevie Wonder would have known’.

               Allegation - police video evidence showed they were - or should
               have been - well aware o f the condition ofpens 3 and 4 before they
               opened Gate C. The police did not produce this, or destroyed it, then
               lied about it Houldsworth could have exposed all this - but he was
               not called to give evidence.

2.21.00        Mr Duckenfield gives evidence - ‘7 was in the control box. I had a
               view - 1 saw nothing untoward on the terraces from my position in the
               control box and the angle I was a f . Mr King - ‘ you say you didn’t
               know the precise contents of the safety certificate?’ - Duckenfield
               ‘difficult to recollect’ - ‘did you have a copy?’ - Duckenfield‘I can’t
               remember’ - ‘Did you ask for one?’ - Duckenfield ‘I remember
               asking about it’.

               King ‘you say your knowledge of the ground was limited?’ - ‘yes’ -
               K ing‘based on how many journeys round the ground?’ - ‘I can’t
               remember, I’d be guessing’. King ‘did you know the club were not
               going to steward the Leppings Lane terraces?’ - ‘I don't remember’ -
               King ‘can you honestly say that you regarded yourself as competent to
               police the Hillsborough ground?’


G:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\GRANADA.Q73
2.22.00        Coroner warns Duckenfield this is ‘definitely an incriminating question
               and you should think hard before you answer it’. Duckenfield (after a
               pause) ‘I was something of a generalist as opposed to a specialist’.

               Allegation - Duckenfield dishonest as well as incompetent - refused
               to admit his responsibility - took refuge in evasions - Inquest let him
               off the hook.




G:\HILLSBOR\MAJN\GRANADA.073
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: SCHEDULE




Saturday 15 April 1989: Disaster at Hillsborough Football Stadium resulting in the
deaths of 96 Liverpool fans

17 April 1989: Home Secretary (Mr Hurd) appoints Lord Justice Taylor to carry out
an Inquiry

from 19 April 1989: Coroner opens and formally adjourns Inquests (some victims
died a little after 19 April).

24 April 1989: West Midlands Police begin investigation.

15 May 1989 - 29 June 1989: Lord Justice Taylor’s public hearings.

I August 1989: Lord Justice Taylor publishes his Interim Report

18 January 1990: Lord Justice Taylor publishes his Final Report

18 April - 4 May 1990: ‘mini-inquests’ into each of the deceased (heard before jury)
- aim to establish for each of the (then) 95 deaths who they were and when & where
they died. After establishing these facts the Coroner (Dr Popper) adjourned the
Inquest again because of the ongoing police inquiries

September 1990: DPP concluded that no person should be subject to criminal
proceedings, following investigation by West Midlands Police (supervised by PCA)

1990(?) - application for judicial review of the DPP’s decision not to prosecute -
application dismissed by the Court.

19 November 1990 - March 1991: Coroner’s Inquest resumed, when evidence
relating to the incident as a whole was heard - Dr Popper ended his 4-day summing
up on 26 March - jury then reached a verdict of “accidental death” in respect of each
of the 95 victims.

II July 1991: PCA directed that police disciplinary charges of neglect of duty be
preferred against Chief Supt. Duckenfield and Supt. Murray

10 November 1991: Chief Supt. Duckenfield retires on medical grounds and is no
longer subject to the Police Discipline Code.

6 January 1992: Family of Kevin Williams (supported by Malcolm Thornton MP)
apply to the Attorney General for leave to apply to the High Court for a new Inquest.




G: \HILLSBOR\MAIN\SCHEDULE.070
13 January 1992: PCA announces that charges against Supt. Murray have been
dropped because the joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be heard in the
absence of the more senior officer.

11 February 1992: Attorney-General refuses the Williams family application.

15 April 1992: Application to the Attorney-General on behalf of families of Paul
Carlile, Ian Glover, Michael Kelly, Richard Jones, Peter Tootle and Kevin Williams
(again) for leave to apply to the High Court for a new Inquest.

5 May 1992: Families of the six apply to the Divisional Court for judicial review of
decisions made by the Coroner - aim to get the jury verdicts quashed and fresh
inquests ordered.

18 August 1992: Attorney-General refuses this application.

5 November 1993: Divisional Court refuses Judicial Review of the Coroner’s
proceedings (i.e. the application made by the six families on 5 May 1992)

2 June 1994: Cook Report TV programme (about Kevin Williams)

26 October 1994: House of Commons adjournment debate (Kevin Williams)

January 1996: Further application to the Attorney-General by family of Kevin
Williams for leave to apply to the High Court for a new Inquest (NB - the Attorney-
General’s office cannot fin d this application - 1 understand that we will be sent
another copy by the Williams ’ solicitors - CB)

20 March 1996: Solicitor-General refuses the Williams application.

5 December 1996: Granada Television ‘Hillsborough’ programme is shown.

17 December 1996: House of Commons Adjournment Debate - Home Secretary
(Michael Howard) promises to consider any “new” evidence

7 March 1997: Dossier of evidence from Families presented to the Home Office

30 June 1997: Mr Straw’s announcement of the scrutiny.




G: \HILLSBOR\MAIN\SCHEDULE. 070
‘THE COOK REPORT’ - YORKSHIRE TV - SHOWN 2
JUNE 1994
The programme concentrates largely on the death of Kevin Williams.

Key points made in the programme

(Programme lasts around 25 minutes. Timings are shown below).

00.50 -           Roger Cook - ‘evidence previously disregarded or altered under
                  duress and witnesses previously ignored demonstrate that Kevin
                  and others could be alive today’.

01.50     -      WPC Debra Martin ‘I picked him up ... cradled him ... he opened his
                 eyes ... (they) fluttered .... he went ‘Mum” (and then died).

02.50     -      Cook - the police refused to believe her story - but the first statement
                 was 100% the truth - she did what she had never done before and told a
                 lie (Debra Martin nods agreement).

03.30     -      C ook-K evin was pulled out of the stand at 3.28. Two men who
                 carried him across the pitch say he was still alive - so does an off-duty
                 police officer who gave him the kiss of life 20 minutes after he was
                 supposed to be dead. So does Debra Martin, later still.

04.00     -      Sir Malcolm Thornton MP (as was) ‘the tru th seems to have been
                 suppressed - policemen and women on the spot were ‘leaned on’ by
                 their colleagues to change their evidence’.

05.00 -          The ambulance service refused to allow their staff to be
                 interviewed by West Midlands police. Instead, ambulance staff were
                 interviewed by the service’s own solicitors, and sealed copies were
                 kept.

08.00 -          ________________who was trapped against the fence for a quarter of
                 an hour, has sensible things to say about the disaster - police lost
                 control.

09.00 -          Roger Cook tries to talk to Mr Duckenfield, who walks away.

10.30 -          Sheila Coleman (‘official Liverpool researcher’) - ‘the 3.15 cut-off
                 time meant that there was no inquiry into the period post 3.15 when we
                 know the chaos was at its worst’.

11.30 -          Mrs Williams ‘Kevin was still alive at five to four’.




G: \HILLSBOR\MAIN\COOK. 075
 12.00    -        Dr Iain West, pathologist, says Kevin could have been saved by
                   creating an airway below his voicebox - can be done with a pair of
                   scissors.

 13.00 -           Cook - as it was, nobody took control. The fans used advertising
                   billboards as makeshift stretchers to carry the dead and injured away
                   from the crush. This went on for almost half an hour, the period
                   which has never been properly investigated.

                   Sheila Coleman - police let off the hook by the 3.15 cut-off time. It
                   meant that there was no proper investigation into their behaviour. We
                   also have the investigating force creating a picture of events. Kevin
                   Williams didn’t fit into that picture. When he didn’t fit pressure was
                   brought to bear so that witnesses altered statements

                   Cook - if evidence that (Kevin) was alive at five to four had been
                   allowed to stand, events after 3.15 would have had to be investigated.

 15.00 -           Debra Martin describes being browbeaten by West Midlands police.

 16.00 -          Fans who carried Kevin across the pitch say he was still alive.

 17.00 -          Mrs Williams says that PC Bruder has told her he never changed his
                  statement, although West Midlands police tried to get him to.

                  Cook - Bruder had claimed that an ambulance passed him as he was
                  helping Kevin at 3.37. But videos which the police chose to
                  show the Coroner did not show the ambulance. But it is shown on
                  another video - Cook programme has traced the driver.

18.00 -           Tony Edwards (ambulance driver) describes driving over pitch.

18.30 -           Mrs Williams - PC Bruder wondered why he was never called to the
                  Inquest.

19.00 -           Dr Popper (Coroner) - a number of anomalies in Bruder’s evidence
                  including the ambulance - Cook tells Popper he has film of the
                  ambulance - Popper ‘fair enough, but at the time ...’ - other problems
                  with Bruder’s evidence too. Popper does not believe Kevin could have
                  sat up in Debra Martin’s arms and said ‘Mum’.

20.30 -           But James Burns, pathologist, thinks he could have done.

21.50 -           Cook - ‘Kevin was alive, he was recoverable, and he was not alone’.

23.00 -           Sandra Stringer - Coroner said her son (Paul Carlile) was dead by 3.15
                  - but he was still fighting for life then.




G: \HILLSBOR\MAIN\COOK. 075
