                                                             0                                       /?t

SIR CECIL CLOTHIER, KCB, QC                  POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Chairman
                                                                            10 Great George Street       W
                                                                                London SW1P 3AE

           Yr ref: MMR347                                               Telephone: 01-293   273 6400



           3 A C hilcot Esq
           Home O ffice
           Queen Anne's G ate
           LONDON SW1H 9AT                                                       17 April 1989




%
                                                                                                  |&f|
           Thank you for your le tte r of today's date delivered by hand a short tim e ago j

           As you may imagine, we have already given this appalling affair some thought.
           We had concluded th a t an approach from P e te r Wright under Section 88 inviting
           us to supervise his own investigation of the affair might be coming our way and
           th a t la te r com plaints from members of the public might follow and be accepted
           for supervision pursuant to Section 89. This is a very common sequence of
           events for us.

           We had already thought th a t we could hardly be criticized if in all the
           circum stances we deferred any investigation in which we were concerned until
           a fte r the public inquiry was concluded, it being pointless and even undesirable
           for two sep arate sets of people to be carrying on the same task concurrently.

           However, so fa r as Section 88 is concerned, the mechanism you envisage in
           paragraph 3 of your le tte r is som ew hat d ifferen t from anything we have
           previously encountered. It seems to me th a t the need for a civilian presence in
           inquiries conducted by the police would be diminished or even elim inated if the
           police ’inquiry team were to work under the a ltern ativ e supervision of Lord
      *    Ju stice Taylor and his colleagues. But I have yet to speak to Mr Wright on this
           to p ic and only he could in v ite us to be in v o lv ed u n d er S e c tio n 88.

      ?    We have more than once accepted for supervision a Section 88 re fe rra l or a
           com plaint in which the allegation was on the fa c e of things nearer to
           misjudgment than to misconduct, but we have fe lt it in the public in te re st to
           a cc e p t such a com plaint as one the investigation of which the public would wish
           us to witness. This case would fall into a similar category.
