From: Marcia Reid
      Voluntary Services Unit
      Room 1371, QAG

       Tel: 273 2989

       28 November 1994



Mr Smith

CORRESPONDENCE FROM DAVID ALTON MP
THE CASE OF HILLSBOROUGH

Issue
Correspondence from David Alton MP to Virginia Bottomley enclosing one from solicitors
E Rex Makin & Co of Whitechapel, Liverpool who is pursuing on behalf o f _________
       the administration and use of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund.

Timing
2. Routine. David Alton’s letter of 14 October was originally sent to the Department of
Health who forwarded it to the Home Office Voluntary Services Unit on 23 November.

Summary
3. The correspondence refers to the Trustees’ management of funds in particular, and in
general to the principles on which the funds are based. The money raised was placed into
two separate funds. The smaller fund (£2 million) was registered as a charity and the larger
fund (£12 million) was not. It is the use of the larger fund, and the division of funds in this
way i general, to which Mr Altcrand his constituents object. The essence of the previous
correspondence put forward to the PM’s office was that the management of funds which are
not registered as charities is essentially a private matter. The Prime Minister wrote to David
Alton emphasising this, and specifically rejected the need for revisions to trust law. Where
funds are held by a charity Any dispute between the trustees remains for the individual
concerned and the courts to resolve. However, where funds are held by a charity, the
Charity Commission must ensure the funds are administered appropriately. However, with
a non-charitable trust as here, the matter is a private one involving general trust law. The
matter must be pursued through the courts.

4. With reference to the latest correspondence in question, it would appear that it is a
duplicate of what was originally dealt with in briefing provided for the original PM’s
response to Mr Alton (dated 30 August).    Department of Health officials have passed it
around the Department before deciding what and where to send it!!! Hence its late arrival
in the Home Office.

Consideration
6. You may recall that you originally asked me to copy the papers to Bob Parkin and to
draft a reply (to Mr Alton) informing him that the matter was being dealt with by the Charity
Commissioners. As far as I am aware, this is not the case. (This has been verified by
Simon Bucher-Jones who co-ordinated the response to the original correspondence (on file
attached)). As far as the briefing provided was concerned, it recommended that this matter
is a private one, and involves general trust law, and must be pursued through the courts.
The Charity Commission would only be involved if the funds were held by the charity.

Recommendation
5. In view of this, it would appear that nothing more can be added to that already stated
in the PM’s letter. I have therefore, drafted a reply for you to send to Mr Alton, enclosing
a copy of the PM’s letter for his information.




                                                   MARCIA M REID
Thank you for your letter of 14 October to Virginia Bottomley enclosing one from solicitors
E Rex Makin & Company of Whitechapel, Liverpool LI 1HQ about the case of Hillsborough
                          This letter was passed to the Home Office as it has responsibility
for the law on charities and for the general efficiency of the Charity Commission. However,
it has no authority to intervene in the Commissioners’ decisions regarding the day to day
administration of individual charities.


You will recall that the Prime Minister wrote to you on 30 August explaining the position
on private trusts, and I attach a copy of the letter for ease of reference.


Whilst I appreciate the distress being caused to                              issues such as those
raised in the correspondence it is a matter for the courts to ensure that the funds are
administered appropriately.
