                                                    St. Andrew's Ambulance Association
                                                                        In c o r p o r a t e d b y R o y a l C h a r t e r 1 8 9 9
                                                                        P a tro n : H E R M A J E S T Y Q U E E N E L I Z A 8 E T H , T H E Q U E E N M O T H E R .
            Ijoirttl
                                                                        St. Andrew's House, Milton Street, Glasgow G4 OHR.
                                                                        Telephone: 041 332 4031
D lr e c t o r G e n e r a l Si S e c r e t a r y

               F I N L A Y T . M A L C O L M , L L .B .   FJB.IJML
                                                                        O u r R ef.      FIM/ET
A l l c o rre s p o n d e n c e t o be addressed
               * Th e D ire c to r General & S ecretary'.               Y o u r R ef.


                                                                         If   catting ptease ask fo r:            MR. MALCOLM

                                                                                                                   7th June, 1980




R.M. Whalley, Esq,,
Secretary to the Inquiry,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,  SW1H 9AT




 Dear Sir,

                                                      Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry

       I refer to your letter of 23rd ult. and would thank you for giving the
  Association the opportunity to corrment in regard to this matter.  It is hoped
  that the following may be of interest to you.

       The Association is the principal provider of First Aid cover at football
  grounds within Scotland and is currently in dialogue with the Football Authorities
  relative to upgrading the standard of First Aid facilities at stadia within
  Scotland which are the Club's responsibility, and agreeing a formula to reimburse
  the Association for the expenses it incurs in providing the service required.
  It is the intention that, after discussion, guidelines will be drawn up relative
  to the numbers of First Aiders required at different types of game, which the
  Association will undertake to provide, and that the Association w i 11 intensify
   its training programmes relative to major fixtures so that in effect certain
 • standards would require to be iT“2 t before a First Aider cculd be considered for
   duty at such games.   A copy of the relevant correspondence with The Scottish
   Football League is attached (as undernoted) which clearly sets out the current
   position.   It is anticipated that discussions will be conmencing with the League
   on an early date, and a copy of the Survey Report referred to, can be forwarded
   to you if desired.

          You will be aware that in the immediate aftermath of the disaster there was
     considerable press coverage relative to the standards of medical care available at
     football grounds and in view of the misconceptions arising and a number of
     misleading statements being made, the attached letter (as undernoted) detailing
     the role of the First Aider at football grounds, was submitted to and published
     in the Glasgow Herald.   This clearly sets out the Association's view of the
     situat ion.

                      I/. .. .




                                                          We are now on FAX : No 041 332 6582
R.M. Whalley, Esq.                                               7th June, 1989


     I would just make the following additional points for your consideration
1)   As a first contact, the trained First Aider    the expert, and is a vital
     part of the "medical cover" required at football grounds, but he is not, nor
     should he be, the only part.

2)   It is considered that we should not go overboard with talk of doctors, nurses,
     specialist equipment etc. being provided at all football games.    It may
     indeed be desirable to consider provision of permanent specialist equipment
     such as heart defibrillators at certain of the major grounds in Scotland
     such as Hampden, Ibrox and Celtic Park, and doctors could be on hand at such
     games to operate such equipment.    It could also be possible to consider
     training First Aiders in more advanced paramedical techniques.    Rather than
     merely concentrating on providing additional specialist equipment at major
     games however, what is more important is to ensure that a co-ordinatedr plan
     exists involving all the Emergency Services - a system which all the relevant
     people are aware of .and familiar with, whereby casualties can have the
     quickest possible access to any specialist medical treatment required.

3)   The lack of enforcable guidelines relative to standard of First Aid facilities
     at football grounds is obviously not satisfactory.   However, as will be
     seen from the correspondence, the Association is confident that it can reach
     agreement with the Football Authorities on the matter, and has the medical
     expertise to advise on the standard required.

4)   It is submitted that in the light of the proposals put to the Football
     Authorities by the Association, the fact that we are a "voluntary" provider
      of First Aid cover ' is not relevant; we have the resources and the
      expertise to provide a service - a guaranteed service in terms of numbers
      and quality.

5)   It is submitted that all seated stadia should not be regarded as the panacea.
     Whilst provision of such would obviously go a long way towards improving
     safety at football grounds, apart from the enormous expense involved, it
     would not solve the problems outside the ground and the danger periods of
     entering and leaving the ground.

6)   Although outwith the Association's sphere of influence it would appear that
      the initial problems at Hillsborough arose from the large numbers of fans
      without tickets congregating oviiside the ground.   Obviously the answer
      would be to stop such fans getting near the ground itself, and no doubt
      police procedures will be reviewed in this connection in the light of
      Hillsborough, whilst acknowledging the many problems no doubt involved in
      this regard.

      I trust the above comments will be of assistance to you.

                                              Yours faithfully,
R.M. Whalley, Esq.                                                  7th June, 1989




     Note referred to :

     a)   Correspondence with Scottish Football League :

          i)     Letter to Secretary dated 17th April, 1989
          ii)    Letter from Secretary dated 18th April, 1989.
          iii)   Letter to Secretary dated 15th May, 1989
          iv)    Letter from Secretary dated 17th May, 1989.


     b)   First Aid cover at football grounds :

                 Letter to Glasgow Herald dated 18th April, 1989.
                                                FIM/ET



                                                         MR. MALCOLM

                                                         17th April, 1989




James Farry, Esq.,
Secretary,
Scottish Football League,
188 West Regent Street,
GLASGOW, G2




Dear Mr. Farry,

                    First Aid Cover at Football Grounds

     I would advise that since taking up m y post with the Association towards
the end of last year, I have been engaged in obtaining information from all
Company Secretaries of St. Andrew's Ambulance Corps regarding First Aid
facilities in use at football grounds at which the particular Company provides
cover.   M y aim was to build up a picture of the scent nationally with a view
to considering how best to have facilities inproved where required, in
conjunction with the individual Club/S.F.A./Scottish League, as appropriate,
It was also the intention to consider ways of improving the service given
by the Association, w it h regular training sessions and possible grading of
members authorised to attend at, for example, larger and more important games.
I had considered that there wa s a need to centralise the control of such
activities with a v i e w to providing a better service, and once all replies
had been received from Company Secretaries, I was intending to contact the
S.F.A. and yourselves on the matter.

     The week-end's tragic events compel me to write and advise you of such
action which I have been taking.       No-.doubt the S.F.A. and yourselves will
be discussing whether any action requires to be taken in the light of the
disaster, and I w o u l d accordingly be pleased to be involved in any relevant
discussions with you and to make the results of my survey known as soon as
these are available.       In the circumstances, I am taking steps to have
outstanding replies received as quickly as possible.

     I had thought initially that there was a need for St. Andrew's to ensure
that adequate First Aid facilites and cover was provided at all football
grounds where the Corps's services were utilised.   This has now taken on a
new significance and urgency.
James Farry. Esq..                                           17th April. 1989



     I had thought it was likely that adequate First aid cover at football
grounds would at some time in the future be included in legislation.   In the
light of the Hillsborough disaster and the talk of additional legislation
concerning football grounds being considered, this I would have thought is now
a strong possibility.   In any case, I wished to ensure that St. Andrew's, as
the major provider of First Aid cover at football matches in Scotland, w a s in a
position to provide an effective service with sufficient and suitable equipment
throughout Scotland.

      I would accordingly be happy to meet with you to re-assess the situation
in   the light of the Hillsborough disaster and to discuss ways and means of
ensuring that steps are taken to make certain that adequate First Aid cover
with appropriate equipment and facilities, is provided at all football grounds
in Scotland.

      I would also add that I have written to the S.F.A. for their interest
in   regard to matches which come under their control.


                                               Yours sincerely,




                                               DIRECTOR GENERAL
                                                                                             ...   -




                                                                                 Secretary: JA M ES FARRY




The Scottish Football League
188 WEST REGENT STREET, GLASGOW G2 4RY      Telephone: 041-248 3844   Telex: 779312   Telefax: 041-221 7450


   Our Ref.   JF/EW.
   Your Ref. F3M/ET.




              Finlay T. Malcolm, Esq., LL.B.,
              Director General & Secretary,
              St. Andrew's Ambulance Association,
              St. Andrew's House,
              Milton Street,

                                                                              l8th APr i1’ 1989.



              Dear Mr. Malcolm,

                                    First Aid Cover at Football Grounds

                   Thank you very much for your letter of 17th April, and the points
              that you raise are extremely valid and will receive the attention of
              my Management Committee at an early meeting.

                    I will establish further contact with you again shortly thereafter
               and will arrange to liaise with The Scottish Football Association in
               this respect.

                       With thanks for your assistance.




                                                                      Yours sincerely,


                                                                                      OWN—



                                                                           Secretary.




 Address all Correspondence to 'THE SECRETARY'                                  V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4786 52
>> <




                              F*B*I *M*                FTM/ET
                                                       JF/Bi)
                                                                 MR. kWLCOLM

                                                                 15th Nay, 1989




       Jarnzs FaA.nu, Esq.,
       Secretary,
       Thz Scottish Football League,
       1BS iiJzst Regent S tr z z t,
       GLASGOU, Gt 4RV




       Vzar Mi. Farry,

                             First Aid Covzr at Football Ground*

           . Furthzr to my Izit&i of, 17th Apx.it, I now znclosz Ion. youn. attention
       Survzy Report as promiszd.

            I wouid zrnphasisz that this at the momznt is baszd simply on the
       view* of, thz local Companiz-6 who provide thz First Aid covzr at the
       particular grounds.

               Thz Association has its own mzdical zxpzrts who can provide additional
       morz dztailzd information i f rz q u irz d , and would also bz in a position to
       discuss with yourszlvzs thz po ssibility of, a minimum standard of First Aid
       f a c ilit y bzing drawn up, with which Clubs would hopefully bz rzquirzd to
       complyi,

                y ou w i l l notz from thz Survzy that apart from onz or two instanczs thz
       I z v z l of, First Aid fa c ility currzntly in zxistzncz is considzrably bzlow what
       is i z l t to bz an acczptablz standard.             Rzprzszntativzs of thz Association
       would accordingly bz przparzd to mzzt with you on an zarly datz to discuss
       how we might proczzd in thz mattzr, and also thz other mattzrs mzntionzd
       in my z a r l iz r t z t t z r - z. g. training, guidlinzs rz financial assistancz etc.

              You w i l l bz awarz that this wholz mattzr has rzczivzd considzrabtz
        pu blicity in thz mzdia rz c z n tly , and w h ilst 1 apprzciatz that we have the
        closz szason approaching when hopzfully any mzasurzs wz agrzz upon can bz
        implzmzntzd.        1 havz alrzady bzzn adviszd by a number of, nzwspapzrs and
        thz 8 . B.C. that thzy would wish to bz appriszd of, thz rzsults of, thz survey
        oncz known, and of thz outcomz of, discussions with yourszlvzs.

             1 would accordingly rz s p z e tiv e ly suggest a meeting as early as possible
        is required to at least discuss the whole matter.

             1 / __
                                      -   2     -



Jame* Fa* * V .                                                              75th Maty,   1989



     I £oofc {joxwcuid to he.aA.ing piom you.




                                                V ou a   4 ia ith fu lty ,




                                                DIRECTOR GENERAL
                                                                                 Secretary: JAMES FARRY



The Scottish Football League
188 WEST REGENT STREET. GLASGOW G2 4RY   Telephone: 0 41 -2 48 3844   Telex: 779312   Telefax: 041-221 7450


   Our Ref.           JF/LW

   Your Ref.          FTM/ET




                                                                        17th May, 1989

                Finlay T. Malcolm, Esq., LL.B. , F.B.I.M.,
                Director General &. Secretary,
                St. Andrew's Ambulance Association,
                S t . Andrew's House,
                Milton Street;
                GLASGOW, G4 OHR



                Dear Mr. Malcolm,

                               FIRST AID COVER AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

                Thank you very much for your letter dated 15th May, 1989. with
                enclosure, the contents of which I will carefully consider,
                and following upon a Management Committee meeting on 30th May,
                I will establish further contact with you.

                I anticipate that any improvements necessary, following
                upon consultation with member clubs, can be effected, in
                the majority of cases, prior to the commencement of next
                season.

                 I am appreciative of your continued assistance in this
                 respect.

                                         Yours sincerely,




                                              Secretary




 Address all Correspondence to 'THE SECRETARY'                                  V.A.T. Reg. No. 261 4766 52
           ViM e.
                                                    St, Andrew's Ambulance Association
                                                                                 In c o r p o r a t e d b y R o y a l C h a r t e r 1 8 9 9
                                                                                 P a t ro n ; H E R M A J E S T Y Q U E E N E L I Z A B E T H . T H E Q U E E N M O T H E R .



                                                                                 St. Andrew's House, Milton Street, Glasgow G4 OHR.
                                                                                 Telephone: 041 332 4031
D ir e c t o r G e n e r a l & S e c r e t a r y

               F I N L A Y T . M A L C O L M , L L .B .
                                                                                 O u r R e f.        F IM /E T
A l l c o rre s p o n d e n c e t o be addressed
               ' Th e D ire c to r General Si S ecretary'.                        Y o u r R e f.


                                                                                  If   calling please ask for: M R . MALCOLM


                                                                                                                             18th April, 1989




     Letters Editor,
     Glasgow Herald,
     Albion Street,
     GLASGOW,  G1




      Dear Sir,

                                                           First Aid Cover at Football Grounds

            In the light of the tragic events last week-end and in view of some of the
       comments emanating from certain sections of the media as to whether medical care
       at football grounds "should be left in the hands of volunteers", I feel it
       necessary to write and clarify a number of misconceptions and hopefully give
       reassurance on the matter.

             Firstly, it is important to differentiate between "First Aid" and subsequent
        "Medical Treatment".

             First Aid is the first assistance or treatment given to a casualty for
        any injury or sudden illness before the arrival of an ambulance or qualified
        medical expert.   First Aid treatment is given to a casualty

                       a)          To preserve life.
                       b;          To prevent the condition worsening,
                       c)          to promote recovery.

                        In the management of a casualty the First Aider's responsibi 1it;• is to

                        a)          Assess the situation.
                        b)          Identify the condition from which the casualty is suffering.
                        c)          Give immediate appropriate and adequate treatment.
                        d)          Arrange without delay for the disposal of a casualty to a doctor
                                            or hospital.

                 The First Aider is accordingly the initial contact with the casualty and his
            primary responsibi 1 ity in a serious case where he cannot complete the necessary
            treatment himself, is to ensure that person gets appropriate medical attention
            as quickly as possible.

                          The/___




                                                   We     cut   novo o n F A X    :       Nutbzn.            041        332 65&1
                                      -   2   -


Glasgow Herald                                                    18th April, 1989



     The St. Andrew's Ambulance Association, through its Voluntary Corps of some
3,000 members, is the principal provider of First Aid cover at football matches
in Scotland.   All members on duty at football grounds require to hold a current
First Aid Certificate from the Association indicating that he or she is qualified
to render First Aid.    To obtain such a Certificate, indviduals must have
attended a Course of theoretical and practical work and have passed a professionally
supervised examination.    The Certificate also has to be renewed regularly,
ensuring First Aiders are :-

     a)   Highly trained.
     b)   Regularly examined.
     c)   Kept up to-date in knowledge and skill.

     The Association itself is the major authorised provider of First Aid training
in Scotland and all such training handled through its Headquarters in Glasgow is
undertaken by eminent qualified and experienced medical practitioners..

     The subsequent medical treatment of the casualty is something quite different.
The Association will normally have in addition a doctor present at matches, and
he will be contacted as necessary.     Close liaison exists with the Scottish
Ambulance Service, and at larger matches First Aiders are in radio contact with
each other and the First Aid Room at the ground, and an ambulance can be surrmoned
immediately... as required.   A number of ambulances are also in attendance at
larger games.     Specialised equipment such as defibrillators do not fall within
the ambit of the First Aider.     The Ambulance Service has a number fitted within
Ehiergency Ambulance vehicles, and there is a campaign under way to raise additional
funds to have more vehicles so equipped.     However, the Association itself has a
number of Resuscitators for use at major games, and is also obtaining other
equipment considered desirable, such as Aspirators.

     First Aiders accordingly have a crucial and unique role to play in the
provision of safety at football grounds.   However, the position never has been,
nor could it be that such provision is "left to them".   Co-operation with the
other Emergency Services is vital in ensuring provision of a complete service.

This obviously takes on a greater significance in International matches and major
club games where, larger attendances are the norm.    At Hampden fox example, up
to 50 First Aiders can be on duty at ma jor fixtures, positioned in various parts of
the ground and in close radio contact.

     There is however, no room for complacency, particularly in the light of recent
events.    The Association has initiated a survey into First Aid facilities at
the football grounds it covers in Scotland, which are the Club's responsibility,
with a view to assessing whether in our opinion these are adequate, and contact
has been made with the Scottish Football League and the S.F.A. offering to meet
and discuss the whole matter including the standard and extent of equipment
available and in use, particularly at larger games.    Co-ordination of the
Ehiergency Services at such games, including the role of the volunteers, will also
no doubt be further examined and action taken where necessary.

                                                    Yours faithfully,



                                                    D IR EC TO R /GENERAL
             BOV.l
                                                St. Andrew's Ambulance Association
                                                                       in c o rp o r a te d b y R o y a l C h a rte r 1 8 9 9
                                                                       P a tro n : H E R M A J E S T Y Q U E E N E L I Z A B E T H , T H E Q U E E N M O T H E R .


                                                                       St. Andrew's House, Milton Street, Glasgow G4 OHR.
D ir e c to r G e n e r a i & Secre ta ry
                                                                       Telephone: 041 332 4031
            F I N L A Y T . M A L C O L M , L L .B .   F.8.1M.
                                                                       O u r R e f.     FTM /ET
A ll correspon dence t o be addressed
            ' The D irector General & Secretary'.                      Y o u r R ef.


                                                                       If calling please ask fo r:                       MALCOLM



                                                                                                                25th May, 1989




         R.M. Whalle.y, E *q .,
         S&cAdtcviy to the.
         Hill^bohough Inquihy,
         50 Queen Anne. ' 4 Gate.,
         LONDON, SbJ1H 9AT




         Vzan. Sin.,

                                                   HittAboJiough Stadium ViAaAteJi In q u ir y

              1 white, to ack.nowle.dge. Ke.ce.ipt o{, youA Iz t te A o{, 23hd May, and note,
         what you white..

               1 would con{,iw\ th a t 1 should foe happy to phzpahz a w h ittz n *>ubmLt>t>ion
         {,oh coMide.hation by the. Inquihy and w i l l cuihange. to loxwahd by 12th June. .


                                                                                                  Vouaa faithfully,




                                                                                                  VWECTOR GENERAL




                                                  We are now on FAX : No 041 332 6582
