                                                              (iJo


hs.8.17/fla.peb



                                                     3322



                                        17 August 1989



Neil Kinghan Esq
Department of the Environment
Room P3/167
2 Marsham Street
LONDON    SW1P 3EB




FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

Following our meeting on 8 August, we have given further thought
to the effect of clause 13 of the Football Spectators Bill on
section 3 (3), 4 (8) and 5 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975. We have a number of doubts which we think should be put to
Counsel and unless you can provide us with satisfactory
assurances I think we would like to pursue them with Counsel
direct. Our doubts and concerns relate to the possible effect of
clause 13 of your Bill on the consultation and appeals provisions
of the 1975 Act.
Section 3 (3) of the 1975 Act is in practice unlikely to be
affected by clause 13 because the circumstances in which the
Licensing Authority is likely to be interested in the application
for a new general safety certificate will be few and far between.
As we see it section 3 (3) clearly operates to require a copy of
an application for a safety certificate to be sent to the persons
there specified and for those persons to be consulted about the
provisions of the safety certificate. That consultation process
must be complied with before the certificate can be issued and
the Bill's provisions will not cast doubt on that.

We are more concerned about section 4 (8) of the 1975 Act. Our
legal advisers' view is that whilst it might be absurd for a
local authority to consult about provisions they are required to
include in the certificate, it is not obvious beyond doubt that
that absurdity deprives a statutory provision of its effect. If,
of course, as a result of looking at the certificate again
following the notice from the FLA the local authority decide that
other amendments ought to be made       to the    certificate,section
4 (8) would apply as respects those amendments.

Since you have conceded that the Bill should be amended to impose
a duty on the FLA to consult the interested parties we think it
would be reasonable to ask for the provision to also disapply the
obligation to consult under sections 3 (3) and 4 (8) as respects
those   conditions which the FLA,       following the earlier
consultation, require to be included. This would put the matter
beyond doubt.

I understand that it was suggested to us by your Department that
clause 13 has the effect of preventing the persons mentioned in
paragraphs (b)-(d) of section 5 (5) of the 1975 Act from
appealing against conditions which the FLA requires to be
included in a safety certificate, though not the clubs.       If
indeed this is Counsel's view, we would be grateful for a
detailed explanation of the reasons for it.

Our own view is that all of the persons mentioned in section
5 (5) should have the right of appeal as respects conditions
included in a certificate by virtue of a requirement of the FLA.
But we think it would also be sensible to amend section 5 of the
1975 Act so that the FLA can be treated as a party to the appeal
proceedings. We also suggest that the FLA should be added to the
persons who can appeal (to the Crown Court in England and Wales)
under section 5 (3C) and (3D) (as inserted) against the order
made on the initial appeal.       The FLA would then have the
opportunity of arguing its case before the courts even though the
local authority and other interested parties disagree with it.

One of the reasons which influences us in suggesting that a final
decision should be in the hands of the court is the possibility
that the FLA could require the amendment of a provision in a
safety certificate which itself had already been the subject of a
an appeal to the magistrates' court and perhaps the Crown Court.
Since the function of the courts in this respect is to resolve
disputes between persons who disagree and it follows from this
that the determination of the courts is final, it does not seem
particularly sound that the decision of the court should be
capable of being overriden by an executive authority.
I hope that our proposals on consultation and appeals are
acceptable to you.   Perhaps you would like to consider whether
you or we should put them to Parliamentary Counsel.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)
cc   Mr Clayton, LAB
     Mr Osborne, LAB
     Mr Brown
