               states:-


1.   I was born on


2.   I joined SYMAS in May 1982, and I am a qualified ambulance
     man based at Longley.       I attended an initial two week
     training course at Fairfield in Rotherham, and thereafter
     attended a six week residential training course at Markfield
     just outside Leicester.    After one year of service, which is
     really a probationary period,        I obtained the Miller
     qualification.    I followed the six week residential course
     with a further two week driving course at Markfield in
     September 1982.       Since qualification,   I have attended a
     post-proficiency course.    I have no paramedic training.


3.   I was on duty on Saturday 15th April 1989.    My shift started
     at 1000 hours and I was attendant for the day.       Ambulance
     man                  was the driver and our vehicle had call
     sign Sierra 405.      I drove to Longley Station direct from
     home and arrived at approximately 0950 hours.      I recollect
      that the first part of my shift was fairly routine.


4.   At approximately 1300 hours I recall that Control informed
      us to return to Longley.     We were at the Northern General
      Hospital at this time and arrived back at Longley some time
      around 1310 hours.     When we arrived Station Officer Paul
      Eason was already present, whilst Station Officer Higgins
arrived some time shortly afterwards.


                  and I were aware that we were required for
Semi-final duty at Hillsborough.   If there had been no Semi­
final   I would not have worked on Saturday 15th April.-
Station Officer Eason had asked me a few days before the
Semi-final to ascertain whether I would be willing to attend
the match on duty, and I was more than willing to attend.


Prior to leaving Longley, our ambulance vehicle was fully
checked, and in particular we made sure that it was equipped
for   emergency    duties    (see the attached   list).     Mr
            drove the vehicle, I sat in the attendant's seat
and Station Officers Eason and Higgins were sat in the rear.
We left Longley just before 1400 hours, and I recall Station
Officer Eason radioing Control as we were setting off to
Hillsborough.


Our route to Hillsborough took us past Herries Road Bus
Depot, onto Leppings Lane, round by Parkside Road and along
Penistone Road.     We parked in the first corrugated entrance
gate leading to the gym, under the Spion Kop.     The vehicle
was parked over near some fencing.        I recollect Leppings
 Lane was crowded with supporters, and Mr               had to
 drive very slowly through the crowds in order to gain access
 to the ground.   I would say that we arrived at the ground at
 approximately 1410 hours.
As far as I am aware, we were the only SYMAS ambulance
inside the ground, although a St. John's Ambulance vehicle
may have been parked in the ground near to the police

control unit.


    four crew members left the ambulance after parking, and
we all    put on our     fluorescent    yellow jackets.       Mr
                and I were given a short briefing by Station
Officer Eason, namely that we were at the ground for major
incidents and that trivial injuries such as cut fingers,
were to be left to be dealt with by the St. John's Ambulance
Brigade.      Whilst    stood in the area around our parked
vehicle, I recall seeing a number of fans being taken away
by police officers, and quite clearly a number had been
drinking.       Our   emergency   equipment   was   left   in the
ambulance, and at around 1445 hours Station Officers Eason

 and Higgins, Mr                  and I all walked down between

 the North Stand and the Spion Kop and took up our positions
 at a point adjacent to some fencing at the end of the North
 Stand.    We had a full view across the pitch and the West
 Stand.    This was my first time on duty at Hillsborough this
 football season and I did notice a wheelchair ramp adjacent
 to the North Stand although did not pay any particular
 attention to it.      We remained at this point until the start
 of the football match.      I recollect seeing the players come
 onto the pitch, at which point in time there was nothing
untoward happening in the West Stand.


Following the kick of/^ ,1 first noticed some supporters
trying to climb over the fence behind the goal at the West
Stand end of the ground.      Station Officer Eason said he
would go down to that end of the ground to check out the
situation, and both he and Mr                proceeded to walk
down along side the North Stand.         Both Station Officer
Higgins and I remained at our location next to the North
Stand initially, although Mr Higgins then went back towards
the   ambulance,   presumably     to   inform Control   of    the
situation.   This was at 1505 (Track 19 Page 1).    I continued
the monitor the situation at the West Stand end from my
position, and noticed that the number of fans spilling over
the fence onto the pitch were greatly increasing.       At this
point in time, I was not able to see whether the gates to
the fencing behind the goal had been opened.       However, from
my position I did see one supporter come onto the pitch and

collapse inside the goal mouth.


I could also see a couple of fans run over to one of the
Liverpool players, presumably to inform him that there was a
problem within the crowd.       Some more fans came onto the
pitch and began to waive their arms.      I focussed my eyes on
the fans coming onto the pitch, and also continued to look
out for Station Officer Eason and Mr                      .    Mr
Higgins returned to my location very quickly, and at this
time the players were still on the pitch.



Within moments ambulance man ___________     hurriedly came
back to my location an<T said that there were people injured
within the West Stand,.and a couple had possible fractured :
legs.    Mr Chippendale said that the first aid bags were
required,   together with splints and a stretcher cot.    Mr
             and I went to the ambulance to pick up this
equipment, and I instinctively put a bag and mask onto the
cot.    We wheeled the cot down alongside the North Stand as
quickly as possible, at which time the players were nearing
the players tunnel to make their way off the pitch.


Approximately two thirds of the way down alongside the
pitch, we began to pass supporters who were on the pitch.
They were clearly distressed and shocked.     Mr
and I took the cot down to a casualty near one of the goal
posts, who had a suspected fractured leg.     I did not come
across Station Officer Eason at this point in time.       Mr
Chippendale and I managed to get the casualty in a fairly
comfortable position, and Mr Chippendale was able to put a
 splint on the casualty's leg.    At that very same moment I
was requested by a supporter to look at another casualty.
 As I made my way over to this casualty I can specifically
 recall large numbers of hysterical supporters and many
 crying for help.   As I reached this second casualty I found
 him to be on his feet but holding his ribs.          He was
genuinely shocked and winded.    I made a quick examination of
him, made sure he was not in danger and told his friend to
take him up the field and sit him down for relaxation
purposes.   I made this decision because there were clearly

more serious injuries to attend to.


I began making my way back to the goalpost area, although
many supporters continually asked me to look at injured
friends and relatives.   At this stage I did not realise that
a large number of supporters were crushed against the fence
behind the West Stand goal.     However, as I made my way over
to the fence directly behind the goal, I saw for the first
time a number of supporters crushed against the fence.       Some
were in a vertical position and many were clearly dead.         I
did notice one supporter crushed against the fence and who
was in great pain.       I advised him to keep as calm as
possible.   I could not get to him because of the fence and
even if I could get into the pen I would have been walking
on other bodies to get to those I could help.


At this stage, a number of police officers were bringing out
bodies from gate 3 gates.     Whilst some of these people were
 still   alive,   a large number      were   clearly dead.      I
 immediately went back to the cot.       The patient with the
 fractured leg was being cared for by St. John's ambulance
 brigade.   I collected the bag and mask and went back to the
 area where police were bringing out casualties from the
gates.     As the police were laying down bodies on the pitch,
I beg a n    to   try   and vresuscitate   the   casualties.
Unfortunately, none of the casualties I treated had any
pulse, and despite every*effort to resuscitate them, there

was no hope for these people.


At some stage I found Station Officer Eason at that end of
the pitch, and informed him that there were a number of dead
bodies.      Mr Eason was actually trying to use his radio
handset,     but was obviously having problems contacting
control.     I then proceeded back into the melee of crowds on
the pitch in an effort to resuscitate even more people using
my bag and mask,        whilst police officers gave cardiac

massage.


I recall seeing one large man being brought out through the
gates, and although still breathing, was clearly breathing
in a bad way.      I told the police officers who were carrying
this man to lay him on his side, and with the help of the
police I helped to put this man onto an advertising hoarding
and then a group of supporters carried him down the pitch
towards the gymnasium area.      I knew this was the designated

 area for casualties.


 I lost all track of time whilst I was on the pitch, although
 within a fairly short time I noticed a number of other SYMAS
 ambulance men on the field attending to casualties.     I also
recall at some stage seeing a St. John's ambulance vehicle
driving down alongside the North Stand and onto behind the
goal to collect casualties.        I also saw a SYMAS vehicle J-
driven by 1       1 and         come across the pitch to pick

up casualties.


At a later stage, I came across Station Officer Eason again,
who was still having problems with his radio handset.         I
then ran back to our ambulance vehicle, and at this time I
noticed that a lot of supporters were clearly angry and were
hurling abuse at the police.     The police had actually formed
a cordon across the pitch, obviously to prevent supporters
going up to the Nottingham Forest end.          I was allowed
through the cordon by the police and when I got back to the
ambulance I collected a radio.     On my way back to Mr Eason I
came across Alan Hopkins who was making his way towards the
Leppings Lane end.        We found Mr Eason together near the
goalmouth and Mr Eason began to advise him in detail of the

situation.


I proceeded to attend even more casualties, although it is
very difficult to remember exactly how many casualties I
treated.     Somehow I worked my way back to the ambulance at
 some stage, and saw Mr Eason who was helping an asthmatic
patient.     I took this patient off Mr Eason and assisted him
 back to our ambulance.     When we arrived back at the vehicle
 I noticed that there was a casualty already inside the rear
on a stretcher cot, and I recollect seeing a doctor and two
other people trying to resuscitate this person.   I put the
asthmatic casualty into Jfche attendant's seat in the cab as
the second cot in the vehicle was nowhere in sight.


Mr              then returned to the ambulance on his own,
and I told him to get into the vehicle.     I got into the
driver's seat and drove the vehicle as quickly as possible
up to the Northern General Hospital.     I made a point of
continually talking to the casualty sat in the attendant's
seat to make sure that he was conscious, even though he had
difficulty    in breathing. ' We actually had a police
motorcyclist escort up to the Northern General and, within a
matter of minutes, had arrived at casualty department.    As
soon as I brought the vehicle to a halt, the rear doors were
opened and medical teams were waiting to receive both
casualties.    The stretcher patient,    who was the more
seriously injured was immediately taken into the hospital
with Mr              in assistance.   I asked for a nurse to
come over and assist with the asthmatic patient sat in the
attendant's seat,   and with the help of this nurse the
asthmatic was helped into the casualty department.       When
assisting with this casualty, I came across Mr Wardrope, an
Accident and Emergency Consultant, and Mr Wardrope told me
to take the asthmatic patient into a cubicle where hospital

staff took over.
22.   I went   back    to   the    ambulance   and    met    up with Mr
                      We loaded two cots back into the rear of the
      vehicle and I drove dijrectly back to Hillsborough.          We did
      not bother radioing Control because we knew that we were
      required at the ground.        I drove back down Penistone Road
      and into the ground.        I actually reversed into the ground
      under the guidance of Mr                 .1    also recollect that
      Alan Hopkins was also directing vehicles into the ground at
      this time.   I parked the vehicle just inside the entrance to
      the ground, and immediately proceeded to the gymnasium with
      a cot in order to collect another casualty.           When I arrived
      at the gym, I quickly collected a casualty, and received a
      quick assessment of his injuries by a doctor in attendance.
      This particular casualty had chest injuries, a possible
      broken arm, and he was also on a drip.          He was helped onto
      the stretcher cot and I wheeled the cot back to the
      ambulance.


23.   When I arrived back, Mr                  was already in the rear

      of the vehicle with another casualty.            I received some
      assistance to put the second cot and patient into the

      ambulance.      Mr                remained in the rear of the
      vehicle whilst I got back into the driver's seat.           As I was
      driving off I noticed                          in the     immediate
      vicinity, and asked him which hospital I should take the
      casualties too.       At this time, some ambulances were being
      directed to the Royal Hallamshire and I was directed to this
hospital.


I had a fairly clear run to the Royal Hallamshire because
the police were ate every junction to clear the road, and
t he   journey   took    approximately    10   minutes   from
Hillsborough.    We were directed to the clinic entrance
where the not so seriously injured were being dealt with,
whilst cardiac arrest patients were taken into the casualty
department.   I was assisted by another ambulance man to off
load one patient from the ambulance and Mr
continued to attend the other casualty in the rear.   By this
time the casualty I was taking into the hospital had been
diagnosed as having a fractured arm and chest injuries, but
he was conscious.       Once I had informed a nurse of the

casualty's injuries, medical staff took over.


I proceeded back to my ambulance vehicle       and assisted Mr
              to bring the other casualty into the hospital.
Mr                and I loaded the casualty onto a hospital
trolley, wheeled him into the hospital, where medical staff

took over.


Mr               and I then loaded the two cots back onto the

 ambulance, and as we were loading the second cot we came

 across                   the Standards and Efficiency Officer

 who was Liaison Office at the Hallamshire, who told us to
 park up on Netherthorpe Road and await further instructions.
We contacted Control, informed them that we were going down
to Netherthorpe Road on standby as requested.     Netherthorpe
Road is only approximately half a mile away from the Royal t

Hallamshire.             ^ ~ '


We were the first ambulance to park up on Netherthorpe Road,
followed by a number of other vehicles very shortly
afterwards.     We then received a call from Control and were
advised to relocate at Herries Road Bus Depot, again on
standby.      When we arrived at the Bus Depot there were a
number of other ambulance vehicles present.     At this point,
we were able to have a short break and relax for a few

minutes.


Station Officer Eason then informed all crews at the Depot
that all injured casualties had been removed from the
football ground and there only remained fatalities in the
gymnasium.     Mr Eason directed the first three ambulances to
the gymnasium inside the ground, and ours was one of these
vehicles.      I would say that the time was approximately 1740
hours.      I assumed that we were being directed down to the
ground in order to remove bodies.     We drove into the ground
 at point marked C on the attached plan and pulled up just
 adjacent to the gymnasium.        At this   stage one or two
 ambulance men were coming round each vehicle requesting body
 bags and were taking the bags into the gymnasium.
29.   Mr               and I remained at this point for some time
                                                                      ^■4
      before              briefed all ambulance crews within our

      vicinity.   Mr      enquired as to which crews were on which $

      particular duties, and ^s-our shift was 1000   to 1800 hours.
      Mr Jones advised that we were stood down from duty, and were
      told to return to base.    I drove back to Longley with Mr
                   ], arriving back just after 1830 hours       The
      vehicle was refuelled, we made a note of missing equipment

      and then signed off at 1840 hours.




Signed .




Dated      "f           /P f
    3 1 -“0 5 - 1 5 8 9                            3       I               • n« luuum ivi- ww. •.




                                                                                                                         Reg. No

                                Commencing                                                                              Fleet No.

                   LIST ITEMS                                                                       MON   TUES ‘ WED   THUR   FRI   SAT   SUN"

                   Oxygen     F. 3/4 1/2 1/4

                   Entonox F. 3/4 1/2 1/4

1                  Suction Unit
i
j                  Resusitator (Robert Shav/M.man)
I                                  «   _   _   _   _   _   _   _   _   _   _   _   _   _   _

I                  Frac Splints
i
j                  Bag and Ma3k

                    Chloride Tablets (6)

                    02 Masks

                    Blankets (x 6)

                   PiTiovs (x 2)

                   Maternity Pack

                   Waterproof Sheets

                    Burns Sheet

                   Nursing/Barrier Gown

                    Green Sheets (3 )

                    Carrying Sheets

                    Cervical Collar

                    Bed Pan

                    Urine Bottle

                    Vomit Bowl

                    Bucket and Lid

                    Air Freshener Spray

                    First Aid Box

                    Carrying Chair x 1

                    Scoop Stretcher x 1
                            b   Y U K K b . H I 'I B U U M l 'i'- c .   w t - r w i y .i_
31-05-1989 15:45




                                                                   1     f,

                                                                                                           Reg. No

                   Conmencing                                                                             Fleet No.

       LIST ITEMS                                                                MON        TUES   WED   THUR   FRI   SAT   SON

       Oxygen     F. 3/4 1/2 1/4

       Entonox F. 3/4 1/2 1/4

        Suction Unit

        Resusitator (Robert Shaw/M.man)

        Frac Splints

        Bag and Mask

        Chloride Tablets (6)

        02 Masks

        Blankets (x 6)

        Pillows' (x 2)

        Maternity Pack

        Waterproof Sheets

        Burns Sheet

        Nursing/Barrier Gown

        Green Sheets (3)

        Carrying Sheets

        Cervical Collar

        Bed Pan

        Urine Bottle

        Vomit Bowl

        Bucket and Lid

        Air Freshener Spray

         First Aid Box

         Carrying Chair x 1

         Scoop Stretcher x 1
