      Ext 2199
      4 May 1989                                   cc       Ms Adams
                                                            Mr Chilpot
                                                                 Up
                                                            n JY K -'lU Y
                                                            Mr Boys Smith


                                           S   '        *   i'u   o a u u n u iu
                                               ^        Mr Naglet
                                                   n % Mr Whalley
                                                   ^   'Mr Waghorn
                                                                                  ■■




ME~gfcQLV
                                                                            . .

                                                                                       ■   '-.--'.rtf   ' . i ' ;.


HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST


Sir Clive Whitmore has seen Mr Addison's
to you covering draft letters to the West Midlands and
South Yorkshire Police Authorities.

Mr Addison was not of course aware when putting forward his
submission of the way matters developed over the weekend of the
disaster.  The Home Secretary will recall that our original
intention was that Mr Dear should act as assessor to Lord
Justice Taylor; this was agreed with Mr Wright by early Sunday
morning.  During Sunday Mr Wright came under increasing pressure
to announce a police inquiry by an independent force into
policing aspects and the Home Secretary agreed during his visit
to Sheffield that Mr Wright should announce that Mr Dear would
undertake this inquiry.  It was subsequently decided that this
made it inappropriate for Mr Dear to act as assessor and Mr
Johnson was approached in his place.  However to avoid
duplication of work it was agreed that Mr Dear would make
available to Lord Justice Taylor the findings of his own
investigation into policing aspects.

For these reasons Sir Clive Whitmore feels that it would be
preferable to amend the second sentence of the second paragraph
of the draft letter to the Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police
Authority to read as follows:

     "The costs of the inquiries being undertaken by the
     West Midlands police are, however, a different matter since
     those inquiries were started at the initiation of the
     Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and are being undertaken
     for reasons connected with policing in South Yorkshire,
     although it was agreed at the time they were launched that
     their results would be made available to Lord Justice
     Taylor."




                                      top
