From: Paul Pugh                                      cc:     Sally Weston, LAB
      Operational Policing Policy Unit
      Room 529 QAG
      0171-273 3141

       6 February 1997


Sue McDougall


HILLSBOROUGH

This note confirms our discussions about how to take forward the work on requests
for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. We have now received a full report
from South Yorkshire Police: a copy of the Chief Constable’s letter and my reply are
attached. I have passed to you separately a copy of all the supporting documentary
material, of which copies are attached for Sally Weston. I have put up a brief
submission reporting to Ministers that we have received this material. I have also
spoken to Stephen Wooller in the Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers, and I agreed
that I would forward to him a copy of all the material. At his request, I will also
forward a copy separately to Mr Peter Pearson in CPS headquarters in York. I
suggested to Stephen Wooller that we might aim to be in a position to discuss what
advice we might offer to Ministers at the beginning of March. This is an ambitious
timetable, given the volume of material, but I hope not hopelessly unrealistic. One
important consideration will be whether Sally will be able to give the matter sufficient
attention in that time - 1 realise that there is much pressing work on legislation. But I
do not think that we will be able to put advice to Ministers without assuring them that
we have consulted legal advisers.

2.     I am arranging for the two video tapes to be copied and will pass on copies as
soon as they are available.

3.     I have not yet studied any of the material, and I am not therefore able to give
any steer yet about what views we might come to. But some of the obvious questions
which we will need to answer include:

        (i)     have South Yorkshire Police provided full and adequate answers to the
                 “ten unresolved questions” posed by the television programme?

        (ii)    are the explanations about the video evidence full and unequivocal?

        (iii)   are there any matters on which we might advise Ministers to
                 commission further inquires, either from South Yorkshire Police or
                 from any other source?

        (iv)    how much of the material provided by South Yorkshire Police can be
                 made available to those who have made representations?


PP-0096.pg
4.      When we are approaching the point where we might have reached some
conclusions, we will need to consider with Press Office how any conclusions should
be communicated to the families, the MPs, South Yorkshire Police and other parties
directly involved (Mr Duckenfield?).




                                   PAUL PUGH
