$■                                                               J )c ^ A

 Fronr. Jim Bradley                                                             cc      Home Secretary
        Police Resources Unit                                                           David Omand
        Room 614                                                                        John Lyon
        273 2996                                                                        Sir David O'Dowd
                                                                                        Jonathan Duke-Evans
                   26 October 1999                                                      Richard Komicki
                                                                                        Clare Stocks
                                                                                        Ed Owen
                                                                                        Justin Russell

 M r C larke



 S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E POLICE: M E E T I N G W I T H P O L I C E A U T H O R I T Y
 ( H I L L S B O R O U G H C O ST S)

 Issue

 A meeting with the South Yorkshire Police Authority to discuss their request for
 additional funding to help with legal costs and compensation payments to victims o f
 the Hillsborough football disaster in 1989. A letter o f support from the Chief
 Constable is at Annex A.

 T im in g

 2.     The meeting is on Tuesday, 2 Novem ber at 12.20 pm. You asked for briefing
 by today.

 Sum m ary

 3.               The South Yorkshire Police Authority will be represented by:-

                                     Councillor C Swindell                  -   Chairman o f the Authority
                                     Mr M Hedges                            -   C h ief Constable
                                     Mr I Daines                            -   Assistant C h ief Constable
                                     Mr B Wilkinson                         -   Clerk & Treasurer



 4.     The South Yorkshire Police Authority have asked for this meeting to discuss
 the possibility o f an application for special financial assistance to meet the growing
 additional costs that the police authority is incurring in respect o f compensation
 payments to victims and for the defence costs o f two former officers, Mr Duckenfield
 and Mr Murray. These costs are, in the opinion o f the Authority, beginning to affect
 the force's ability to police South Yorkshire. The Police Authority are not expecting a
 decision next week on whether Ministers would be minded to approve a special
 payment. This is an opportunity for them to put forward their case.

 5.     A background briefing paper prepared by the police authority is at Annex B.
 Further briefing and lines to take are attached at Annex C.




 B r i e t i n g / S Y P A H i l l s b o r o u g h m e et in g
R e c o m m e n d a tio n

6.     That you use the briefing provided as appropriate, and make no commitment
to providing financial assistance to the Authority.



R esource Implications

7.     There is no centrally held pot o f m oney available to meet contingencies o f this
sort. ACPO and APA are opposed to m oney being top-sliced from police grant for
these purposes. The police authority seem to be aware o f this as they have asked, as
an alternative to direct funding, for a different type o f assistance. There are powers in
local government finance legislation enabling the Secretary o f State to direct that
certain revenue expenditure to be incurred by an authority can be treated as capital
expenditure. This is part o f the Authority’s request and is relatively straightforward.
But the second part o f their request is for credit approval - ie authority to borrow
money - which is less straightforward. Supplementary Credit Approvals (SCA) are a
form o f Treasury currency to local and police authorities and are strictly limited.
Credit approvals attract revenue funding to support the debt. We have around £50m
worth o f SC As for distribution to forces next year. They will all expect their due
share. W e are therefore unlikely to have spare SCAs available for South Yorkshire.

H andling/presen tation al issues

8.     The Hillsborough disaster remains a very sensitive issue Liverpool. The
Hillsborough Family's Support Group has already challenged the right o f the police
authority to meet the legal defence costs o f the two former police officers. It is not
inconceivable that they may seek to challenge a special payment to the South
Yorkshire Police, should one be made.




                                                                   Jim B radley




i i r i e l i n g / S Y P A I l il l s b o r o u g h m e et in g
                                                                                               s       c, .c _
             South Yorkshire
                                                                                                             P\

             P O L IC E                                                       M I I H e d g e s QPM l l b
             ■I l.’ S T I C K   u i t h   CO
                                           (> U
                                              (; K AC
                                                 h a c kK   ' i   ^   \                  C h ief Constable



ACC/ID/VB
                                                                                     J   .    s *            /    .
29 September 1999                                                         *
                                                                                                   y              —


The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




H illsb o ro u g h Stadium Disaster, 15 A p ril 1989 - Financial Im p lica tions

On 10 September 1999, the Chair of the South Yorkshire Police Authority, wrote to you
on the above subject. I write to add my support to those issues which he raised with
you.

The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster continues to have a significant financial impact
upon this Force more than 10 years after the event. South Yorkshire Police, in
common with many public services, face difficult financial decisions but we have
managed to be one of the few police forces that continues to maintain recruitment of
police officers. This, will become increasingly difficult to maintain in view of all the
financial pressures we face.

At the time of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, South Yorkshire Police had a public
 liability insurance with a limit of £8.5 million. At the time that was regarded as more
than adequate. With the wisdom of hindsight we can see that it was inadequate, and
as a result of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, a number of public bodies significantly
increased their public liability insurance. Our insurance limit was reached within a few
years of the disaster and since then the Force has been settling claims for damages
from our own funds. As quoted by Lord Justice Stuart Smith in his scrutiny report, up to
February 1998 £13.5 million worth of compensation had been paid. The number of
remaining claims is small but their potential cost to the Force is significant. It has not
been possible to settle these claims because the medical prognoses for the victims are
uncertain. These people have suffered terrible injuries which necessitate a lot of
professional help and in some cases permanent attendance of caring staff. With the
advance of medical knowledge, they may live longer than would have been the case in
the past. Therefore, the cost of treating and caring for them for the rest of their lives is
greater and this increases the cost of settling their claims.
29 September 1999

The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State




In recent weeks I have received claims for damages from three people who have
previously made no claim. I do not know whether others will be made but they are
represented by the same firm of solicitors and are receiving legal aid. In each case we
are asking that the claimant explain why it has taken 1 0 years for the claim to be made
as, at first sight, it would appear that they are outside statutory limitations. These new
claims could add another half a million pounds to the cost of the disaster if they
succeed.

The costs of settling civil claims arising out of this ten years old disaster are an
exceptional case and represent a significant burden upon the Force finances. It is for
this reason that I seek your support by way of special grant to enable me to meet these
legal obligations without significant impact upon my ability to police the community of
South Yorkshire.

On the day of the disaster over 1,000 police officers were on duty. A handful made
claims for damages against the Force, alleging that they had been traumatised and that
the Force had negligently caused that situation. My predecessor was given legal
advice that the first group of claimants would succeed in their action and he was
advised to settle out of court which he did. The claims of the next group of officers
were resisted and I contested the case all the way to the House of Lords, which ruled
against the officers. I mention this because it is sometimes falsely alleged that
spectators who suffered injury received no compensation whilst police officers have
been compensated handsomely.

Another burden on the Force’s finances, arising from the Hillsborough Stadium
 Disaster, has arisen in the last 15 months. This has been caused by the private
prosecution brought by the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) against retired
Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield and retired Superintendent Bernard Murray.
The evidence against Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield was considered by the Director of
Public Prosecutions in 1990 and he ruled that they should not be prosecuted. Lord
Justice Stuart Smith’s scrutiny report found no fault in that decision. In June 1998, the
HFSG’s solicitor, Ms Ann Adlington, began prosecutions against these two long retired
officers for alleged offences of manslaughter and other charges arising out of the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray asked the Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP) to protect them, against what they believe to be a malicious
prosecution, by taking over that prosecution and ending it. The DPP declined to
intervene.

Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield asked the Police Authority to fund their legal costs in
defending themselves. I supported that application because I believe it important for
the operational effectiveness of the service. Officers should know that, when they
perform their difficult and sometimes dangerous duties on behalf of the public and
make immediate decisions in good faith which can have a crucial impact upon people's
liberty and lives, they will be able to look to their ‘employer' for financial support if they
face legal challenge. This particular case is all the more acute because of:
 29 September 1999

 The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
 Secretary of State




 (a) the 1 0 year gap between the event and the prosecution,
 (b) the private nature of the prosecution,
 (c) the expectation that no prosecution would be brought (bearing in mind previous
     decisions of other tribunals).

 Initially the Police Authority resolved to support the two retired officers but later
 received legal advice that questioned whether they had the power to do so. I decided
 to seek clarification from the High Court which ruled that the Police Authority does
 have such power. That legal action accrued bills for the Police Authority and I.

Mr Murray and Mr Duckenfield sought a judicial review of the Director of Public
Prosecutions’ decision not to intervene and were supported financially by the Police
Authority in that action. The High Court upheld the DPP’s decision but required him to
look afresh at one of the charges against Mr Duckenfield (an alleged offence of
attempting to pervert the course of justice). The DPP looked at this again and quashed
that charge only.

The Leeds Stipendary Magistrates committed Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray to Crown
Court for trial on the remaining charges. On 2 September 1999, Mr Duckenfield and Mr
Murray appeared before His Honour Judge Hooper to find that the private prosecutor
has re-instated the charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice. They have
entered not guilty pleas.

The South Yorkshire Police Authority agreed to pay the former officers’ legal costs up
to and including the committal. Now that the officers have been committed for trial they
will be applying to the Authority to fund their legal costs to defend themselves at the
Crown Court. The trial is likely to last up to seven weeks and could involve legal costs
of another one million pounds. The authority will decide soon whether to fund the
officers.

The exceptional nature of the impact of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster of
15 April 1989 continues to affect the Force’s finances in ways that could not have been
foreseen and impose upon the Force a financial burden which reduces my ability to
provide the people of South Yorkshire with the policing service that I would like and that
they deserve.

I support the request by the Chair of the Police Authority for a meeting to discuss an
application for financial support towards Hillsborough Stadium Disaster related costs.

Yours sincerely




IVi i i n e u y e s
Chief Constable
                                                                                        p
S outh Yorkshire Joint 8*cn>tar1«t
P O Box 37. Regent Str«*t                              ^^
Barn»lev. South Yorkshire S70 2PQ
F t t : B«rn«t«y
W.J Witdnron. BAffconJ. CPfA Clerk and Tret lurer                _

                                                                                                             f      'T r
                                                                                                     SOUTH          Y O R K S H IR E
Our ref      WJW/VS                                        ^         ^                         / /                      POLICE
                                                                             /J ^ *                      ,           AUTHORITY
Your r*f                                                                    ^                        ^ -----• <Sj


Dale       21 October 1999                                  S'

Thi* matter is being d»*lt with by   Bill \A/ilkin   10D                         Direct Line


                                                                                 j                           Cs>—         -
Chris Michael                                                        /      ^
Office of Charles Clarke MP                                                     ^                            cS<L r
Room 772                                                                                         '   \
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON SW1H9AT

BY FAX AND POST

Dear Ms Michael

HILLSBOROUGH : FINANCIAL IMPL 1CA TfONS                                                              j
BRIEFING PAPER FOR HOME SECR iTARY

The Chairman of the Authority wishi is to thank the Minister for agreeing to meet representatives
of the Authority on 2 November.

In connection with the meeting. I endose a briefing paper on the two issues which the Authority
wishes to discuss. I have prepared tjuite an extensive note on the mattef of the Authority meeting
the defence costs of the former officers, asthis willprovide         the (Minister with additional
background if at some future state, he is asked furtherquestions in thehouse about the
situation. The papers should be re id in conjunction with the earlier letters from myself and the
Chief Constable.                                                         j



The South Yorkshire delegation on :! November will comprise a maximuln of 5 people - Clarence
Swindell (Chairman); Mike Hedges (Chief Constable); Ian Daines (Assistant Chief Constable),
and myself. There may be a seconc member of the Authority who will join the delegation.

Please contact me if you require anything further.

Yours sincerely



Bill Wilkinson
Clerk and Treasurer

Enc

Copies to:             Councillor C Swindell (Chairm an)                 Mr D R'QQ (District Auditor)
                       Mr M Hedges (Chief ( lonstable)                   Ms M Oades (Assistant Clerk)
O U Li I ' I   i u l   K   I I i   C




     SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY

     Hillsborough - financial Im plication*

     Briefing paper for Home Qvfice




     Introduction
      The Authority's submission is in two parts.


     Part 1 relates to costs incurred as a result o f the Authority's decision to fund
     the legal defence costs o? the two former officers facing private criminal
     prosecutions arising out o f their actions on the day o f the disaster.       The
     Authority is following up an issue raised earlier this year by the Rt Hon David
     Blunkett, who referred, in 3 letter to the Minister, to the financial impact on
     South Yorkshire Council Tl x payers, and whether Home Office funding could
     be made available.     The papers provide a brief history of Hillsborough; a
     summary of the factors which led the Authority to make support available;
     the financial implications to date; and the basis for the Authority seeking
     financial support from other parties.


     Part 2 relates to liabilities for damages to persons who were injured,
     Although the background notes are less extensive, this is the Authority's
     principal concern, because o f the existing scale o f unins Ured liabilitiesr and
     the recent prospect o f even more cases coming to light
Part 1 : D e f e n c e c o s t s o f f >rmer o f f i c e r s

1.1      B ackground

         Original decision Feb ua r y 1 9 9 8

         This followed publtc&lion of the findings of Lord Justice Stewart Smith s
         scrutiny for the Hom< Secretary, which concluded that there was no new
         evidence, in the ligM of that, DPP had taken no further action. The
         immediate response of HFSG was to announce that they intended to take
         out private prosecutic ns, and on reporting this to members it was felt that
         there should be a cl ja r statement that the Authority would stand by its
         former officers Menibers took into a c c o u n t their p re v io u s stance at the
         Inquest and consistontly since 1989, and also the DPP s successive
         decisions that there were no criminal charges to answer. It was resolved
         subsequently to offi r 'reasonable' legal support towards any private
         prosecutions which .night follow       The £0.5m which the Authority had
         originally earmarked in August 1997 for costs m connection with the
          Scrutiny was identified to provide funding

         J u n e /Ju ly 1 9 9 8

         Private prosecutions were commenced by Ann Adlington       Each of the
         former officers was charged with two counts of manslaughter and one
         count of wilfully neg'scting to perform a public duty One of the former
         officers faced a charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice,
         although this charge was eventually withdrawn in April 1999 The DPP
         was invited to take over the conduct of the private prosecutions and to
         discontinue them      On 19 December 1998, the DPP announced his
         decision not to take ever and discontinue the charges

         L a t e 1 9 9 8 / earl y 1 9 1 9

          The issue of Police Authority powers to fund defence costs in criminal
          proceedings was rai led. Mo specific powers exist, and the Authority is
          reliant on its general duty under Section 6 of the Police Act, and the
          supplementary pow e' available to it under S111 of the Local Government
          Act Counsel’s advice was sought, and subsequently the Authority
          appointed indepencent legal advisers             The Clerk and Treasurer
          suspended further pjym ents until the issue was clarified A full report was
          presented to the Authority on 5 February; the Authority’s advisers felt that,
          on balance, there w j s sufficient doubt about the existence of powers to
          raise the possibility of a successful challenge However, recognising that
          there were strong co-inter views - principally from the legal advisers to the
          Chief Constable - it v a s resolved to seek a ruling from the Court

          March 1999

          The Divisional Court ruled that Police Authorities do have the necessary
          powers, but each case must be considered on its merits The Divisional
          Court ruled on two natters First, it decided that police authorities may, in
principle, decide to fu id officers and former officers/ legal representations
in proceedings on he grounds that to do so is conducive to the
maintenance of an el/icient and effective police force in its area, but the
Court made it clear th j t each case must be considered on its merits

In a separate action heard by the Court at the same time. Mr Duckenfield
and Mr Murray s o u jh t judicial review of the DPP s decision not to
intervene in the prosucution The Divisional Court decided that the DPP s
decision not to take o /e r the prosecution of the charges against the former
officers was lawful, s ive in respect of the charge of attempting to pervert
the course of justice, which the DPP was directed to \reconsider. On 12
April 1999, the DPP Hecided that he would take over and discontinue this
charge

2 7 M a y 1999
                                                              \


The Authority met to ronsider the whole issue of support afresh, in the light
of a comprehensive report prepared by Garretts itd independent legal
advisers. The outcome of the meeting was:             j

(i)      confirmation o        previous offers of support, subject to a review by a
         costs draftsma       n of the reasonableness of the costs to be claimed,
(n)      agreement to         und to the conclusion of the corpmittal proceedings,
         subject to a fo      mal agreement indicating the level of representation
         the Authority *      ould fund and the maximum costa to be reimbursed.

Issues considered by the Authority in reaching these decisions included.

•     the belief that while mistakes were made, the officers acted in good
      faith

•     the officers were on operational duty at the time of tjhe incident

•     as a general proposition, police officers need to kn;ow that if they act in
      good faith and even if errors are made, their Authority will stand by
      them

•     the alternative of legal aid would have required substantial personal
      contributions fronr. the officers' capital and income

•     the morale of current serving officers in South Yorkshire and elsewhere
      would be affected by a decision not to support

•     the Divisional Courts comments on the               powers   issue,   and   the
      implications of Heme Office advice

•     the fin a n c ia l impa zi on th e A u th o rity


•     the need to con:rol legal costs expenditure from public funds m a
      corresponding mi inner to the Legal Aid Board
1.2     Q u t c p p e o f C o m m i t »1     *P J u l v 1 9 9 9

                          Mag strate c o n c lu d e d that there was a case to answer,
        T h e S tip e n d ia r y
        and was not persuadt d by the officers' arguments on abuse of process' (le
        in relation to the elapsed time since 1989. and that the level of public
        comment on the cast precluded a fair trial). This issue is being pursued
        by the officers, and t hearing with the Circuit Judge has been granted in
        December 1999

1.3     Applications for             port

        The Authority’s commitment to support ended at the conclusion of the
        committal proceedings       Further applications are awaited in connection
        with the trial (schedutad for June 2000).

1.4     Costs
                                                                         |
1.4.1   The present position is as follows:
                                                                  £000   !     £000
         Costs to 5 February ,999                                 279    ;
         Costs to 20 July 199? ‘                                  326    |
         Costs in connection v/ith Judicial Review                 64          669
                                                                  ----   ii
         Chief Constable’s le^al costs                                          100
         Police Authority lega. costs                                           186

                                                                               955

         This figure will red-ice by approximately £100,00Q if the Authority is
         allowed to recover V VT, and at this stage it takes no ^ccount of reductions
         arising out of the c o its draftsman’s review In the perjod to 5
         has put forward recommendations that the Authority seeks a reduction of
         £37,000 (13%) in tht former officers’ legal costs.

         The Authority has iri total set aside £1m to cover costs already paid out
         and under review.

 1 4 2 Apart from clarifying the VAT issue the Authority is also seeking
       confirmation from tha Tax Inspector that payment of j legal costs does not
       constitute a taxable benefit for the former officers. This issue has on y
       been raised recenth by tax specialists consulted by the Authority Case
       law on the subject is unclear The Authority’s legal advisers have put
       forward a strong case to the Tax Inspector that there is no taxable benefit
       accruing If the rulir.g is contrary to this, then subject to appeal there could
       be substantial additional costs for the Authority and/or the officers.

 1 4 3 The costs have so lar been funded from reserves                   Options for the future
          include:

          •    further calls on r ‘ serves
          •    budget reductions
        •         raise additional cash via the precept
        •         seek contributions or funding from other sources

1 4 4   |f the former officers sre tried but acquitted, or the charges against them
        are dismissed or otherwise do not proceed to trial in the Crown Court, an
        order for costs in their favour to be paid out of central funds will be made
        unless there are posi ive reasons for doing so eg where their conduct has
        brought suspicion or themselves, or where there is ample evidence to
        support a conviction hut they are acquitted on a technicality

1 4 5 Legal aid was not available to the officers for the judicial review
      proceedings in which they became involved; nor will it be available
      retrospectively in the criminal proceedings Furthermore, legal aid would
      only be made available to the officers upon their making substantial
      contributions from thuir income and assets, namely £1 for every £3 or part
      thereof by which the average weekly disposable income exceeds £50, and
      the amount by which their disposable capital exceeds £3,000

1.5     Basis of the Author tv’» application for support

        The facts of this cast relate to South Yorkshire, but the principles behind it
        could apply anywher j . This was the basis of the Divisional Court hearing.
        Police officers need jssurances that if they act in good faith       inoperational
        circumstances, then their Police Authority willsupport them if they are
        challenged.

            In this context, it is a widely held precedent in both public and private
            sectors that when a.i employee is engaged on his normal duties, but his
            actions result in los ;, damage, or injury, then the employer will stand by
            him as long as the e is no suggestion of deliberate or wilful action or
            neglect If there is a question of whether proper procedures were followed,
            this is an entirely jeparate matter to be dealt with under disciplinary
            procedures. This was the process which commenced on Hillsborough,
            until ill health rules intervened. Police officers are not 'employees - they
            are servants of the Crown. The equivalent of their employer is therefore
            either the Crown or, locally, the Police Authority

            It was on that basis that the Authority believed that It should stand by its
            former officers

            A decision not to support could be rationalised on one of several grounds,
            which were debated by members.

            (i)       The availability of Legal Aid, albeit that the former officers would
                      have to mat's very substantial contributions from limited private
                      resources if I egal Aid was forthcoming,

            (n)       The ability of the Courts to make costs awards from central funds if
                      the officers were acquitted, and
( iii )   The potential i.nplications for Police Authority funds of supporting
          these cases to a full trial.

The members felt, however, that asking retired officers to expend their
savings and most of H eir pension in meeting legal costs mcurre ro
bona fide performance of their duties would be viewed by serving officers
as abdicating responsibility at the very time when a former officer^most
needed support S et ing this precedent would, it was felt, impact badly on
the morale of the c jrre n t force and the willingness of officers to put
themselves in a posu.on where safety critical decisions have to be taken
instantly The case unsmg out of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster is aM
the more acute because nine years have passed between the day of he
 Disaster and the commencement of the prosecution and because the
former officers had b >en told there would be no prosecution brought by the
 DPP.

 Nevertheless, membars are concerned about the financial implications of
 this support for the existing Police budget and therefore imposed strict
 conditions on the level of representation it would fund and initially a9r®e
 funding only up until Committal, which remains the position A trial has
 now been listed to b jgin June 2000 with an estimate of 6-7 weeks. A pre-
 trial hearing has also been listed for December 1999, where the febuse of
  process" arguments will be re-argued before the trial judge.

  Estimates of the likely costs of proceeding to a full trial have been sought
  from the former officers' legal representatives but are clearly difficult to
  give before they ha \e mapped out their trial strategy m detail. Indications
  are, h o w e v e r, that t ie total costs could be well into seven figures. The
  potential impact of ihis sort of additional expenditure on police budgets
  means that mem ber; may be reluctant to approve a continuation of support
  for the trial costs, without additional funds to minimise the impact on
  policing resources

   The potential buds «tary impact is substantial, if the case proceeds to
   trial and conceivatly to other stages beyond that. In view of that, and
   the national impl cations for employers and Police officers, the
   Authority has rtuolved to ask the Home Secretary to consider
   whether addltiona support might be made available to mitigate the
   costs for South Yorkshire residents.

    Separate discussions have been sought with the Police Federation and the
    Superintendents' A; sociation
PART 2 : Qo*ts of settling ?»r»onyl inlurv claims




       of outstanding claims, including the Claimants' legal costs
       date is as follows:-
                                                                           £m

                                                                        2,227,000
       Payments made by the Authority in the
         settlement of claims

                                                                        5.078,00Q
       Reserves placed on outstanding claims

                                                                        7.305.000

2 2     The reserves represent 15 outstanding personal injury claims of which two
       claims have reserve s totalling £3.5m This figure represents a substantial
       increase in the initial reserves placed on the two clainqts by the insurers
       when they were referred to the Authority following recent advice from the
       solicitors handling the claims concerning medical reassessment of the
       Claimants’ life expectancies. In addition three “new” Claims have been
       received from one fi. m of solicitors during the last thrde months, the value
       of which they asses 5 at a total of £750,000 All three jClaimants
       concerned, two of whom were previously unknown to jthe South Yorkshire
       Police, are alleging physical and psychiatric injuries and have obtained
       legal aid to bring ac.'ions against the Police. Limitation will be a major
        issue in each case hut insufficient is known about thej cases at the present
       time to enable an assessment of the value of the claiijns to be made.
        These de ve lo p m e n t have resulted in the Authority having to set aside an
        additional £ 2 .4 m in the 1998/99 accounts and the possibility of further
        claims being made cannot be excluded although it is now 1 0 years after
       the event

 2.3    The Authority separately wishes to explore the possibility of support
        towards the cost to the Authority of meeting the personal injury claims
        W hen the insurancj indemnity limit of £ 8 .5m was arrived at in 1989 it was
        inconceivable th a t; iny one incident involving police officers could give rise
        to claims under a p jb lic liability policy exceeding that amount. Nothing on
        the scale of Hillsbo.ough had ever occurred and the disaster generated
        approximately 16,030 claims. Hillsborough has re-written the rules and will
        have caused all po ice authorities to review the limits of their public liability
        policies South Yo.kshire Police Authority now have an indemnity limit
        under their policy cf £ 2 1 m and this is currently under review
                                                       <_ L   L Jl-   I   'J J   J   •^   0   r . iv




2 4    The Authority w l . l e .     to explore with the                  Home       Secretary the
      possibility of:

      (I)     direct financii I a ..l.t a n e e to w a rd , the cost of settling personal


       (H)    a Jc v lt« H « M '> " n^ ™ ct,on' w ith cr• d ,, * ppr0Va1, * ° enab"               th®
               costs of settling the claims to be spread.




 Bill Wilkinson
 Clerk a n d Treasurer
 21.10.99
                                                                            ANNEXC


S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E P O L IC E - H IL L S B O R O U G H C O S T S



Lines to take


•        Most forces from time to time face unexpected demands on their resources.
         Generally we expect forces to meet the additional costs for the unexpected from
         within their budget and by the use o f reserves.

•        The criteria for considering bids for special payments are quite demanding. The
         additional expenditure should be unexpected and o f a scale likely to threaten the
         efficiency o f the force.

•      I understand that current estimates for outstanding claims against the force would
        exceed this, if they were incurred in one year and would be around 4.5% o f the
        current budget. If, however, such claims along with the legal costs are spread
        over a number o f years, which is more likely to be the case, then the burden is not
        so great.

•      I appreciate that the police authority will need to put a sizeable sum aside into
        reserves to meet these claims as and when they arise. I recognise that this takes
        away a significant sum that would otherwise be used for policing. We would
        carefully look at all the issues pertaining to a request for additional financial
        assistance, taking into account advice from HMIC.

•        I can make no promises on extra financial assistance. N o specific funding is set
         aside for special payments.

•      A small amount o f funding (£ 1 .7m) became available in 1999/2000 to be used for
       other pressing needs. It has now been fully utilised. Special grant payments to
       four other forces were approved by the Home Secretary. It is too early to say if
       we will have funding available for special grants next year.




l i r i c l m u / S Y P A I l ii l s h o r o u g h me eting
Ba ckground

H illsborough Disaster Costs

Compensation to victims

The Police Authority have exhausted their public liability insurance limit o f £8.5
million and will have to earmark £5 million for additional liabilities, which are
expected to rise as claims are settled. They have also been advised o f the need to set
aside a further £2.6 million following the reassessment o f the life expectancy ot two
Hillsborough victims.

2.       At the time o f the Hillsborough disaster, South Yorkshire Police had public
liability insurance o f £8.5 million. At the time that was regarded as more than
adequate. Their insurance limit was reached within a few years o f the disaster and
since then the force has been settling claims for damages from within its own funds.
The number o f outstanding claims is small but their potential cost to the force is
significant. It has not been possible to settle these claims because the medical
prognoses for the victims are uncertain. These people have suffered serious injuries
which necessitate a lot o f professional help and in some cases permanent attendance
o f caring staff. With the advance o f medical knowledge, they may live longer than
would have been the case in the past. Therefore the cost o f treating and caring for
them for the rest o f their lives is greater and this increases the cost o f settling their
claims.

3.      Normally it is expected that costs arising from unexpected events would be
met from within the force's budget and by using their reserves. On the basis o f the
limited information provided, the South Yorkshire Police Authority would need to set
aside in excess o f £8 million for Hillsborough related expenditure. This would be
around 4.5% o f the force's current budget - a significant loss o f expenditure that
would otherwise be invested in policing. The Home Secretary, in a letter to Mr
Blunkett in June, indicated he would give any application from the police authority
careful consideration.

Private prosecution offormer police officers Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray


4.      The Hillsborough Families Support Group (HFSG) has brought a private
criminal prosecution against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. Earlier this year they
challenged whether the South Yorkshire Police Authority had powers to fund the
defence costs o f the two former officers. This resulted in the Police Authority
withdrawing financial support on legal advice. Consequently the C hief Constable
sought judicial review o f this decision, with the Authority's support.

5.       In March the Divisional Court ruled that police authorities did have powers to
meet the defence costs o f officers in private prosecutions, ju d ic ia l review proceedings,
and any other type o f legal proceedings. The criterion was whether the payment in
question supports the function o f a police authority to "secure the maintenance ol an
efficien t and effective police force for its area", as required under Section 6(1) ol the
Police A ct 1996. It is therefore a matter for a police authority to determine whether



U r i c l i n g ' S Y P A H il l s b o r o u g h me eting
g iving financial assistance in a particular ease supports this function, flic South
Yorkshire Police A u th o rity decided they met this criterion and reinstated their
previous decision to meet the legal costs o f the two officers.

6.       The South Yorkshire Police A uth ority earmarked £500,000 to meet the legal
costs o f the tw o former police officers (M r D uckentield and M r M urray). They had
restricted support for the tw o former police officers to the end ot the com m ittal
proceedings. N o w that both officers have been com m itted lor trial at the C ro w n
C ourt the A u th o rity expect further applications from the tw o officers to fund their
defence costs.

Provision for special grants

7.      Normally there is no specific funding for special payments to police
authorities. This year £1.7 million o f police grant had been set aside centrally to
correct an underpayment to Derbyshire Police Authority for its pensions costs. The
need to make this payment slipped to 2000/01 because o f the local government
procedures for correcting an error made in the 1998/99 funding for Derbyshire. The
grant set aside for 1999/2000 was not, therefore, allocated to the police authority.
This meant that this sum was available in 1999/2000 to be used for other pressing
needs. It has now been fully utilised for special grant payments to four other forces
which were approved by the Home Secretary. There is no scope to assist South
Yorkshire in 1999/2000. It is too early to say what the position will be in 2000/01 as
no decision has been taken on how to use the £1.7 million that will potentially still be
available next year. You and the Home Secretary, however, may wish to retain this
funding for applications for special payments next year.

8.      For the Home Office to provide a special payment to cover most o f South
Yorkshire's additional costs would require taking money out o f the police grant pot.
Top slicing o f police grant for such purposes does not have the support o f ACPO or
the APA. There is also some uncertainty as to when these costs would fall due.
Compensation payments can be notoriously slow and take years to finalise. It is 10
year since Hillsborough and compensation payments are still being made. The ability
to spread such payments over a longer period reduces the financial burden. It is
however, the uncertainty in the timing o f these payments that is the problem for the
police authority. They may need to set aside a large sum, to cover all outstanding
compensation payments and the legal costs o f Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray, in the
event they all fall due in close succession.




H r i e l m g /S Y I 'A Hillsborough nicctini:
South Yorkshire 1’ olicc - rcsourccs

•       The South Yorkshire Police has set a budget o f £173.3 million lor 1999/2000. An
        increase o f 3.5% (£5.8m). The average increase for England and Wales is 3.1%.

•       At the end o f March 1999 the force had 3,168 police officers, 14 less than in
        March 1998.

        In March 1999 the forcc had 9 more police officers in March 1999 than in March
        1997.

        As at March 1998, the force had general reserves o f £6.1 million, representing
        3.7% o f net revenue expenditure. This is likely to fall as at March 1999.




H r i c l m g ' s> \ T A H il l s b o r o u g h me eting
