                              From:Joe Ashton MP.




                           HOUSE OF COMMONS
                              L O N D O N SW1A0AA



                                                20th April 1989



ffy Lord Justice Taylor.

    I should like to formally present evidence to your enquiry on

the Hillsborough disaster.

    I attended the match and have been at approximately 25 other semi­

finals there.     In addition I am vice chairman of the House of Commons

Football Committee, a previous Parliamentary Private Secretary to Mr.

Denis Howell the Minister for Sport in the Labour Government, and served

on the standing committee of the Safety of Grounds Bill following the

Ibrox disaster.

    I am also a Sheffield Wednesday shareholder and a member of the

House of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee which investigates Police

Procedures.

    I hope the attached submission is helpful.


                                      Yours sincerely.




                                                                           T~l . f.
                       Submission from Joe Ashton MP




1   I have attended 25 Semi Finals at Hillsborough and years ago there wax

no trouble because large numbers of fans arrived by train at Wadsley

Bridge Station half a mile away in good time.   On tjie day of the disaster

only 500 travelled that way.

2   I drove to the ground from my home in Sheffield at noon for the official

reception and easily parked in the street 100 yards away.   Yet even then

fans were standing outside pubs well away from the ground, drinking.

3   Many pubs a mile from Hillsborough and down side streets erected largft

impromptu signs saying "PUB GRUB" with arrows pointing off the main road.

4   On Sunday morning several observers telephoned Radion Sheffield with

stories of excessive drinking and these tapes and witnesses should be

available.

5   It is crucial to realise that if the same events had occurred on a

dark January night for a mid-week cup tie it would have been even worse,

as it was for the overcrowding during the Luton v Millwall tie in 1985

which resulting in Luton banning away supporters.

6   If the proposed membership card had been in operation at such a replay

(and there would have been one the following Wednesday had the game been &

tie) then the darkness would have made rescue virtually impossible.

7   It is well known among football fans that if they go without a ticket

and get squeezed into a turnstile it is practically impossible for than

to be ejected back out of the tunnel because of the pressure of the crush.

The turnstile operator has no option but to allow than to climb over the
                       —        -------

gate.   Often a bribe is offered too, and these extra spectators may not be
12    At Coventry fans used to standing, simply infuriated the rest of the

spectators by standing on the seats and forcing everybody else to stand on
        #
theirs too to see the game.    Eventually they were taken out.     In any case

Liverpool had 4,000 more seats than Notts.Forest       did onthe day.

13    Installing seats would not only reduce the ground capacity by half it

would make it even more difficult to get tickets, resulting in even more

fans turning up outside without one and hoping to buy or steal one from a

ticket tout.    This too could lead to trouble.

14    Because seat tickets cost two or three timesas much asstanding      for a

big game the poorer fan, mainly young, is going to be priced out of it.          The

advocates of the much vaunted American stadiums do not mention how these

are invariably filled with affluent middle class families and not those who

live in the ghettos of the Bronx or Harlan.       It does in fact cost $40 to

watch the New York Giants.    One of the reasons why our inner cities have a

much smaller drug problem than the USA is that football is the "opium of

the poor" presenting a very cheap form of aspirations and release from a

menial life.    Few of the supporters can afford to pay £20 for a ticket       and

take their children all the way to Wembley for every big game.

15    Stadiums do have to be re-designed but there will always be at least

5.000 young fans who prefer to stand and jump about behind the goal.       A

relatively small number like this can be handled with police sitting in front

     the touchline aided by video cameras.   This was the practice for generations

until the pitch invasions ten years ago,which were caused not by violence,

but by idiots trying to stop the game when their teamwas losing.        The FA

put an immediate end to it by awarding the match to the other side, but

by then some police forces insisted on perimeter fences.      These must, must,

now be taken down.
16   The current practice of allowing each Chief Constable to persue

individual policies on crowd control must cease.     It is a hotch potch of rules

with some of the 43 different authorities insisting on morning kick*offs at

Christmas (usually so that their policemen can finish early) which creates

even more of a mad dash down the motorways with an early start in the

frosty dark mornings. The Hone Office must legislate on national safety

rules and procedures rather than leave them to individual forces and back

this up by specialised training at Bramshill Police College.     Otherwise when

a big team like Liverpool is drawn away in the cup to a semi* rural small

fourth division team the local force have no experience whatsoever.

17   The cost of altering our grounds will be enormous.    Clubs like Sheffield

Wednesday have spent hundreds of thousands of pounds on safety.     So much

so that this season their own spectators demanded the resignation of the

Board for not spending it on players and only achieving modest playing

results.     Fans say they pay to look at a team not a ground.

18   That is why the theory that football wastes money on transfer fees is

false.     Transfer fee money simply moves around from club to club like a

daisy chain and eventually returns.     Whereas money spent on the ground is

difficult to recoup unless the team does well and is a much more speculative

venture.

19 While tb«Football Trust does an excellent job in helping clubs pay for

ground improvements, the government still takes 42 % of the football pools

income as a levy, plus 15% VAT from the gate and transfers yet gives nothing

back to the game.

20   Undoubtedly big grounds like Hillsborough have a staff with a wealth of

experience of big crowds,yet this is not true of other clubs which rarely

stage a semi final.    The Football League must set up crowd control training
courses too with a relevant proficiency certificate,or qualification,for an

executive member of the club staff on all grounds.    This should be a condition

of granting a safety licenO#.".   Furthermore it should be illegal for clubs

to discriminate against away supporters by often limiting them to sub-standard

accomodation at higher prices than those charged to the hone crowd,because

this often causes annoyance and friction.




    I hope these recommendations are helpful.




                                                                    C-x&L
