                       HO M E SECRETARY’S STATEMENT O N

                              HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                          WEDNESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1998




With permission Madam Speaker, I would like to make a statement about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


2      Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so many people. The families
and friends of the 96 Liverpool fans who died have suffered immeasurably. The whole
nation has been profoundly disturbed by what occurred that day. Although it is now
almost nine years since that fateful day, many of the families and others felt that new
evidence was available which would cast new light on these events. As Home Secretary, I
was determined to do all I could to establish if that was indeed the case.


3      On coming into office in May I gave this question intense and urgent consideration,
and on 30 June 1997, I announced to the House that the Attorney General and I had
decided to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal
to conduct an independent scrutiny of this matter. His terms of reference were:


       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
       Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


       (a)     to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


       (b)     to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the purpose
               of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or


       (c)     to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
               disciplinary matters;
                   and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
                   is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
                   the Home Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b)
                   and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by
                   them which may be relevant to their respective duties;           and to advise
                   whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
                   interest.


4          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing
today. It is available in the Vote Office.


5          His scrutiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and detailed examinations of the
evidence in this case. The public inquiry led by the late Lord Justice Taylor considered
fully the causes of the disaster and made wide-ranging recommendations about crowd
control and safety at sports events. These have had a profound effect on both crowd safety
at football grounds and on the policing of football matches.


6          The deaths which occurred were also the subject of inquests which were conducted
by the Coroner for the Western District of South Yorkshire in two parts in April and May
1990 and between November 1990 and March 1991. These involved over 80 days of public
hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised
by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
criminal or disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the taking of more than
5000 statements. At a later stage, in November 1993, there was a judicial review of the
coroner’s proceedings. This upheld the inquest verdict of accidental death and the conduct
of those proceedings. We have now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior Lord
Justice of Appeal.


7          The main causes of the disaster have long been clear. They were identified by
Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to a
single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it clear that “the main reason for the
disaster was the failure of police control”. Both Lord Taylor, and now Lord Justice Stuart-



Statem entihills
                                                  2
Smith were damning in their condemnation of the senior officer in charge that afternoon,
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers in his report in terms
to “Mr Duckenfield’s disgraceful lie” about one of the gates at Hillsborough, “Gate C being
forced open by fans”. The South Yorkshire police have in turn accepted the main share of
responsibility for the disaster.       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, and the Local
Authority were also criticised by Lord Taylor.


8         With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that over the course of time some
new information may become available.          But that does not necessarily mean that the
outcome of any previous inquiries would have been different. What is crucial is not just
whether the information is new, but also whether it is of such significance - to use the
phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new inquiry.


9          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence which was
put to him. This included all the relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at all the information presented to him, by
individuals and official bodies including those representing the families of those who died,
and others who have acted in support of them.             He has produced a thorough and
comprehensive report and goes into immense detail to analyse and to reach conclusions on
each of the submissions made to him. Let me briefly summarise what he says on the key
allegations relating to video evidence, the cut off time of 3.15 pm for the inquest, and to
interference with witnesses.


Video evidence


10        Two sets of allegations were made about video evidence.


11       First, that two video tapes were stolen from the Club’s control room in order to
conceal material evidence from the earlier inquiries. There is no dispute that this theft
took place. The tapes were pictures from the Club’s CCTV cameras and not those of the
police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the tapes in any event would not have shown




Statem ent:hills
                                                3
anything significant. Moreover, Lord Justice Stuart Smith is satisfied that all police tapes
were made available in their entirety to Lord Taylor’s inquiry and the Coroner [page 17].


12        Second, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals at considerable length with allegations made
principally by Mr Roger Houldsworth, a video technician at Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club that the police had blamed their failure to see overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 on
camera 5 being defective when it was not; that evidence of the video tapes taken by camera
5 was deliberately suppressed and concealed; that two police officers gave deliberately false
evidence that camera 5 was not working correctly.


13        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the police did not try to blame their failure to
spot overcrowding on the terraces on faulty CCTV equipment. The police controllers had
a good view over the terraces from the control box and did not pretend otherwise.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also concluded that “the importance of Mr Houldsworth’s
evidence has been exaggerated out of all proportion”, and that Mr Houldsworth’s existence
and evidence were known to the Taylor inquiry and to the Coroner. He concluded that
that the allegation that the police hid video tapes evidence of the terraces is “unfounded”.


The cut-off time of 3.15 pm


14        One of the issue which unquestionably has caused most distress to those bereaved at
Hillsborough was the decision of the Coroner to rule that he considered that all those who
had died had received the injuries which caused their deaths by 3.15 pm on the day of the
disaster. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the Coroner did not say that all those who
died did so before 3.15 pm, nor that all those who became unconscious subsequently died.
It was only in relation to the question of how, by what means, the deceased came to their
deaths that the cut-off time was imposed. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that the cut-off
did not limit the inquiry undertaken by the inquest, and that he does not consider the
inquest flawed. The Taylor inquiry considered in detail in Chapter 2, the response of the
emergency services, for long after 3.15 pm as well as before, and concluded that no valid
criticism could be made of them.




Statem ent:hills
                                                4
Interference with witnesses


15          The main allegations here were that some specific witnesses had had pressure put on
them by the West Midlands police, and that the South Yorkshire police had collected
evidence from its own officers in a manner which was unacceptable.


16          On the first allegation, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that there was no
improper attempt to alter the evidence of these witnesses.


17          On the second, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith records that a number of the initial
statements made by South Yorkshire police officers were subsequently amended on advice
from solicitors to the force, before being submitted to the Taylor Inquiry. He says that in
a very few cases - referred to in Appendix 7 - what was excluded was either factual or
comment in which factual matters were implicit.           He says that “it would have been
preferable” for these matters not to have been excluded, but that he is satisfied that Lord
Taylor’s enquiry was not in any way inhibited or impeded by what happened.


18         The report also deals comprehensively in Appendix 10 with the ten questions posed
by the Granada television programme in December 1996.


Overall conclusion


19         Taking these and all other considerations into account the overall conclusion which
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reaches is that there is no basis on which there should be a
further public inquiry.       He also finds no basis for a renewed application to quash the
verdict of the inquest, or any material which should be put before the Director of Public
Prosecutions or the police disciplinary authorities which might cause them to re-consider
the decisions which they have already taken. He concludes that none of the evidence
which he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence which was
available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.




Statem ent.'hills
                                                 5
20         I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions have considered
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report very carefully.          We have no reason to doubt his
conclusions. This will, I know, be deeply disappointing for the families of those who died
at Hillsborough and many who have campaigned on their behalf.


21        I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough feel betrayed by
those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state of the
ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which resulted from the Taylor
Inquiry should mean that such a disaster will never happen again.


22        But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough families.
As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,


           “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held
           to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent
           of losing their job”.


23         This highlights some of the serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system.
The Home Affairs Committee produced a report earlier this year which makes major
recommendations for change. I will be responding fully to that report soon. But what
happened after Hillsborough is a prime example of why we have to improve the current
arrangements.


24        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also comments on whether coroners proceedings are
appropriate at all in respect of a major disaster, which has already been subject to a public
inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of a Home Office Working Group on Disasters
and Inquests, published in March 1997, that the role of the coroner after such a public
inquiry should be limited.


25        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith brings out in his report the exceptionally difficult task
which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I
think, unnecessary burden on the families when the Taylor Report had covered



Statem ent:hills
                                                 6
substantially the same ground. Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that the
inquest system in its present form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this
kind. In my view, it would be far better, above all for bereaved families, if there is one
fully comprehensive inquiry into the causes of death and the wider circumstances.


26         When I established the scrutiny I said that I would do my best to ensure that the
evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published.             Most of the main
material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report. Much of
the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain, consisting of
transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor Inquiry. I am arranging
for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in the Library of
the House save that where there are overriding reasons for doing otherwise. The material
to be published will include all the original statement made by South Yorkshire police
officers together with the amended versions.


27        All Honourable Members will have the most profound sympathy with the families
and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend
what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


           “ I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
           especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could be
           done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look
           dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of
           the evidence which had previously been considered”.


28        Madam Speaker, the Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I
have had to consider Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same light and we accept its
conclusions.


29        The entire country is united in sympathy with those who lost loved ones at
Hillsborough and we cannot take the pain from them. But I hope that the families will




Statem ent:hills
                                                 7
recognise that this report represents, as I promised, a most independent, thorough scrutiny
to examine all the evidence which was brought before it.




Statem ent:hills
                                            8
