                                                            (£)
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH       The Rt Hon Lordjustlce Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER                      Queen Anne’s Gate
                                    London SWIM 9AT
                                    01-2732577/3602/2370

                          IV'
 The Pie Magazine



                                    Dat52 January 1990




#         Nv.              f
 Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you
 for your letter of 12 January about the
 Nottingham football forum on 26 February. He
 very much regrets that he will be unable to
 attend the meeting as you request.
                                V

                                          KHVvUm u ,
                               R M WHALLEY      ' J ’
                          Secretary to the Inquiry
12 January 1990
Lord Justice Taylor
c/o R Whalley Esq
Post Hillsborough Enquiry
Home Office                                           4
50 Queen Annes' Gate
London SW1H 9AT


Dear Sir

Nottingham Football Forum - 26 February 1990

Our reason for writing to you is that simply we are convening
arguably the most important public forum to discuss football

•
Which has occurred in Ko'kt.iiighaia for many years.     We have
arranged for representatives of Notts County FC, Nottingham
Forest FC, the Football League, the Football Association, a
Conservative MP, Rogan Taylor (ex-FSA and now Sir Norman Chester
Trust) and Supporters' representatives to form a panel at a
Football Forum here in Nottingham. This forum is to take place on
Monday February 26 at 7.30pm at the Meadow Club, which is
adjacent to Notts County FC.
We would be delighted if you could attend this meeting of people
concerned with football today, as you have an important input to
make. The meeting willbe properly and professionally run by an
MC   and each guest will have around 5 to 10 minutes in which they
may deliver a short speech on their thoughts about the game, its
problems and the possible solutions thereto. We shall then have
a short break, whereafter ordinary supporters in the audience may
question members of the panel.     We are pleased at the response
which the above has had and if I can relate that the Chairman of
Notts County FC,     Gordon Taylor of the PFA and similarly
significant persons involved in the administration of the sport
are aiming to attend, then you will appreciate the efforts we are
making to ensure that the Nottingham football loving public have
an evening to look forward to.
We   earnestly hope that you will be able to attend this meeting-
it    would mean a great deal us if you could.       The meeting
commences at 7.30pm and if you can come, please could your
Secretary telephone me on Nottingham (0602)       |
                                                  , in order that
we can deal with the physical arrangements cf your possible
overnight stay in Nottingham as our guest.
We look forward to hearing from you shortly on this matter.
                   *
Yours faithfully




The Pie Magazine




AN   IN D E P E N D E N T    FOOTBALL           M A G A Z IN E
