From           MRS 6 I MOODY        cc   Mr Burns HMCIC
               F2 DIVISION               Miss A M Edvards   F2
               ®   273 2621
               18 March 1992




Mr Kevin Lockyer
PS/Lord Ferrers


HILLSBOROUGH

The Prime Minister's Office have recently passed to us a copy
sent them by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire of the
latter's   letter to one     of the Hillsborough relatives.
Lord Ferrers has himself had to write to Mrs Jones, and I know
that he feels very deeply the distress of the relatives and
friends of those who died at Hillsborough. He may therefore be
interested to see the attached copy of the very good letter sent
by the Chief Constable, on which no Home Office action is
required.




                               MRS 6 I MOODY




GIM-M908.000
TELEPHONE;                                                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
SHEFFIELD #742) 768522                                                      POLICE HEADQUARTERS
TELEX: 547996                                                                 SN1G HILL
FAX: (0742) 523243                                                                 SHEFFIELD S3 SLY


1 E WELLS QPM MA(Oxon) CBIM                                                           20 January 1992

CHIEF CONSTABLE



 Mrs D Jones
                                                             HQfat ( c4j                I


                                                                     3FE
                                                                           iVilM
                                                               CCS
                                                              &S&?^SUT'iioW yw if
                                                                       *
 It
 Thank you for your brief note of 14 January and for troubling to enclose the handwritten copy of
 your letter to Brigaater Pdwrji

 I can'fully appreciate your sen:    (frustration and anger at the latest turn of events and you should
 not focus too much on trte'rol        mplaints Authority. They are very much bound by the law and
 by circ^^$ces._a.r»d I do>n|'| link that they had much room for manoeuvre in this final decision.
                                ^ 4#
 Although it isJm B iff'fcfff8u'to accept, questions of evidence impose much more stringent tests on
 those involved in testing the law than do our private observations and beliefs.

 The Director of Public Prosecutions (who frequently disagrees with us and so is not to be seen as
 somehow an ally of the police service) found that there was insufficient evidence to prosecute any
 officer for criminal charges.

 The longest inquest ever held determined, through a jury decision, that the deaths - however tragic
 for you, your family and the other families - were accidental. This didn't mean that no mistakes were
 made, but that they were not seen as culpable mistakes. The South Yorkshire Police Service has
 stood up and acknowledged its contribution to those mistakes in its admission of civil liability and
 in its willingness to pay damages.

 On the basis of legal advice (a barrister appointed by our Police Authority, who, you’ll remember,
 at first refused to pay our officers’ legal costs - so, again, not to be seen as other than fiercely
 independent), we recommended to the Police Complaints Authority that no disciplinary proceedings
 should be taken. The barrister concerned is also quite independent and it would be more than his
 professional standing was worth to give other than perfectly frank advice. I he had believed that
 discipline should have followed, then he would have had absolutely no qualms in telling us so.

 When we so recommended to the Police Complaints Authority, they felt so strongly in disagreement
 that they directed us to proceed with a disciplinary tribunal and we immediately set about that
 process.

 The next major turning point was when Chief Superintendent David Duckenfietd fell ill. I know your
 view is that he was just malingering but you cannot merely set aside the professional view of a very
 independent minded medical practitioner who was emphatic in his opinion about how very unwell
 Mr Duckenfield was. I must say, once again, that if the doctor had thought otherwise, wild horses
 wouldn’t have dragged him from saying so.
It was my decision to require the Chief Superintendent’s medical retirement; he had been declared
to be unfit to discharge the duties of a police officer and it was the only course available to me. He
wasn’t in a fit state to have the charges served on him or to prepare his own defence.

After Mr Duckenfield’s medical discharge, we pressed ahead with the preparation for the tribunal
but the barrister advising on the progress of the prosecution became increasingly concerned about
the legal implications of Superintendent Bernard Murray standing in front of the tribunal alone, and
about the aspects of natural justice which that would have entailed. You, of course, will feel your
own acute sense of injustice but that is not to be rectified by another injustice.

I know only too well that you will not accept this argument from me but the words of Dr Habgood
at the Memorial Service really are compelling:

        "Events of the magnitude of Hillsborough don’t usually happen just for one single
        reason, nor is it usually possible to pin the blame on one single scapecoat ...
        Disasters happen because a whole series of mistakes, misjudgmerrts, and
        mischances happen to come together in a deadly combination".

Once again, do let me say how very very sorry I am at the dreadful loss that you and your family
have suffered. Little of this will help you in your distress but I felt that your latest letter deserves a
considered reply.




Richard W




Copies to Police Complaints Authority and the Prime Minister’s Office
