                                                        A(

INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon LordJustice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

R H G Kelly Esq FCIS
Chief Executive
The Football Association Ltd
16 Lancaster Gate
LONDON
W2 3LW
                                           Date
                                             8 November 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
Thank you for your letter of 2 November. We look forward to
meeting you and your colleagues, and Mr Fox and his colleagues
from the Football League, at 2.30 here on 21 November. Lord
Justice Taylor will be accompanied by his two Assessors, Mr
Johnson and Professor Maunder. I and Mr Sweet (Assistant
Secretary to the Inquiry) will also be present.

It might be helpful to set out some of the matters on which Lord
Justice Taylor would be grateful for your comments. I raised
four matters in my letters of 25 September and 2 October, and you
have indicated in your letters of 11 October and 2 November that
you would like to deal with these in discussion.Adding in   other
subjects, I have arranged them in the form of an annotated
agenda.
     1.   Organisation and Management

          The issues involved in a joint organisation embracing
          the Football Association and the Football League (point
          iii. in my letter of 25 September).

     2.   Membership
          The leading personnel in the Football Association and
          the Football League: how they are appointed or
          elected: and for what periods (in elaboration of
          paragraph 2.3 of your submission).
National Membership Scheme

The reservations felt by the Football Association and
the Football League about the Government's proposals
for a National Membership Scheme, and alternative
suggestions for tackling problems of football
hooliganism.

Perimeter Fences

The present position on perimeter fencing at Football
League grounds: estimates of the extent to which
existing fencing has been retained, removed, or
modified, and the extent to which it provides a
deterrent to bad behaviour: any incidents in the
current season of pitch invasions or other disorder
which can be attributed to the absence of perimeter
fences, or having gates in perimeter fences kept open;
current views on the desirability of perimeter fencing;
European requirements on perimeter fencing.
Funding for Safety (Point ii. in my letter of 25
September)

Whether the Football Association and the Football
League fund safety at football grounds at present and
how you would expect to see safety improvements funded
in the future (more detail on paragraph 4.6 of your
submission).

Transfer Fees (Point i. in my letter of 25 September)

Your   proposals on capital allowances (paragraph 5.26 of
your   submission): the source of the money originally
used   in the example: the amounts raised in transfer
fees   and the amounts spent on ground improvements.


Attendances

Recent statistics on attendances at matches and
possible reasons for recent increases.

Simultaneous TV Showings

The possibility of showing at home grounds a
simultaneous TV relay of away matches, and any
experiments in this respect.

Overseas Matches

Steps taken to ensure that tickets for matches abroad
do not fall into the hands of hooligans and what
further steps could be taken.
I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr Dent at the Football
League.

                                   Vov




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                    L IM IT E D
                                                     Founded 1863
                                     Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                   President: H . R . H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                          Chairman:F . A . MlLLlCHlP

     Chief Executive:                                                                   Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
                                                                                               Telex: 261110
 R. H. G. K e l l y f c i s                                                               Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                              16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
   OurRef:       RHGK/RB/901                     YourRef:                     2nd November 1989


    Mr R.M. Whalley
    Inquiry into the Hillsborough
    Stadium Disaster
^ 0      Queen Anne's Gate
^ ^ o n d o n SW1H 9AT




  Dear Mr Whalley,


                  HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY PART II


             Thank you for your letter of 31st October.

             From The Football Association there will be:-

                     Mr A . D . McMullen                (Vice- Chairman)
                     Mr A.R. Titcombe                   (Crowd Management Co-ordinator)
                     Mr R.H.G. Kelly                    (Chief Executive)


        Mr F .A. Millichip, Chairman of The Football Association,
  extends his sincere apologies, but he is attending a meeting
  of the U.E.F.A. Executive Committee in Zurich on 21st
  November.

              I understand that from The Football League there will
  b e :-

                     Mr W. Fox                         (President)
                     Mr J.D. Dent                      (Secretary)
                     plus one other

        As we indicated in our letter of 11th October, the
  issues raised by you are very complex and, after further
  discussions between The Football Association and the Football
  League, we feel we would very much prefer to get to the heart




                                  Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                                  Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
Mr R.M. Whalley              page 2                   2.11.89



of Lord Justice Taylor's questions in the meeting on 21st
November, rather than at this stage submit further comments in
writing and run the risk of misaddressing ourselves.  We
would, of course, be entirely happy to put in a further
written submission if requested at the meeting.  I do hope
this is acceptable to his Lordship.




                       Yours sincerely,




                       Cnxef Executive




        J.D. Dent, The Football League
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                       LIMITED
                                                       Founded 1863
                                    Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                  President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                         Chairman: F. A . M i l l i c h i p

     Chief Executive:                                                                          Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
                                                                                                      Telex: 261110
R. H. G. K e l l y f c i s                                                                       Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                             16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
    Our Ref:   PFS/bc/1332                          Your Ref:                       11th October,         1989



Mr. R.M. Whalley,
Secretary to the Inquiry,
Inquiry into the

•
Hillsborough
u*i 1 1 c K n r n n n h Stadium Disaster,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
London, SW1H 9AT.



Dear Mr. Whalley,

                             Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry

        I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated
 2nd October, as Gr aham Kelly is abroad this week on Football
 Association business.    We are also considering the wide ranging
 questions raised in your letter dated 25th September,
 acknowledged by Graham Kelly on 27th September.

        As you know, the subjects to which you refer are complex.
 The submission for Phase 2 of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry was a
 result of many meetings between representatives of The Football
 Association and The Football League.   It may be necessary,
 therefore, for those members to meet again to discuss in detail
 the points you raise.   We believe the best way forward may be to
 meet with you and advise you direct what action has been taken so
 far and what action is planned in the future.

        I        will of course bring your letter dated 2nd October to
 Graham Kelly's attention when he returns to this Country.

             Whilst writing, may I refer to Graham Kelly's letter to
 you dated 27th September, concerning the possibility of obtaining
 copies of the submissions that have been received, or
 alternatively a list of contributors.        We look forward to
 receiving your response to this inquiry at your earliest
 c o n ve n i e n c e .

                                                Yours sincerely,




                                               Patricia F. Smith
                                                            Manager
                                         A d m in istr a tio n
                                  Registered O ff ice: ]6 Lancaster Gate, L o ndon W 2 3 L W
                                  Incorporated in L ondon Registration N um ber 77797
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                           London SW1H 9AT
                                           01-273 2577/3602/2370

R H G Kelly Esq FCIS
Chief Executive
The Football Association
60 Lancaster Gate
LONDON
SW2 3LW
                                           Date
                                             2 October 1989




Dear Mr Kelly

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

As part of his Inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor is now looking more
widely at issues of crowd control and safety at sports events.
An aspect of particular interest is that of identity cards, and
more especially the type of membership scheme envisaged in the
current Football Spectators Bill.

Lord Justice Taylor is aware, from formal submissions already
received, of the reservations felt both by yourselves and the
Football League as to the merits of such a scheme. He recognises
that striking a balance between catering for the needs of the
responsible majority and dealing with the problem of an unruly
minority is not easy, and is anxious to hear in more detail of
alternative ideas for tackling these problems, it would be
helpful to know whether you could let Lord Justice Taylor have
written comments about this in advance of any meeting with you
which he might want to arrange.

I am writing in similar terms to the Football League and the
Football Supporters' Association.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                 ff    R M WHALLEY
                                  Secretary to the Inquiry
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH                 The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                              50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                              London SW1H 9AT
                                              01-273 2577/3602/2370

G Kelly Esq
Chief Executive
Football Association /
16 Lancaster Gate
LONDON
W2 3LW
                                              Date
                                                25 September 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

I refer to the submission which you and the Football League put
forward for Part II of the Inquiry. Lord Justice Taylor has read
this and has asked for clarification on the following points

i.    He would like to know more about the merits of the arguments
      on transfer fees outlined in paragraph 5.26. In particular,
      what is the source of the money originally used in the
      example? Also, there seems to be some disparity between the
      amount raised in transfer fees and the amount spent on
      ground improvement. Are there any reasons for this other
      than the argument that the present system gives strong
      fiscal inducements to clubs to spend on players rather than
      improvements ?

ii.   Do the Football Association and Football League fund safety
      at football grounds at present and how would they expect to
      see safety improvements funded in the future?

iii. Has a joint organisation to run football, embracing the
     Football Association and the Football League, ever been
     considered? What are the issues involved?

I look forward to your reply in due course.     I have sent a letter
in similar terms to the Football League.




                                         R M WHALLEY
                                    Secretary to the Inquiry
