v
    E.R.                                                               ism ss
                                                cc   Mr Yates
                                                     Mr Chilcot    f      y
                                                     Mr Boys-Smith y
                                                     Mr Addison
                                                     Mr Nagler
                                                     Miss Stewart
           Mr Malone-Lee


           HILLSBOROUGH:   COSTS OF ENQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

           1.   Thank you for your note of 22 May.
           2.   I agree very much with the views set out in the attached
           note of 24 May from Mr Gange.   In particular, I think that he
           brings out very well the reasons why, if at all possible, the
           costs of the police investigation ought not to be carried as
           central government expenditure from Vote 3.
           3.   It will still be prudent to   consider whether increased
           expenditure from Vote 1 might be   offset, in whole or in part,
           from Vote 3.    But I think that   one might as well look to Vote 2
           as to Vote 3, especially in view   of the present parlous state of
           Vote 3.




                                     G K SANDIFORD
                                      25 May 1989

           Finance Division 1
           Queen Anne's Gate
Mr Sandi^ord
                   x<%
HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF ENQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

You asked for views on the attached.              I
2. The expenditure would be counted as running costs since it
consists almost entirely of police manpower and manpower-related
costs. To attempt to bear it on Vote 3 would, of course,
exacerbate our current difficulties on the Vote. Our exercise to
identify targets for costs to meet those difficulties has located
about £11 million of candidates - £3 million to £4 million above
what we think w^jmight need. But if we are actually to use that
top slice to       for the Hillsborough police enquiry we shall
be attacking some politically high-profile and sensitive areas.
Victim support schemes, the safer cities programme, drug control
measures, supervision and rehabilitation of offenders and civil
defence would all be among the subheads affected. Moreover, if
Vote 2 is to help us out on the main overspends, we can hardly
expect them to be particularly helpful in respect of a separate
Hillsborough programme.
3. Quite apart from these short-term difficulties, I would view
as a dangerous precedent any decision to meet the whole of the
costs of the police investigation as central government
expenditure. The investigation of any apparent catastrophic
police failure - whether of the Hillsborough variety, or a
breakdown in discipline or in professional standards or an
absence of success in solving large-scale serial crime, e.g. of
the Yorkshire Ripper variety - can plausibly be presented as
having a national importance. It is clearly right that if there
are lessons to be learned all police forces and the public at
large are made aware of them. But in every such case, the
primary object of the investigation - which will have been
initiated by the relevant Chief Constable - will be, as I have
said elsewhere, the determination of criminal or disciplinary
liability among his officers. That is a police matter and the
cost should lie with the police in the first instance. This is
not to argue that a case cannot exist for making a special grant
in instances where the cost of the investigation is simply too
great for the police authority to bear. That case, however, must
be argued in financial and budgeting terms alone.




Finance Division 1
Queen Anne's Gate
     24 May 1989
