                                                       "V       /

                                               ^                pJbl



D Fysh Esq
Chairman of the Birmingham
 Road [G3] Local
 Consultative Committee                 POL/89 850/4/30
                                        29 June 1989




Thank you for your letter of 2 June about the costs of  the
inquiries by the West Midlands police into the Hillsborough
Stadium Tragedy.

The Home Secretary has accepted, in his reply of 28 April to a
Parliamentary Question from Mr Beaumont-Dark and in his letters
to other West Midland MPs, that the additional costs of the
police inquiries which are being undertaken in relation to the
disaster by West Midlands police officers should not fall on the
West Midlands Police Authority.

"Additional costs'j include the cost of overtime worked by the
West Midlands police officers in their own force area to cover
duties which would otherwise have been undertaken by officers
seconded to the Hillsborough inquiry.

The Home Secretary also mentioned that it will take a while to
sort out the precise mechanics of how the West Midlands police
should be reimbursed.

Lord Ferrers,   the Minister of State with responsibility     for
police matters, has met representatives of both West Midlands and
South Yorkshire Police Authorities to discuss how the costs
should be handled.     He has recently put proposals to South
Yorkshire which he hopes will resolve the matter and which South
Yorkshire are considering.

Lord Ferrers and the Home Secretary are anxious for agreement to
be reached as soon as possible and hope that the proposals put to
South Yorkshire Police Authority will help achieve this.




                                       MS P RANSFORD
\                            2**\

^            Mpu>ei^J®odJL


        S



    W       to * ^ t<*ij _
The position regarding vacancies in policegfc>rces is constantly changing and we are
not always aware of all the forces which m w currently recruiting. However, I list
below those forces which have recently advised us that they would welcome
applications from suitable candidates:
            Avon and Somerset Constabulary
            Bedfordshire Police
            Derbyshire Constabulary
            Hampshire Constabulary
            Hertfordshire Constabulary
            Kent Constabulary                an(j Northamptonshire Police
            Surrey Constabulary
            Sussex Police
            Metropolitan Police
            West Midlands Police
I enclose details of entry requirements to the police service, and a list of
addresses and telephone numbers of all police forces. Each force has a Recruiting
Officer who will be pleased to discuss a career in the police service with you and
answer any questions you may have.
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
       STADIUM DISASTER
                           Jus

              W ith the Com plim ents o f
                                                juJh 7
             the Secretary to the Inquiry   *



                                            r^ ( U ‘
                                              Lck "

     Ititl               72 .




                                v"    ^          V
                                 <

50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT
01-273 2577/3602/2370
                                            < v W
r e ‘ephon»e: W olve rh a m p to n (0 902) 27851 lE x t. 331 or 301?                        ' A-o       v.
          >
Birm ingham Road [G3l Local C onsultative Com m ittee / i° a-.
C hairm an: Mr. D. FY S H
Secretary: Mr.

                                                                 S°0U E £ty

                                                                                                         y\

                                                                              2 June 1989




         The Right Honourable Douglas Hurd
         Home Secretary
         Home Office                                                                 I BEAT         i
         Whitehall                                                                OFFr- — -         |
         LONDON
                                                                                   • 8 JUN f989     *

                             -V                      -
                                                                                                    |
         Dear Sir

         I have been asked by the Police Local Consultative Committe of the G3
         Sub-Division in Wolverhampton, to express our concern over the source of
         funds for the assistance being provided by the West Midlands Force to the
         Hillsborough Stadium enquiry.

         There is every reason to believe that the people of the West Midlands
         accept - almost with pride - the duty that has fallen on their Police, to
         help sort out this sad tragedy. However, this does not relieve either the
         Home Office or the community from looking to an equitable distribution of
         the costs. As you will be aware, there are two aspects to the problem.

         The first is that a high rate of expenditure, incurred outside the West
         Midlands in respect of accommodation, travelling, food and functioning
         expenses, has already been going on for some weeks and will continue for a
         long time to come.  In the ultimate, it will undoubtedly amount to several
         millions of pounds and be a very serious burden over and above the sum of
         money budgetted for the running of the West Midlands Force.

         We emphasise that the Force is paying this money out already, day by day
         and week by week.  These payments are, at this stage, already an extra
         cost in themselves, forced on the Police Authority to use a Home Office
         phrase. Moreover, however it is being funded by the Accountant to the
         Authority, it must be incurring funding costs, since it is so clearly an
         outgoing which was not budgetted.
                                    -   2-




The Police Local Consultative Committee is far from reassured at Home
Office statements (the most recent last week) that no extra costs will be
forced on the Authority.  It is distrubing to hear of the matter being
discussed in terms of Mutual Aid.

If this approach is used, it will amount to no more than a decision to
force extra costs on some other Police Authority, and that must be
regarded as equally unacceptable.

From our point of view, there will be delays in us being paid, involving
the costs of financial procrastination.  There may easily even be legal
action, since it is by no means a cut and dried case that we are rendering
assistance to any specific other Police Authority; the Government now has
a track record of losing cases.

In addition well marked briefs for Barristers would be yet another,
avoidable charge on the public purse.  It cannot be regarded as in any way
the application of responsibility in the discharge of its duties, for a
Government Department to sit by and watch this hotch-potch of delays,
bridging charges, expensive arguments and legal costs build up while it
tries merely to pretend nothing untoward is happening.

All of this relates only to expenditure incurred outside the West
Midlands.

The Consultative Committe are equally concerned over the funding used in
paying overtime to Officers who have remained on duty in the Force Area,
as they cover for absent colleagues.  That charge, at the moment,
undoubtedly comes against one of our budget heads.  It would therefore be
easy for the Home Office to develop an argument (which we would regard as
disingenuous) that this category of expenditure did not itself amount to
an "extra cost" and was not therefore to be considered for reimbursement.
In fact our overtime budget will have been designed to cover the
approximate cost likely to arise from ordinary policing vicissitudes;
provision for something as extraordinary as this enquiry is undoubtedly an
extra cost.
                                    -   3-




The G3 Consultative Committee therefore presses the following points most
strongly on you:-

(1)     That a system of monthly payments to our Police Authority, from
        Home Office funds, be instituted promptly and a realistic payment
        to cover costs already incurred be prepared and made with all
        speed.

(2)      That consequential expenditure incurred in the West Midlands, of
        all kinds but particularly in respect of domestic overtime to
        cover for absent colleagues, be specifically included as
        chargeable.

(3)      That the financial costs of delays and procrastinations in
        payments and of unnecessary legal arguments be specifically
        included as chargeable.

(4)     That the total expenditure outside the West Midlands be refunded.

(5)      That all payments come to the West Midlands Police Authority
        directly from Home Office or other central Governmental
        contingency funds.




Yours faithfully




DERRICK FYSH
Chairman

Copy for information to:-

N Budgen Esq M.P
D Turner Esq M.P
Mrs Maureen Hicks M.P.
Councillor Gordon Jones
Councillor Geoff Patten
Chris Tomlinson Esq, West Midlands Police Authority
David Fenton Esq., Express and Star
f
I
