.R.
  From:   M J Addison                     cc       Ms Adams
          FI Division                              Mr Yates
          Extn 3743                                Mr Chilcot
          19 May 1989                              HMCIC
                                                   Mr Boys Smith
                                                   Mr Malone-Lee
                                                   Miss Edwards, LAB
                                                   Mr Sandiford
                                                   Mr Nagler-— '
                                                   Mr Whalley
                                                   Mr Archer
                                                   Ms R

  Mr Storr

  HILLSBOROUGH : COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

  1.   I have now been informed that, following the meeting on which
  I reported in my submission of 18 May, the Clerk to the South
  Yorkshire Police Authority has spoken to his Chairman, Sir Jack
  Layden^ and as a result the authority would like an early m ^ i n g
  with Ministers.   A letter formally conveying this request will
  arrive shortly.

  2.   I recommend that Lord Ferrers sees them and, if this is
  agreed, would be grateful if Ms Adams would get in touch direct
  with the Clerk (telephone number 0226 285996) about dates.

  3.   I mentioned in paragraph 8 of my note of 18 May my feeling
  that we needed to make an early approach to the Treasury.        I
  understand that Finance and Manpower now have this in hand.      I
  suggest that the meeting with South Yorkshire is arranged for a
  date after the late May Bank Holiday Recess and that Finance and
  Manpower Departments do their best to extract a favourable reply
  from the Treasury by then.  (We shall not I think be in a position
  to satisfy the West Midlands on 25 May but separate briefing for
  that meeting is in hand).



                                               A

                                           M J ADDISON
