*is.4.3/f af 1. peb



From:     P E Bolton *                       cc    Miss Nicholson
          G2 Division//                            Mr^Turney
          X3322                                       Goddard
                                                   Mr Mower
          3 April 1990                             Mr Mould



Ms Dent

                                                  ^.far
MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE

The Home Secretary has agreed to meet representatives of the
Football Association and the Football League at 3pm on Wednesday
4 April.

2.   The meeting was requested in Mr Millichip's letter of
19 February setting out the Football Association's response to
the recommendations of the Taylor report.    That response, in
summary:

        (i)    welcomes the report's recommendations; but

        (ii)   considers some of Lord Justice Taylor's strictures
        unfounded;

        (iii) points out that the FA has limited powers in relation
        to crowd control and safety;

        (iv)   welcomes Lord Justice Taylor's suggested strategy
        against hooliganism;

        (v)   accepts that the bulk of the finances         for ground
        improvements must come from the clubs;

        (vi)    seeks a reduction in pools betting tax.

3.   Since Mr Millichip wrote, we have heard from the Football
League that the 2 organisations have agreed to set up an Advisory
Design Council (Taylor recommendation number 5) to collect and
disseminate information and expertise on the improvement and
design of football stadia.

4.   All these are positive contributions. Accordingly the line
to take recommended for this meeting is to:

      (i)    welcome the positive response which the Football
      Association and the Football League have given to Lord
      Justice Taylor's final report;
w    (ii)  indicate that the Home Office is convinced that our
     joint interests and those of the football supporters are
     likely to be best served if we approach the Taylor report
     recommendations in a co-operative manner;

     (iii) say that this meeting provides an opportunity for a
     brief discussion of any general points arising from the
     report which the 2 organisations want to raise;

and at the end of the discussion

     (iv)   encourage the 2 organisations to maintain a close
     working relationship with officials on the detailed
     application of the Taylor recommendations while (of course)
     expressing the readiness of Ministers to respond if there
     are any matters which cannot be resolved in that way.

5.   Briefing on particular issues is contained in the annex to
this note.   Points which we can expect the Association or the
League to raise are as follows:

     (a) the arrangements and timing for the setting up of the
     Football Licensing Authority;

     (b) whether there is likely to be any flexibility in the
     timetable for the introduction of all seated accommodation
     at football grounds;

     (c)   whether the Government proposes to legislate to
     introduce the new offences proposed in the Taylor report;

    (d)   financial issues: (under this item we may hear of
    proposals by the League and/or the Association to make
    monies available to the Football Trust from their own
    resources for ground improvements. They may, however, want
    to reserve their contribution to the First and Second
    Division clubs where the crowd/accommodation problems are
    likely to be most acute);

    (e)   planning problems:   Mr Moynihan had hoped to attend
    this meeting but is unable to be present.    A DoE official
    will be present to register any points which are raised (eg
    difficulties over planning consents) which can be taken back
    to him;

     (f) the possibility of an interdepartmental working group.
     (We do not know what is behind this proposal.)

6.   The Home Secretary may care to note that DoE have already
had discussions with the Pools Promoters Association and the
Football Trust with a view to securing an agreement on the
disposal of monies made available by the proposed reduction in
the football betting tax.  (The League and the Association will
be aware of this.)  The Treasury have said that the money will
be made available as soon as agreement has been reached.
y•   The Football Association is the national organisation for
football in England.  (There are separate FAs for Scotland and
Wales.)

8.   The Football League represents the 92 clubs which are full
(Divisions 1 and 2) or associate (Divisions 3 and 4) members of
the league which is currently sponsored by Barclays Bank.   The
league covers England and Wales.

9.   The Association will be represented by:

     Mr F A (Bert) Millichip - Chairman
     Mr Graham Kelly - Chief Executive
     Mr Adrian Titcombe - Head of Competitions and Regulations

The League   will be represented by:

     Mr W Fox - President (and Chairman of Blackburn   Rovers)
     Mr Arthur Sandford - Chief Executive
     Mr David Dent - Secretary.




                                        P E BOLTON
                                                             ANNEX



ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS 1-4)

The overall objective is to achieve the targets set down in the
Final Report ie

     (i)     from 1993/4 season at UEFA high risk matches.

     (ii)    Divisions 1 and 2 from 1994/95.

     (iii)    other league grounds from 1999/2000.
Line to take:

(a) Overall objective - The Government's objective is to achieve
all seated accommodation within the timetable.    We acknowledge
however that Taylor's proposed staged move towards all seating
may cause anomalies and practical difficulties in particular
cases. Looking to clubs to set their timetables to achieve the
overall objective in the first instance.       Accept that some
•
flexibility to take account of individual considerations arising
at particular grounds may nevertheless be desirable.

(b) Method of Introduction - Express hope that clubs are already
formulating plans to comply voluntarily with the Taylor
timetable.   Football Licensing Authority (FLA) will licence
grounds occupied by league clubs and other designated grounds
where international matches are held or where league clubs play.
That licence may (if Home Secretary directs) contain conditions
as to the seated accommodation for the ground.       Envisage at
present that direction will apply only where FLA considers that
progress towards all seating is unsatisfactory.

(c) Non-League grounds - It was made clear from the outset that
the Government expected to apply the all seated requirement to
the 92 Football League grounds. The position of the small number
of non-league grounds which are designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975, will be kept under review. Not intended
to impose the licensing requirement for matches normally played
at these grounds at present.



FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY (FLA)

The Authority will have two principle functions.

    (i)   The issue of licenses under Part I of the Football
    Spectators Act (which will contain conditions, as necessary,
    on the introduction of all seated accommodation.)

    (ii)  To keep under review functions of local authorities
    under the 1975 Act - with the object of securing a
    consistent  approach  to   safety  certification  (Taylor
    recommendation 6).
 ^fcine to take:

   (a) Membership - Not yet finally decided.     Maximum membership
   is Chair plus between 4 and 8 members.      Envisage presence of
   senior ex-fire and police officers, as well as people with a
   background in engineering/construction or building control. Want
   to include people who have a particular knowledge of football.
   Express willingness to consider any nomination from the FA/FL,
   (provided they do not have an inappropriate pecuniary interest).

   (b) Timing - FLA is to be set up from 1 June 1990 becoming fully
   operational as soon as possible thereafter.

   (c) 'Parent' Department for FLA - Explain that current proposal,
   subject to PM agreement, is for responsibility for setting up the
   FLA to be transferred to HO from DoE.



   ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL (TAYLOR RECOMMENDATION 5)

    Line to take;         Applaud the action proposed by the FA/FL in
 _ responding to the Final Report recommendation to set up an
^ A d v i s o r y Design Council. (Mr Sandford of the Football League has
    written on this and Secretary of State has already replied.)



   PLANNING PERMISSION (if raised)

   Line to take: - Planning permission is a matter for Secretary
   of State for Environment. Note any concerns or points which are
   raised and agree to pass them on to DoE.



   SAFETY MATTERS ARISING FROM THE FINAL REPORT

   Line to take:

  (a)  Maximum crowd densities for terraces - maximum densities
  will be reduced in the next edition of the Green Guide.    Clubs
  should nevertheless have already been required to reduce numbers
  by amendment to safety certificates following Home Office
  circular to local authorities.

  (b) Pitch/perimeter fences The Government has already indicated
  its support for the general move by the Taylor Inquiry to reduce
  their 'fortress' like appearance. Removal of high barriers style
  fencing altogether a matter for clubs in association with the
  certificating authority and police.

  (c) First Aid/Medical Facilities Support improved first aid and
  medical provision and urge compliance.
        Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds fthe "Green Guide")
  Revision is taking place as quickly as possible in the light of
  the Inquiry recommendations.   Welcome views from FA/FL on any
  other points that should be considered in the process.

  (e)   Application of Taylor recommendations to small/non-league
  clubs - recognise possible difficulties to non-league and 3rd/4th
  Division clubs; willing to consider any particular areas of
  difficulty. Point out that HO Circular 11/1990 sent out with the
  Final Report to police and certificating authorities highlighting
  the need for them to pay attention to individual needs.      (For
  example police control boxes and CCTV may not be justified in the
  smallest grounds if there is normally no significant police
  present.)



  FINANCING CHANGES PROPOSED BY TAYLOR

  Line to take;

     (a) Reduction in pools betting tax - express the hope that this
 _ will provide a substantial contribution to the move to obtain
^ b e t t e r , safer grounds.

  (b)   Additional funding from FL/FA - question what funds the
  FA/FL have in mind to allocate to ground improvement, for example
  from TV fees or transfer fees.

  (c) Allocation of the funds released bv the reduction in pools
  betting tax.

       (i) agree importance to ensure best use made of funds; need
       for close working relationship between FLA and the Football
       Trust;

       (ii)   express caution over any suggestion that 3rd/4th
       Division clubs should be excluded in preference to 1st and
       2nd Division clubs.     Accept that the problem is more
       immediate for the larger clubs but remind that all
       4 Divisions are expected to become all seated in due course.

  Note: It is possible that the football authorities will wish to
  allocate much of the available finance to upgrade Division 1 and
  2 grounds. This would direct funds at the most attended ('higher
  risk') grounds leaving the less well attended grounds to
  systematically reduce the use of terraces as a way to comply with
  the phasing of all seated accommodation.     This formula is not
  altogether without merit but unless carefully presented might
  suggest:

  (a) a weakening of Government resolve in relation to Divisions
  3 and 4.

  (b)   an acceptance that such grounds do      not merit priority
  attention (even though many are run-down).

  We believe that in principle small league clubs should move
  towards all seated accommodation, but we will be relying on the
  FLA to make recommendations on the fine-tuning of the programme
  in the light of particular local circumstances.
^1-4. AH


 BRIEFING FOR THE HOME SECRETARY'S MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL
 ASSOCIATION AND THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE, WEDNESDAY APRIL 4


 SPECIFIC OFFENCES IN THE GROUND


 Lord Justice Taylor expressed concern at the undercurrent of
 unruly behaviour which can result in disorder.    He paid
 particular attention to three activities:    (i) throwing coins
 and other missiles,    (ii) chanting obscene or racist abuse, and
 (iii) going onto the pitch without reasonable excuse.       The
 first two activities are outlawed in general terms by the
 Public Order Act 1986 but Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
 71 is for each of the three activities at a designated sports
 ground to be made a specific offence.


 Line to take


 We are carefully and urgently considering Lord Justice
 Taylor's recommendations on creating new offences.    We are
 currently consulting ACPO and other Government Departments
 about the proposed offences.    Too soon to say what our
 conclusions will be.


 TOUTING


 Lord Justice Taylor was concerned that the activities of touts
 at football matches can put at risk the maintenance of safety
 and the prevention of disorder.


 Line to take


 We are carefully and sympathetically considering this
 recommendation [In the past we have seen difficulties in
 proposing a ban on ticket touting but we are looking at it
 again in the context of the particular circumstances of
 football].
m                                   w   r   -   .   ts             <fr
E l e ct r on i c tagging                                L- 0 \.


    At present the electronic monitoring of sentenced offenders is
    on a voluntary basis.    To impose 'tagging' upon offenders,
    including convicted football hooligans, would require
    legislation.


    Line to take


    We are urgently considering Lord Justice Taylor's
    recommendation.    One of the objectives of the electronic
    monitoring pilot studies was to provide information about its
    usefulness.    It is too early to reach conclusions.


    THE ROLE OF THE POLICE


    Lord Justice Taylor paid tribute to the police generally for
    their invaluable work in maintaining order at football grounds
    Saturday after Saturday.    He expressed cautious optimism about
    the future of crowd behaviour at football grounds.              He saw the
    National Football Intelligence Unit and the use of video
    systems to monitor crowds as the two major planks of the
    police strategy against hooliganism.


    Line to take


    We are vigorously supporting the police in their operations
    against football hooliganism.       We are developing the full
    potential of the newly-formed National Football Intelligence
    Unit to enable the police to target the ringleaders more
    effectively.   We are encouraging the enhancement of optical
    evidence gathering systems at football grounds in this country
    and the training of their operators.
  [If pressed on funding for CCTV:


  It is for football to bear the costs of CCTV.   The Football
  Trust has made generous grants towards these costs in the
  past.   I hope they will continue to do so.]


  TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS


  Lord Justice Taylor made several recommendations for the
  police in his Final Report concerning, in particular, training
  and procedures.


  Line to take


^ ^The police service reacted speedily to implement the practical
  recommendations in the Interim Report.   I have no doubt that
  chief officers are responding just as positively to the final
  recommendations.


  COST OF POLICING FOOTBALL


  Lord Justice Taylor recommends that police authorities should
  ensure that charges made to clubs for policing inside grounds
  are realistic.


  Line to take


  We support the recommendation on charging and are encouraging
  consistency of practice, subject to the need, recognised in
  the report, for local discretion.


  STEWARDS


  More, and better trained, stewards would help to reduce the
  policing requirements.   Manning gates, directing spectators to
  the correct areas, keeping gangways clear and monitoring the
  density of packing in pens and enclosures are all mentioned by
     Justice Taylor as examples of duties which could be
carried out by suitable, properly trained stewards.


Line to take


We very much favour a move towards less policing and more
stewarding at grounds provided adequate safety is maintained.
As Lord Justice Taylor recommended, stewards must be fit,
active and robust and fully trained.
 'ORLD CUP (ITALY, 8 JUNE - 8 JULY)



The potential for disorder in Italy is being taken very
seriously by all concerned.    A constructive steering group
chaired by DoE official has met several times and is attended
by Home Office (Frank Smith, F8), police and FA.


An important English police liaison team will visit Italy
during the World Cup to advise the Italian police eg in
Cagliari. Sardinia where England will play initially; Rome, to
liaise with the central Italian police committee; and Genoa
where large numbers of supporters may gather at the ferry port
en route for Cagliari.    Scottish officers will be present in
Genoa and Turin.


World Cu p - costs of police liaison


We are grateful to the FA for being prepared to meet the costs
of the English police liaison team which will operate in
Italy.   That is right.   We are however pressing the Italians
to make a substantial contribution too.
  STRICTION ORDER


Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (restriction
orders) comes fully into force on 24 April and we are
finalising guidance to the courts, the police, and the central
’Restriction Orders Authority' now.     These powers will be of
great value in the future in preventing hooligans from
attending key matches abroad.


Negotiations with Scotland and the Italians are well advanced
to enable us to impose restriction orders following conviction
in those countries for offences corresponding to our football
related offences.


The FA are concerned that their views should be taken into
account when the Restriction Orders Authority decides the
criteria for requiring offenders to report on the occasion of
each particular designated match.     The Home Secretary mav
reassure the FA (and if relevant the League) that they will be
listened to - their views are valued.    We are looking at a
suitable reference to that in the written guidance the Home
Secretary will give to the Restriction Orders Authority.
                                        QU EEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT




                                               30   March 1990
                                                      ec
                                                         ft* '- H o ^ m rn o n U
                                                         fn'~
                                                        £    %     3     &     J
              Li   4                                    mr- a e / b /
                                                        fY )r- /T )o U L ( p
                                                        M '~ C tcu (\fr e m
                                                        /*?'- /7)o'*L>G,/-
                        TAYLOR REPORT                            T c ^ Itrr-



    You wrote to me on 8 March and on 26 March about the timing
of the Taylor Report recommendations on all-seated accommodation
at Scottish football grounds and at Murrayfield.       I delayed
responding to you at Treasury request, until after the budget.

    In a sense this is still an interim response. We are waiting
for a meeting with the Football Association and Football League
in England and Wales. Their initial reaction to the report has
so far been supportive. They are hurt by some of the criticism
but appear to accept its recommendations, at least in principle.
We have not yet had discussions with representatives of the other
sports.    Nevertheless, I think that I can respond to your
proposals fairly conclusively.

    I had hoped that you would have changed your view given the
prospect of additional funds for football clubs for ground
improvements if, as seems likely, an agreement can be reached
between the pools promoters and the Football Trust to give effect
to John Major's proposal on pools betting tax.     In my view the
economic arguments for treating Scottish football differently are
now considerably diminished.     I would like in this letter,
however, to restrict myself to safety issues.

    I must say at the outset that I would be most unhappy if any
general dispensation were given to Scottish football clubs to
depart from the timetable proposed by Lord Justice Taylor for
the introduction of all-seated accommodation at football grounds.
The Taylor recommendations are made on grounds of safety. They
will undoubtedly cause difficulties in some cases and those
difficulties are likely to be as great for particular clubs south
of the border as in Scotland.   If we are to depart from the


                                            /Taylor recommendations


The Rt Hon Malcolm Rifkind, QC, MP
Secretary of State
Scottish Office
Whitehall
LONDON SW1
Taylor recommendations it will, in my view, need to be a very
considered decision either applied to all of Great Britain, if
we are proposing a general move away from the timetable, or
applied on a consistent basis to all clubs if what we are
considering is a departure from the recommendations in special
cases.    I do not think that we can argue that safety
considerations vary significantly from one part of the country
to another.

    Can I explain first how we are thinking of proceeding south
of the border.    You know that we intend to use the Football
Licensing Authority to bring about all-seated accommodation
through the proposed Football Licensing scheme at grounds at
which matches are held which are designated matches under the
Football Spectators Act 1989.      Our present intention is to
designate any match in a UEFA competition or involving a team
representing a club which is a member of the Football League or
an overseas club held (in each case) at a ground designated under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 or a ground which is
normally used by a Football League club (there is in fact only
one league club, Torquay, using a ground which is not so
designated).   We do not propose at present to require licences
for matches held at designated grounds where neither team is a
member of the Football League or a foreign club, nor to impose
the all-seated accommodation criteria to those matches.

    Can I now comment on the Taylor recommendations themselves.
Taylor's Recommendation 2 is based on paragraph 82 of the final
report which refers to the FIFA resolution passed in July 1989
that from 1993 all high risk matches, as defined by UEFA, should
be held only in all-seater stadia. The football authorities in
England and Wales appear to have accepted this position.       We
propose to require all-seated accommodation at grounds which seek
a licence to hold UEFA matches from 1993, because in practice
this should already be required by the football authorities
themselves. Though this is one of the issues for discussion with
the football authorities, their interpretation of the FIFA/UEFA
requirements will presumably apply to Scotland as elsewhere.

    For matches involving first and second division clubs in
England and Wales, we see at present no reason to depart from
the recommendations in Taylor's Recommendation 3 of all-seated
accommodation to be achieved by August 1994.     I do not think
that we would wish to concede any departure from the proposed
timetable and I would hope that you would feel able to hold your
hand in respect of the premier division of the Football League
in Scotland.

    You mention the first and second divisions of the Scottish
League. As I read Recommendations 3 and 4 of the Taylor report,



                                         /no specific
no specific mention is made of these two divisions and our own
thoughts were that these should be regarded in the same category
as the third and fourth divisions of the Football League in
England and Wales. If this is the case, Recommendation 4 applies
which means that these clubs would not be required to achieve
all-seated accommodation before August 1999.    There might even
be a case for arguing that Scottish second division clubs should,
be regarded as akin to English and Welsh non-league clubs, to
whom we do not propose at present to apply by law the Taylor
recommendations on all-seating.    But even if they are not, the
Taylor recommendation is not that the whole of the stadium should
be converted to all-seated accommodation, but only that standing
accommodation should be progressively removed.     In other words
it will never be necessary for a club to provide more seats than
the number of people that it expects to attend its matches.     I
imagine that many of these smaller Scottish clubs are already in
the position where the small numbers of spectators which they
attract could be accommodated in the seats which are currently
available.

    I do believe however that if our decisions are not to be
challenged on grounds of reasonableness, we shall need to have
some flexibility on both the 1994 and 1999 timetables by which
individual clubs are required to move towards all-seated
accommodation.    Clearly some will have an easier task than
others.   Some will have features which make them fairly safe
grounds by any standards; others will not.     One advantage that
we shall have in England and Wales is that we shall be able to
rely on the Football Licensing Authority to make recommendations
in respect of the use of section 11 of the Football Spectators
Act which provides the power to direct that conditions relating
to seated accommodation should be included in the licences for
particular football grounds. Although we are still considering
precisely what range of matters the licensing authority will be
able to take into account in deciding whether a licence should
be granted to permit the holding of the particular classes of
designated football match and on what terms and conditions, we
hope that it will be possible to permit the Authority to exercise
a fairly wide judgement on these matters. Thus if a ground were
in all other respects safe, with adequate arrangements for the
control of spectators and for the prevention of offences, the
Authority might feel able to recommend that there should be some
relaxation of the Taylor timetable for one year or perhaps two
if there were firm plans in the longer term to meet the overall
objectives. We envisage close liaison here between the Licensing
Authority and the Football Trust.

    The licensing authority will of course also have power
under section 13 of the Football Licensing Act to review the
way in which individual local authorities carry out their



                                         /responsibilities under
responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
Some local authorities have undoubtedly been better at this
than others. What all this means is that if we permit individual
clubs to depart from the proposed timetable, it will only be in
circumstances where we can be assured that the grounds are
reasonably safe.   Since Lord Justice Taylor’s recommendations
are made on grounds of safety, I think it would be less than
prudent to grant a relaxation from the timetable without such
an assurance.

     You raise also the question of Murrayfield. Officials here
will be inviting the Rugby Union authorities to meet us to
discuss the Taylor recommendations very soon.    We have already
made it clear that we have no statutory authority at the moment
to require the provision of all-seated accommodation at rugby
matches.    It is also the case that rugby matches have been
mercifully free of crowd accidents and crowd disorder.   I think
it sensible that the national rugby stadia should be encouraged
to move towards all-seated accommodation but my first thoughts
are that we do not need to force the same pace as in the case
of association football.     We shall be looking to the rugby
authorities to come forward with definite proposals for movement
towards all-seated accommodation at Twickenham and at the Welsh
National Stadium but it may not be practicable to insist on all­
seated accommodation at other locations where rugby is played.
Rugby Union is an amateur game which does not have available to
it the monies which are available to association football and we
shall, I am sure, need to adopt a pragmatic approach.

    Nevertheless there is a difference between telling the
rugby authorities that we shall not be legislating to enforce
the introduction of all-seated rugby grounds and telling them
specifically that they need not comply with the timetable.    It
is they, in the absence of statutory requirements, who must make
the judgement on the extent to which they should heed the Taylor
recommendations.

    I would counsel against any across the board relaxations of
the Taylor timetable for association football grounds in Scotland
primarily for two reasons.      The first is that the Taylor
recommendations are essentially a package which the Government
has accepted as an alternative to the football membership scheme
to secure improved public order and safety at football matches.
I do not believe that a case can be made either on cultural,
economic or safety grounds for taking a less rigorous line in
Scotland than in England and Wales.

    The second point, which follows, is that any general
relaxation of the Taylor timetable in Scotland will be taken
as an indication that the Government considers that a lesser



                                         /standard of
standard of safety than that which Taylor is recommending is
acceptable.   Where that leaves the Government if there is an
accident due to overcrowding is something which you will
doubtless need to consider.

    I would be prepared to agree however that you should tell
Scottish clubs, and the rugby authorities, that in the absence
of legislation it is they who must decide on the relevance of
the Taylor recommendations and determine their own timetable;
and that there will only be Government intervention if it is
clear that adequate progress is not being achieved or there is
an increase in disorder.

    I can also see no reason why football clubs should not be
told that the Government view is that some departure from the
interim timetable may be justifiable in particular cases where
grounds already provide a high degree of safety and amenity and
there are firm longer term proposals to bring about increased
seated accommodation within the Taylor targets.

    I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, John Major,
Chris Patten and Peter Walker.
