                       THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


THE SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB




PART I :     INTRODUCTION
   The Club's submissions have been prepared in three parts:

Part I is a very brief introduction and explanation; Part II is

an examination of what we believe to be the "live" issues and the

club's submission on them;       Part III contains what we hope is a

fairly comprehensive analysis of the evidence which is relevant

to all the criticisms which were made of the club many of which,

it is believed, are no longer "live".            It is accordingly not
suggested that anyone will want or need to read this document in

its entirety.     It is hoped and intended that reference will only

need to be made to those sections of Part III which relate to

criticisms which are still persisted in or to issues which remain

live, or if it is thought that our summary under Part II fails
adequately to deal with any matter of importance.



   The   Salmon   letter     which   was   addressed   to   the    club   was

necessarily written before very much of the evidence had been

collected.    It is accepted that it was, at that time, a perfectly

fair document which raised a number of issues which               foreseably

had to be dealt with.       In the light of the evidence which has now
been given and the facts which are now known it can be seen that
many of those criticisms are not justified - at least as against

the club. The letter nevertheless still provides a useful index

of the criticisms which have been aired and of the issues which

have been raised and in so far as it is accepted or submitted by

others that any of those criticisms are still justified or those

issues still live the relevant evidence has been collated by
reference to the paragraphs of that letter.


     In addition to the Salmon letter,              further criticisms were
made   of   the     club during   the    course of     the    Inquiry and    in
particular by Counsel to the inquiry at the opening of its second

phase on Thursday 15th June (Transcript day 22 p.m. @ 132). In
view of the limited cross examination of the Club's officers it

is   not    clear    to what   extent,    if   at    all,    those   additional

criticisms are persisted in but, for the sake of completeness,

they have been set out in the second section of Part III and
appropriately cross referenced to any available evidence.


     In the interests of continuity and in the hope of avoiding
unnecessary repetition the references in Part II to documents and

to evidence have been kept to a minimum.              Where such references

have been made they have been inserted at the appropriate point

in brackets:        documents have been identified by reference to the

title and page of the bundle in which they are to be found and

the evidence by reference to the relevant day of the transcript

and the material page and part thereof.
      An index has been introduced at the front of Part III so that

#   selective use can be made of that section.




                                   3
PART II       THE CLUB'S SUBMISSIONS


   The tragedy occurred because Gate C was opened, without any

preparation, and approximately 2,000 people were allowed to enter

pens 3 and 4 at a rapid and uncontrolled rate         and at a time when

those pens were both full. There were a very large number of

subsidiary "causes" in that there were many matters without which

those events would not or might not have occurred or would not

or might not have been so tragic. While many of those subsidiary

matters need to be examined in the light of the events which

occurred on 15th April 1989 none of them caused this tragedy.


   Before examining these subsidiary matters and their
relevance the club wishes to make its own position plain.               The
club and its officers have been deeply affected by what has

happened.         The sympathy which they have for those who have

suffered and who are suffering is sincere. We hope that it has

been clear to everyone that the inquiry has been approached with

complete candour; everything that was thought to be helpful has

been volunteered; nothing has been withheld and such criticisms

as have been material and justified have been accepted with

candour     and    humility.   We   would   nevertheless   ask   that   the
criticisms which have been made be seen against the background

not only of the general history of the game but also of this

club's record and reputation.
The History - generally.            It may fairly be said that terraces
everywhere have been allowed to become uncomfortably or even
dangerously full for a great many years.           It should nevertheless

be recognised that they are popular places and that the peak

viewing areas upon them are actively sought out by enthusiastic

supporters who enjoy their atmosphere: note in particular the

clear and unchallenged evidence that supporters were climbing

into pen 3 at a time when "outsiders" were               saying with some

justification that it was already over-full.             In the aftermath
of this tragedy it is not surprising that little has been heard

from those who enjoy the atmosphere of the crowded terrace and

who may even participate in the boisterousness which, while being
enjoyable for some and acceptable to many, makes it practically

impossible for stewards to control anything that is done on the

terraces. While the club accepts that conditions such as those

which existed prior to the tragedy must never be allowed to arise

again they do not believe that they are alone in expressing the
view that it would be regrettable if this tragedy led to the
abolition of the terrace as a viewing area.



     We would also submit that whatever may be said as to the

desirability of deviding terraces into self-contained pens the

reality of the position has always been, and will remain, that

it   is   of   the   essence   of   "free   standing"   areas   that   it   is

practically impossible to prevent concentrations of supporters

in the most popular of "peak viewing" sections.
The Club's own History.



    It is submitted that the evidence clearly shows that this is
a   club   which,   particularly     in    recent    years,      has    been
conscientiously     and   professionally    run:     the    structure     is

exceptional   in that its board of directors has only a tiny

financial interest representing 4.5% of the capital; its chief

executive is competent, conscientious and honest; it had retained

the services and acted on the advice of two of the best qualified

people who it could have found in Mr. Lock and Dr. Eastwood.




    Those who had experience of this club have paid tribute to
the standards which it achieved and attempted to maintain: the

Environmental Health Officer in his formal memorandum to the City
(Core 411 @ 413) volunteered that he was            "impressed with the

level of ground management being maintained";              Superintendent
Freeman, who had an exceptionally close working knowledge of the

club, had reported with specific reference to the question of

compliance with the       Green Guide (Core @ 373) that this club

"have complied with the guide to a very large extent, more so I

would suspect, than the majority of clubs in the Country....";

the Assistant Chief Constable in his letter to the City (Core @
373E) had written that "Co-operation afforded by both clubs is
very satisfactory....";     Ch.Supt. Mole, who probably had more

practical experience of working with the club's officers than
anyone else   and who was a conspicuously impressive and candid

witness,   had volunteered    his   congratulations        in   unsolicited
correspondence (Club p 31) and repeated his views in evidence
(Day 7 pp 39-41); Mr. Evans who made a critical inspection of the

club on behalf of the Football Association with the sole purpose

of assessing its suitability for hosting a semi-final and who was

very well qualified to do so was impressed by what he saw at a

time when the facilities were operating under full pressure; the

off-duty Police Officer Mr.             Maddox    (Evidence Day 24 p         90E)
described the ground as "one of the best in the Country and first

class..." ;        and Dr. Eastwood who had been engaged for a very

long     time   to advise    the Club volunteered         the    fact    that   it
invariably accepted his advice as to what it ought to do, was

willing to spend money on improvements and was "very careful to
do the right thing" (Evidence day 26 @ 8IB - 82B and day 28 @

32G) .     It    is   not   suggested   that     these   tributes    can    rebut

legitimate criticism but that such criticism should be weighed

in the light of the evidence of this general attitude.                  Similarly

it should be borne in mind that the club has never claimed that

financial hardship has prevented it from doing anything that
needed to be done or that it might have been advised to do as a

matter of safety.        What is requested is that note should be taken
of the sums which were being spent on safety and on ground

improvements generally in the light of priorities which were

inevitably conditioned by the thinking and the concerns which

followed the Bradford tragedy. More than 1.5                  Million had been

spent     on    ground   improvement    and    safety    in   the   four   years

preceding the tragedy and while it is always easy to say with

hindsight that part of this money might have been more wisely

spent elsewhere it would nevertheless be very unfair to regard


                                        7
finacial meaness as being either eveident or relevant.



The 1981 incident.     While it can fairly and properly be said
that the problem of uneven terrace distribution was underlined
by this incident it should also be acknowledged that the two

parties most directly concerned with it appear to have reacted
to it sensibly: the Police reconsidered the whole question of an

open terrace and devised the penning system and the club accepted

the recommendation and acted upon it in accordance with the

advice of Dr. Eastwood and the authority of the Council.            It

should also be noted that this incident occurred before the pens

were devised or installed and it is accordingly plain that this

type of tragedy   could have occurred in circumstances similar to
those with which this Inquiry is concerned even if there had been

no pens. In other words, if more than a thousand people had been
allowed rapidly to enter the most popular area of the terrace at

a time when the entrance leading directly to that area should

have been "closed" to them it must have been foreseeable that

those at the front could have been crushed       even in the absence

of radial fences.



The penss     The legitimate criticism which has to be faced by

those who required, designed, authorised and used the pens is
that they needed to be monitored for over-crowding if they were
not   to become   as dangerous   if   not more   dangerous   than   the

undivided terrace had been.      However, while that is easy to say
in the light of this tragedy, the truth is that the problem of

crushing had originally arisen on the undivided terrace;             no
amendments of any kind had been made to the Safety Certificate
following the installation of the pens; the Safety Certificate

had not at any time required stewarding of the terrace; it was

always known and recognised that the turnstile arrangements at

the Leppings Lane end did not permit numerical monitoring or

control of entry to the individual pens;                    the filling and state

of the pens had, as a matter of fact, always been monitored by

the Police and, in full knowledge of the physical lay-out and of

the way in which it was used, neither Police nor Council nor Dr.

Eastwood ever suggested that the pens were a potential source of
greater danger.             It would be unfair to criticise the club for

acting    on     the    advice      of   experts,    in    response      to   a   police
suggestion        and       in   accordance    with       the    local    authority's
permission when they knew of the way in which the pens were being

controlled; they checked expressly that neither the certificate
nor the single total capacity of the terrace had been altered

(Core     pp    379     &   385);    they   had     confirmed     with    the     senior

responsible police office                (Supt. Mole)      that the Police were

monitoring the pens              (Evidence day 30 @ 102G - 103D & 114E -

115A); it was well known, obvious and accepted on all sides that
their stewards were not involved with the filling or monitoring

of the pens and nobody had suggested that they should be. Indeed,

the true position appears to have been that                     not since 1981, that
is before the pens were thought of, had anyone suggested the

stewards should be concerned with the terraces at all. The                          club

contributed to the system of monitoring by keeping the Police

control box informed as to the computed total of entry to the

ground.        Despite that fact that it was not challenged that this
had been done on this occasion it is perhaps interesting and
significant that Supt. Murray was apparently unaware of that

fact.



   It was and is accepted that there never has been any way in

which the precise numbers of supporters who entered any part of
the terrace could be counted. That fact was obvious to everyone

concerned. It is, however, both wrong and unfair to suggest that
the club therefore automatically committed a criminal offence

every time that the terrace was used. They did not.


   It is equally important to note that, given the layout of the

pens and the express requirement of the licensing authority that

the radial gates remain open, there was no way in which the

numbers of supporters remaining in the      "open"    pens could be

maintained at any particular figure - even assuming that the

radial fences prevented anyone from climbing in or out which, it

was recognised, they could never do.    Thus even in the days when
the Police   filled the pens    sequentially it would have been

physically   impossible   for anyone   to monitor    or   control   the
numbers remaining in each pen and there might well be substantial

movements and variations during the course of the pre-match,

match and post-match periods. What really matters for practical

purposes is that all of the debate and criticism on this point

is wholly irrelevant to the cause of this tragedy.



    Even if one takes the most perfect system which could have
been operated on the terrace and envisages that police officers
and stewards had (with the assistance of the running computer

count) physically counted supporters into each pen that would and

could not have had any material effect on the consequences of an

additional rush of some 2,000 fans being allowed to enter one

part of the terrace.


Stewarding    generally.         We   understand   that   the    general

criticisms of stewarding and of the training of stewards have not

been persisted with although the material evidence is cross

referenced under the appropriate section of Part III and may be
referred to if helpful.     If necessary we would submit with some

confidence that following criticisms in the early 1980s, which

may well have been justified, the training and instruction and

supervision of stewards as organised by the club with the active

co-operation of the Police and Fire and Ambulance personnel could
hardly have been better.      We would also draw attention to the

levels   of   sensible   co-operation as   evidenced by    the    annual

checking with Police of the match day instructions to stewards

(Core pp 449 & 451) and we would describe the suggestion that it
would have been better to distribute copies of the Green Guide
to stewards as unrealistic and unhelpful. It would be unfair,

both to the Club and to its staff, for any doubt to be left as

to whether or not there was anything that the stewards or gatemen

could reasonably have been expected to do once Gate              "C" was
opened without warning to them on either of the two occasions

that it was.     The true position must be that to open that gate

without warning when there was ample time in which a warning

could have been given effectively deprived those within the
ground of any hope of controlling or directing the inevitable and

intended in-rush.


     The detailed evidence relevant to staff training can,             if

necessary, be found at pages 4 & 5 of Part III.



Direction   signs   and   ticketing        It   was   accepted    without

hesitation that the directional signs at the Leppings Lane end
of the ground are not good and that the map on the reverse side

of the ticket is capable of being misleading.          It is, however,
not understood on what basis it is suggested that either of these

matters was relevant to the events on this day. In the first
place it is submitted that it would be absurd to suggest in the
face of the video evidence that any significant number of the

supporters who are to be seen pouring through Gate "C" when the

kick off was due and when the pitch could be seen and the noise

could be heard through the tunnel immediately in front of them

would have been diverted by signs or information on tickets - or

by   anything   other   than   the   physical   barrier   which    should

obviously have been in position, which had been in position on

a number    of previous   occasions    and which was      in   fact more
necessary now than ever before.       Secondly there is surprise and
disappointment that it was thought fair to attack Mr. Mackrell
for providing tickets which "encouraged. ..everyone to go down the
tunnel" (Evidence day 30 p 82) when not one single witness had

said that he had been so influenced and no-one had even been

invited to comment on the matter at all.
      It was and is also accepted that the signing outside the

ground could have been improved upon.        But this is a fair example

of a criticism which is more easily made with the benefit of

hindsight.    At    the time when the signs were put up and before

it was    realised that the area was to be allowed to become

dangerously congested it must have seemed sensible and helpful
to erect clearly written and freshly painted coloured signs which
corresponded to the ticket colours.        It is nonetheless plain that

there were cases of confusion outside - what is less plain is

whether this confusion was in truth due to a lack of signs or to

the ordering of the blocks of turnstiles out of alphabetical

sequence or to the general chaos and confusion then prevailing.

However, given the appalling scenes of overcrowding and physical

confrontation which had been allowed to develop outside it is

submitted that mistakes as to which "queue" people wanted to join
or in fact joined cannot have had the slightest effect on the

events which in fact occurred.



The adequacy of the Leppings Lane turnstiles.          The first and most
important of the matters which should be taken into account is

that thought was given to this question which was discussed by

Mr.    Mackrell    and   Supt.   Mole   before   the   arrangements   were

approved: (Evidence Day 7 p 41).



       It was recognised that the closure of the twelve turnstiles

at the other end of the ground inevitably imposed an additional

strain on those at Leppings Lane.          On the facts which are now
known it is clear that the turnstiles were capable of coping and
did in fact cope with a rate of more than 1,000 people per hour
(see para 4.17 of H.S.E. Report) but that their operation                 was
seriously slowed down as a direct result of the physical strain

which the crush imposed upon them.        Accordingly, the rate which

had been anticipated by Mr. Mackrell of about 800 per hour was

conservative - particularly when viewed against the background

that other turnstiles from the adjacent 1 - 1 6           row might have

been available and the very worst that could realistically have

been anticipated was that the Kick-off might have to be delayed.

It should also be recalled that even a delayed kick-off would

only have been required in the event that Liverpool supporters
using this end of the ground ignored in substantial numbers the
advice in their own supporters magazine to arrive early to take

account of the fact that the turnstiles would open at 11.30 -

which they did.



Physical structures inside the ground.          It is clearly regrettable

in the extreme that the Safety Certificate was allowed to become

seriously   out   of   date.   Mr.   Mackrell    had   acted   sensibly    in

checking that there had been no amendments to it despite the
works which he could*see had been carried out (Core p 385). Given
the level of continuing co-operation between the club, the police
and the working party, it would be unfair and unreasonable to
have expected Mr. Mackrell to take the matter further and require

that the certificate be amended.
       It is submitted that the single most important fact which

should    be        borne    in    mind    when     considering          those    physical

alterations to the ground which represent departures from either

the Green Guide or the Safety Certificate is that no material

alterations were ever made which were not requested by a member

of the working party and/or discussed and agreed with the working

party.        It should not be forgotten that the first and most

serious criticism which was aimed at the club and its advisors
was    that    barrier       144    had     been    unlawfully       removed       without

consultation         or     permission      and     that    this    might        have   been
causative of the tragedy.                 That criticism was maintained at the

opening of the second phase of the Inquiry (Day 22 p 99).                                The

true position was that the removal of this barrier had been

requested by the Police and very fully debated by the working

party in discussion with Dr. Eastwood.                     None of that was recorded
or minuted by the working party but it is unfortunate and unfair

that the club should have been criticised in the way in which it

was.     Equally, it had been suggested on behalf of both the Fire
Service       and    the     Council      that     the   club      had    made    material

alterations to the internal layout at the rear of the West Stand
by the conversion, without consultation, of the "personnel door"

into an access way.               Here again the true position was that the

enlargement of the door had been requested by the Police and it

is submitted that on this matter it is particularly important to

look at the terms in which Insp. Calvert referred to the way in

which the Police were filling the terrace after 1986 (Evidence

Day 30 pp 15D - 16B).               Further, and equally importantly, Insp.
Calvert's     evidence    that   this   alteration had been    shown and

explained to the Working Party was not challenged by anybody

(Evidence Day 30 p 50D-E).


   The last matter of serious concern under this head arises out
of the contention which was put by Counsel to the Inquiry to Dr.
Eastwood      to the    effect   that   the   Safety Certificate   imposed

absolute standards and thereby converted the guidance of the
Green Guide      into rules of      law.      It is submitted that this

contention is both unfair and misconceived as a matter of law.

Paragraph 15 (1) of the Safety Certificate requires that:



   "The holder shall at all times maintain all structural parts

   of the stadium in sound order and to the appropriate and

   relevant     standards    in the Guide and in all cases to the

   satisfaction of the Council."


It is submitted that the above high-lighted passage is, as a

matter   of    simple    construction,     the dominant   phrase   in this

condition. It would be both unfair and absurd to suggest that a

club could be guilty of a criminal breach where it adhered to

standards which had been approved and imposed by the relevant
licensing authority simply because those standards differed from

those suggested in the Green Guide. An example of the absurdity
which would arise if the position were otherwise is readily
afforded by the facts of this case.             The evidence is that the

City Council specifically authorised and required that the gates

in the perimeter fences should be smaller in width than the Green
Guide envisages.       That decision was     taken by the    licensing

authority   at   the    specific   request     of    the   Police   and
notwithstanding the unchallenged evidence of Dr. Eastwood that
the Green Guide standards had been discussed in detail and that

his own preference was for larger gates.            If, therefore, the

Safety Certificate requires the club to comply with the standards

of the Green Guide as distinct from those of the licensing

authority in this instance it would have meant that the club

should have acted on their own initiative in a way directly

contrary to the specific requirements of the Council - who were

also the prosecuting authority!
                             PART III



                  THE SALMON LETTER CRITICISMS

Staf f/Training

Management Responsibility
General - the Ground itself:
(a)   Walls could be climbed over;
(b)   The gangways in the terraces were not indicated;

(c)   Inadequate signposting in the ground;
(d)   Turnstiles    A-G   were   insufficient   to   ensure   ease   of

      admission to the terraces inside;
(e)   The gates in the perimeter fence were not marked as such;

(f)   The gate in the perimeter fence in pen 4 was difficult

      to use since there were no steps leading to it;

(g)   The tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4 was not of a uniform
      gradient and sloped steeply at the end leading to the

      terraces.
Planning for and the stewarding of the semi-final itself:

(a)   Foresight - since Liverpool had been given an inadequate

      allocation of seats, additional pressures outside the

      ground should have been foreseen;
(b)   insufficient contingency plans to deal with the effects

      of opening gate C to relieve the pressure outside;

(c)   Overcrowding inside the ground should have been foreseen
      and very great care should have been taken to avoid it;

(d)   No stewards were available to direct persons entering

      the ground to ensure that the pens filled up evenly;
      (e)   Stewards ought to have monitored the ingress of the ood
            and,   with    police   help    if    necessary,   ought    to   have
            prevented spectators going down the tunnel to pens 3 and

            4;
      (f)   No steps taken to ensure that the capacities of pens 3

and 4 were not exceeded

      (g)   Insufficient    plans     for   communication      with    and/or   a

            failure to communicate with the police.

5. Emergency planning:
      (a)   The planning for emergency, in the light of events, was

            inadequate;
      (b)   No loud hailers provided to stewards and/or police;
      (c)   Insufficient exits to cater for an emergency;

      (d)   Training of stewards inadequate;
      (e)   First aid equipment may have been inadequate - no oxygen

            available to assist resuscitation;

      (f) Emergency vehicle access inadequate - ambulance could

            only   reach    playing    area      after   advertising    hoarding

            removed.

6. Miscellaneous:
      (a) The collapse of a barrier in pen 3 may indicate a lack

            of strength.
7. The "Second Opening" Criticisms - 22:132E-133C
(a)         Failure to consider the effect of the removal of barrier

144         on the capacity of the Pens;
(b)         Failure to consider what effect the works in 1981 and

            1985 should have on the capacity of the terrace;

(c)         Little if any consideration in 1985 or thereafter of the
number of turnstiles needed at the Leppings Lane end to

cope with any reasonable flow that might be expected of

spectators into the ground;
The First Aid Room never seems to have got its proper

equipment;
No one seems to have applied their minds properly to the

problems of ensuring even distribution of the fans on the
terraces, coupled with ensuring that the capacity of the

pens were not exceeded.
1. Staff/Training s
   The criticism:-
   "(a) Training of stewards in carrying out their roles               in

        natural and emergency situations."



This criticism is misconceived.


It is clear that there was high level discussion, planning and

implementation   of   such   plans   for   the   training   of   stewards

involving the Police and other emergency services:

   Mole 7:34E-38H
   N.B. All references to the evidence in Part III have been
abreviated simply to identify the witnesses surname, the day of

the transcript and the page and part thereof.


Proper training was given to the stewards by the Club with the

very able assistance of the Fire Service, the Police, and the St.

John's Ambulance:



   Thorpe 21:29G-30H



Note that stewards were told to leave first aid to an expert:

   Wells 19:24H-25G


The fact that the stewards were not provided with a copy of the
Green Guide itself is irrelevant:          they were provided with a

digest of the relevant parts of the Green Guide:

   Marsh 21:117E-H.
If it is suggested that the stewards should have been given
copies of the Green Guide the Club believes that this would have

been unhelpful and unrealistic. The Green Guide, as appears from
its nature and content,   is not intended for distribution to

stewards: it is a guideline to those responsible for all aspects

of safety and for the training and instruction of stewards. It

is submitted that the instruction which was in fact given was

wholly consistent with the principles of the Green Guide and that
such instruction was sensibly organised and effective. There is
no evidence that any steward was unaware of his duties or that
any steward failed to do anything that could have been done which
could have prevented this tragedy or its consequences.
2. Management Responsibility (Chapter 2, esp. para 29)s

   The criticisms:-
   "There may have been breaches of the following sub-paragraphs,
   namely (v)(a) and (c), (vi), (x), (xii) and (xv)."



General matters:
The Club could not have done anything better than engaging Mr.

Lock,   the former Police ground commander of Hillsborough with

extensive experience of policing the ground and a particular

interest in safety at football stadia:

   Mole 7:39D-F.


Having been engaged it is clear that Mr. Lock carried out his

duties conscientiously and effectively.


The Club and the Police have enjoyed a close working relationship

in which both sides have felt able to make their views known to
the other whether or not such comments are complimentary or not.

The relationship was not one of complacency or mutual flattery

   Mole 7:40A-B, Jackson 10:58B, Calvert 30:7F-G.



It has to be accepted that there were breakdowns of communication

on the day of the tragedy. Although there was no request from the
police for a postponement of the kick-off it is important to note

that Mr. Lock became concerned at the build up and would have

contacted the Police Control but he was rightly pre-occupied with

those   matters    which   were   his   responsibility   and   was   then

overtaken by events:
    Lock 31:77C-78B


Further, it is important and fair to bear in        mind that the
machinery for collating and communicating spectator attendance

was operating and the explanation for the failure to postpone the

match lies not in the fact that    the Police were ignorant of the

position either inside or outside the ground but in the fact that

the criteria for postponement were, perhaps, too rigidly applied.
However although the Club would accept that,       as a matter of

principle, the Police could well be concerned not to establish

a   precedent   that   "late"   arrival   automatically   leads   to

postponement.


In Dr.   Eastwood's experience the Club have always been very

willing to spend money to improve the ground and there has been

no instance where the Club has failed to do something that Dr.

Eastwood had told them they ought to do:
    Eastwood 26:81B-82B.



The Club have always been "very careful to do the right thing":

    Eastwood 28:34G


It is also important to note that the Environmental Health

Officer, as a result of his inspection of the ground in 1987, was

"noticeably impressed with the level of ground management being

maintained":

    Bownes 29:119A-B
Further, when asked for comments on the Draft Certificate, the
Police commented that they were impressed with the co-operation

of the Club and the way in which it dealt with problems that

arose:

     Bownes 29:118H


It is also fair to comment on the fact that the Club Secretary

is   and   was very   conscientious    in   relation   to   all   matters

concerningthe Club.       In particular,    on   his   appointment,   Mr.

Mackrell was at pains to ensure that the 1979 Safety Certificate

was still operative:

     Mackrell 30:71E-74D


Mr. Mackrell was also concerned to confirm the arrangements with

the Police for the monitoring of and filling of the Leppings Lane
terrace:

     Mackrell 30:125D-F


The Particular Criticisms:

29(v)(a):      This was rightly not pursued against the Club.



29(v)(c):      The only "contingency plan" was         the power (which

               was, of necessity, vested in the Police) to postpone

               the kick-off. If such a course had been adopted on

               15 April     1989,   in our respectful submission the

               tragedy would have been averted. See further 4(a)

               and (b) post.
29 (vi): This was not pursued against the Club. With the exception
           of the First Aid Room all material parts of the ground

           were served by the Club's internal telephone system. The

           Police Control were provided with Club radios. The crowd

           could be addressed by the tannoy system, one of the best

           available, which had been installed in 1987 after an

           inspection of the ground by the Fire Service revealed

           that the old system had problems with audibility (see

           Mackrell 30:94E-95H).



29(x):     See 6(a) and 7(d) post.


29(xii):        See 1 ante. There can be no criticism of the Club
                in   relation to   the   training   of   Stewards   in an

                emergency. The emergency evacuation procedures were

                tested twice a year during a match (Mole 7:37E).



29(v)      See 3(c) post.




                                   26
3. General - the Ground itselfs
   The criticisms:-

   "(a) Walls could be climbed over;
   (b)    The gangways in the terraces were not indicated;

   (c)    Inadequate signposting in the ground;

   (d)    Turnstiles   A-G were   insufficient   to   ensure   ease   of

          admission to the terraces inside;
   (e) The gates in the perimeter fence were not marked as such;

   (f) The    gate in the perimeter fence in pen 4 was difficult

          to use since there were no steps leading to it;

   (g) The tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4 was not of a uniform

          gradient and sloped steeply at the end leading to the

          terraces."



General
"I was telling them about the ground and how it is one of the

best in the country and first class for this sort of venue...it

has first class facilities."
   The evidence of an off duty Police Officer who attended the

   Semi-Final: Maddox 24:9D-E


Sheffield City Council are responsible for issuing the Safety

Certificate and are ultimately responsible for ensuring that

spectators at Hillsborough are safe:
   Bownes 29:62F




There were regular inspections of Hillsborough, initially bi-
ennually and latterly annually - the reason for the change was

not explained at the time and is still not understood by the

Club.
   Bownes 29:79A-E


The Sheffield City Council were backed up by their own team of
experts, not one of whom identified any problems either with the

ground or with the organisation of the Club's affairs which may

with hindsight be felt to have exacerbated the problems faced by

the Police on the day of the Semi-Final. Obviously when the City

Council   or   the   Officer   Working   Party   required   work   to   be

undertaken that work was carried out by the Club even if its own
consultant engineers had informed the Officer Working Party of
the reservations that they had in relation to the proposed works:

the removal of barrier 144 is the best example of this.
(a)       Walls could be climbed over;


The walls can in fact be seen to be very substantial indeed and

one might think that anything taller and/or more                "fortified"

would be unacceptable. There has been no history of the walls

being scaled before and no one has sought to suggest before that

the walls should be higher.


The evidence (notably of Inspector Bennett and DC Foster) does

not indicate that many supporters climbed the walls to gain

"illicit" entry to the ground.             The fact that the walls were

climbed by a small number of desperate supporters attempting to
avoid a life threatening crush does not in any way suggest that

the walls themselves are defective. Indeed, quite apart from the

question of the acceptability of their appearance, it might have

been regrettable if the walls had been so high or so fortified

as to defeat all attempts to climb them even in an unprecedented
and dangerous situation.



      Bennett 15:65F-66B


The evidence is that fans were being assisted to climb walls by

other fans and by police to escape the crush outside the ground

and,    given   that   this   had   been    allowed   to   develop,   or   had

developed, it would be unfair to criticise that assistance:



      "People were packed so tightly behind the turnstiles that I

      felt it was illogical for me to turn people back from the
    roof, but rather it was better to show them a safe way down

    to the ground..." Bennett 15:65F



    see also for example Foster 1:62E-F




m




                          \


                               30
        The gangways in the terraces were not indicated;



Eastwood report 12 Jan 1979

South Yorkshire CC 7 June 1979


There are no gangways on the Leppings Lane terrace as opposed

from the Kop where, despite practical difficulties, the very size

of the area requires that such gangways should be organised.

   Eastwood 26:82H-83C


Following the 1981 incident on the Leppings Lane terrace the

thinking had been to control free movement by the installation

of Pens. It cannot be denied that this system brought with it
other potential dangers but the absence of gangways was plainly

deliberate   and   inescapable      and   approved   by   the   Licensing

Authority.   Whether   or   not    that   decision was    correct   it   is

manifestly absurd now to          suggest that non-existant      gangways

should have been indicated.
(c)           Inadequate signposting in the ground;


"As you approached down Leppings Lane itself it was first of all
not immediately obvious to me which turnstiles were for the
seated people and which were for the standing people, although

it     soon    became   obvious.     Once   you   had   passed     through    the

turnstiles I saw no sign, advice or assistance at all as to where

one should go."         Kay 25:17C


The    signposting      for   the    side   entrances   to   the    terrace    is

inadequate:

      Mackrell 30:107C


Nevertheless,       it is     fair to note that the West           Stand is a
conventional design so that any experienced football supporter
would expect to approach the terraces either through the central

tunnel or around the sides: Matthews 4:92D-E.                 The difference

about the West Stand terraces is that they are divided by radial

fences with gates at the back that enabled fans to move from one

pen to another, and it is accepted that this is something which

would not necessarily be expected.


The question of signposting raises two areas for consideration

namely inside and outside the ground.



Outside the ground.
As to the signposting outside the ground there has been no direct

evidence of any fan being confused by it apart from that of Dr.
Ashton. The latter was manifestly unreliable and biased and there
can be no sensible explanation for his failure at the time when
he finally approached the turnstiles to see either the large red

sign or the clear gangway letter "Y" which was clearly readily
even from outside the ground. The basis for any criticism of the

system adopted outside the ground, or more particularly outside

the turnstiles, is the evidence of the Police Officers on duty

outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles as to the amount of queries

raised by fans. Even the most critical of the Police Officers,

Sgt. Morgan, accepted that many of the fans were merely seeking

confirmation of what was written on the ticket:

   Morgan 15:130F


It follows from the foregoing that, whilst it must be accepted

that the tickets and the signposting outside the turnstiles may

have contributed to the confusion of some of the fans, there is

simply no evidence that it caused or significantly contributed

to the large build up of fans outside the turnstiles in the half

an hour immediately preceding the kick off.



   "I don't think it would have added too much to the delay,

   certainly not as much as anyone without a ticket or someone
   trying to pay." Bennett 15:73B. See also 15:72F-73D.


   Hand-Davies   13:45F-G   "there seemed to be an awful lot of

   confusion on this occasion, much more than normal."

   (cf 13:57C "...the fans were totally confused. They had all

   of them had drink. They did not have a clue where they were
      going, and that is the reason.")



      Creaser 14:7B-8B



      Ellis 15:52C


      Morgan 15:124A-E. The signs should be "bigger and higher".


Inside the ground.
Although a number of fans referred to the lack of signposting in

the     ground,    the   real     question    should   be    whether   or    not

signposting       would or could have made any significant difference

in the events that happened: this will be considered in more

detail under other heads.



It    also     appears   that     experienced   Police      Officers   did   not

appreciate that the signposting inside the ground would cause any
problems:

       Mole,   7:11C,    7:11F,    7:12B-C,   7:58G;   Duckenfield     7:117D-E

      (although note 7:119B); Murray, 11:70H-71D.


Further, even the admitted inadequacies had not been noted by the

Officer Working Party at any of its inspections.

      See also Bownes 29:89H-90B


It is not suggested that failings by others can excuse the club:

the point which is respectfully made is that the signposting may

not have been so obviously inadequate as is now alleged.
Also note the Green Guide emphasis is on egress from the ground

or, more particularly, evacuation in an emergency. All attention
had been focused on Exit signs following the Bradford tragedy.
There is no suggestion in the evidence that the fire Service was
in any way dissatisfied with the provision of exit signs at

Hillsborough:
     See for example Mackrell 30:105C-E



In the light of the events which in fact occurred it would be

both unfair and unrealistic to pretend that signposting to the

side entrances, however clear, could have materially redirected
that substantial and uncontrolled movement of some two thousand

people from the tunnel which was directly opposite the gate

through which they had entered.


See further 4(d) post.



Note however Andrew Collins' cross-examination of Mr. Mackrell

as   to   the   supposed   causative   defects   in   the   tickets   and

signposting for the Semi-Final:

     Mackrell 30:80A-84E, especially at 83E


As was contended in Part II, the cross-examination is without any

foundation      in the evidence before the       Inquiry.   Not one   fan
suggested that he had been misled by the "B" inside the ground.
The only references made by the fans are to "turnstile B": see

for example Bradley 1:89B-D.
The tickets
It was and is accepted that the tickets themselves could have

been clearer but the crude line drawing on the reverse of the

ticket was only ever intended to give a very simple indication

of the general layout of the stands. The front of each ticket did

give accurate and, it is submitted, clear information; the only

criticism that could be advanced was that the order in which the

information was listed on the counterfoil was illogical. However,
it   is   respectfully doubted whether   this   can   explain why   a

significant number of the fans should have required the tickets

explaining to them.
(d)        Turnstiles   A-G were   insufficient   to   ensure   ease   of

           admission
 to the terraces inside;


The turnstiles were undoubtedly insufficient to deal with the

crush which     confronted them so late on this day but it is

respectfully doubted whether it can be fairly said that this

situation should have been anticipated.



If and insofar as the turnstiles are criticised it is certainly

true that the Club were not alerted to the fact that separate

entrances for the Pens were required in order for the Pens to be

operated safely:

      Mackrell 30:104B-C, 30:124D-E


Further the Sheffield City Council advisors had not raised any

comment or criticism of the layout outside the ground:

      Bownes 29:89G



This is an area of the ground to which considerable thought has

been given. There had been no indication that it was likely to

be the source of danger. The new lay-out had appeared to work
well    and Police     satisfaction with it been expressed at the

Working Party meeting of Jan. 1986 apparently by Superintendent
Greenwood, and it was the club who had taken the trouble to check

the point with them:

      Greenwood 12:79E-81E.
"Hillsborough is a fine ground - one of the best I have policed
at - and there is no particular problem with the Leppings Lane
turnstiles as far as I am concerned." Hand-Davies 13:57D-E.



The closure of the 12 turnstiles
A particular problem did result from the fact that the Police,

for wholly understandable reasons, insisted on the closure of the

twelve turnstiles that would have otherwise served the North

Stand.


It has to be accepted that the closure of these turnstiles

created a potential difficulty but, as with the installation of
the radial fences, this was another example of the difficulty in

balancing the needs of segregation on the one hand and freedom

of movement on the other.


The closure of the twelve turnstiles effectively imposed a heavy

additional burden on the Leppings Lane end on the one occasion

when it is most busy. At the same time, however, it is important

to note that this additional loading should not have affected

turnstiles A-G since they serve the terrace. The closure would

only affect turnstiles A-G, and did only so affect them, because

the concourse area generally was allowed to become jammed instead

of being controlled from the perimeter gates as had happened on

all previous occasions. Accordingly, it was not unreasonable on

the part of the Club to assume that the closure of the 12

turnstiles would not impose a significant, or any, additional
loading on turnstiles A-G although it has to be accepted that it

would be expected to have some effect on 1-16.



The use of A-G for the whole of the terrace.
A-G had, of course, been used by the Police for filling the
Leppings Lane terrrace for all league matches since the end of
segregation at that end of the ground. It was for this reason

that the Police required the enlargement of the gate in the

dividing wall at the rear of the West Stand:

   Calvert 30:15D-16B



The reason for the enlargement of the gate in the wall was

explained to the Officer Working Party by Inspector Calvert:

   Calvert 30:50D-E


The Fire Service would have seen the system in operation at the
1988 Semi-Final when they carried out their inspection:

   Calvert 30:55D



A reasonable inference from the above is that the Sheffield City

Council and the other members of the Officer Working Party were

aware of and approved of the use of turnstiles A-G to fill the

whole terrace.
The events of 15 April 1989.
Almost every fan who arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the
ground at or about 2-30 commented on the large numbers of people

that had been allowed to build up outside the turnstiles in

complete disarray, without any organised queues, see for example:




   Golding, 2:53F : 2.20 "chaos... There were   people everywhere"




   Clark, 2:62D : 2.30 "The courtyard itself was full and there

  were people outside waiting to get in"


   Windever, 2:137B : 2.30 "There was a big mass [of people rear

   the perimeter gates]".



   Barnbrock, 3:36F : 2.40 "It was just stupid, you know...It

   was   just like wherever you stood you stayed.      I was   just

   getting pushed forward."


See also the video.


That situation is to be contrasted with the ease with which those
supporters who had attended the 1988 Semi- Final between the same

teams with the same arrangements in respect of the allocation of

tickets had been able to get through the turnstiles. The most
significant difference between the two years seems to have been

the way in which police officers outside the ground in 1989

checked fans'     tickets and provided a filter or filters that

allowed    orderly queues        to   form at      the   turnstiles,   see   for

example:


   Foster 1:70E : "Last year...there were queues formed on the

   inner side of the cordon...it was controlled."


   Jackson,   2:8B,   E,    and F in answer to Mr.            Woodward:      "The

   difference I noticed was that this year there was no checking

   of tickets until you got to the turnstiles.                  Last year my

   recollection is that the checking point was at the outer

   gates... There was less of a crowd in 1988. Although it was
   later    the   crowd    was    not   as   big    in   volume... I   got   the

   impression it was an organised operation to check tickets."

   See also 2:10A-D


   See also Perry (day 2), Cruice (day 2), Phimester (day 3),

   Garret (day 4).


   Note also the evidence of Mr. Maddox,                  an off duty Police

   Officer: 24:7B-D.


See further the evidence of Evans, the retired Assistant Chief
Constable employed by the F.A. to report on the 1988 Semi-Final,

which tends to confirm the fans' recollection of the policing at

the 1988 game: Evans 26:4C-E.
There also appears to have been an organised filter/ticket check
in 1987: see the evidence of Walker, a journalist who attended
in 1987 paying particular attention to the policing of the Leeds

fans because of the risk of crowd trouble:

     Walker 24:129B-130C, 134G-136B, 138A-D.
     See also Morath, who arrived after the kick off, 28:100C-E.



(Note that Morath suggests that there was a similar build up at

the Leppings Lane end in 1987 and that there was overcrowding in

the central pens. The Club have no evidence on which to challenge

Morath and can only say that no such information reached the

Club.   Inspector Calvert also seems to doubt whether Morath's
analogy with 1989 is correct: 30:28B-E.)


The recollection       of   the   fans   is to be      contrasted with    the

evidence of the Police Officers concerned with the planning and

Policing of the 1988 match. That evidence is to the effect that

the Police operation in 1989 was the same as that mounted in 1988

and that there was only random checking of the tickets of fans

prior to those supporters reaching the turnstiles:

     see e.g. Mole 7:99E.


The two views are irreconcilable but the explanation may very
well be that whatever similarities there may have been between

in    the   planning   of   the   two    operations,    the   execution   and

supervision of those plans in 1988 was undoubtedly more thorough

and effective than in 1989.
In the light of the successful operation in 1988 there was
nothing to lead the Club to think that the identical allocation
of turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end would cause any serious

problems if the crowd were controlled by the police outside the

ground in the same manner as it had been in the past. Given the

long history of excellent policing of the Leppings Lane end of

the   ground,   the   club   cannot    be   criticised    for   failing   to
appreciate that the police would fail to control the crowd in a

satisfactory manner.



The turnstiles.
Police   requirement    to   close    the   turnstiles:   Mole,   6:93B-E,

6:100C-F, 6:101C-F.


nb the Police seem to accept that the turnstiles will not operate
efficiently unless there are orderly queues, which is a function
of the Police: Mole, 6:113B - 116E; Bennett 15:73C-D.



There appears to be a difference of opinion amongst the Police

Officers as to whether or not queues can be formed at Leppings

Lane. Sergeant Morgan is of the clear view that queues can be and

have been formed at capacity or large matches whereas other

officers talk in terms of a "general queue". Those officers think

that the direction in the operational order to form orderly
queues might as well not be included although none of them had

reported the problem as they perceived it to their superior

officers; Sergeant Morgan considers that the operational order
can be and is put into effect:



     Morgan 16:8F-G, 16:22B-C, 16:23B


     cf Sykes 15:1F-G, 15:2C-D, 15:7H-8A; Duffy 15:88A-B


Although even Inspector Sykes agreed that it is the police duty

to "try and prevent crushing or whatever at the turnstiles":

     Sykes 15:1G


Inspector Sykes describes the photograph           MWL/25A as an "orderly

queue:

     Sykes 15:12G


Sergeant Morgan describes the same photograph as people "waiting

patiently" but not a queue:

     Morgan 16:23D


It should be noted, however, that even Inspector Sykes had never

seen the behaviour he witnessed at the Semi-Final at any previous

match:

     Sykes 15:25E


In    1987   it   appears   that   long   queues    were   formed   at   the
turnstiles:



     ...snake queues...two or three abreast...[for] about 30 or

     40 yards..." Walker 24:130A-C
The Club is not qualified to express a view on either of the two
opinions   on    the    policing     of   the    Leppings    Lane    turnstiles.
However, the Club is both concerned and surprised to learn that

anyone can accept that it is impossible to control a crowd that

has collected in an area with ample notice and which has been

expertly designed and laid out for that very purpose.


The Policing of the reduced turnstiles was based on discussions

between the club and the Police as to the capacity of the

turnstiles      on     an   all     ticket    match.     According    to   Chief

Superintendent       Mole,    Mr.    Mackrell's        secretary's    reasonable

estimate for the operation of the turnstiles was 1000 an hour:

   Mole, 6.-119B, 7:41C-D.


Mr. Mackrell believes that the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane

end can comfortably take 800 an hour:

   Mackrell 30-.87E-88B


It does seem clear that, had there been orderly queuing outside

the Leppings Lane turnstiles,                those figures would have been
maintained. Indeed it is to be noted that Superintendent Marshall

thought the turnstiles were operating quickly even when the crowd

outside the turnstiles was approaching some 6000 to 8000 but at
a time when the queues still existed (the queues were "lost" at

about 2.35: Marshall 11:12G; Proctor 16:39F):                 Marshall 10:91A-

B. cf Sykes 15:4E-F
It is very important to note the HSE report at paragraph 4.17 in

relation to turnstiles A-G:


     "Between 2.55 pm and 3.00pm the rate increased and reached a
     maximum of about 1150 people per turnstile per hour. This
     increased rate coincides with the time Gate C was opened and
     could   therefore be    a   result   of   decreased   crowd pressure

     allowing a faster flow through the turnstiles."



It is of course correct to note that some of the Police Officers

commented on the fact that the turnstiles were operating slowly

in any event. This is particularly true of the Merseyside mounted

officers     who   thought   that   people     were   going   through    the

turnstiles at a slower rate than at Anfield when the fans were
paying although it seems that these officers thought that the
policy adopted by the South Yorkshire Police of searching fans

outside the ground was at least an important factor in the speed
of the turnstiles being reduced: Smith 16:60B-F; Grunnill 16:80D-

G. See also a SY Police Officer: Tagg 16:38A.




It   might    be   thought   regrettable,      pointless   and    positively

unhelpful to search people up to three times each within a few

yards of the one point where the maximum speed,                  in confined

conditions, is essential.


The Police Officers actually positioned on the turnstiles all

accepted that the reduction in the flow through the turnstiles


                                     46
was due to the pressure that had built up outside:
e.g. Duffy 15:83E; Branston 16:129E-130B, 17:8C-D. See also McKay

13:10E-G.


Even the peculiar problem described by PC Branston of trousers

being caught on certain turnstiles was caused by the pressure

outside: Branston 16:131B-C. This is clearly a specific matter

that requires correction but which cannot have had any major

influence on events.



It is clear that the problems experienced with the flow rate at

turnstiles A-G were not felt to anything like the same extent at
turnstiles    11-16   which   according    to    Sergeant     Burns   were

processing spectators at the rate of one every three seconds:
Burns 17:30H, 17:44F-H. See also those turnstile operators who

counted the number of people coming through their turnstiles:

Hall 21:25A-F, 21:27D-F (920 between, effectively 2.15 and 3.00);

Haskins 21:29A (600 between, effectively, 2.40 and 3.00).


It is particularly important to bear in mind that the turnstiles
referred to above are the very turnstiles that could be expected

to bear an increased load as a result of the Police requirement

to close the 12 turnstiles that would normally serve the North
Stand.   It   is   accordingly   clear    that   Mole   and    Mackrell's

expectation that these turnstiles would be able to cope does not

deserve the scorn which has been poured upon it!
The evidence of the turnstile operators on A-G is that they lost

control at about 2.30 and the turnstiles subsequently repeatedly

jammed as a result of the crush:

      Sayles 20:123G-H, 20:125E-F.


It is to be noted that the turnstiles serving the West Stand were
operating     at an estimated rate of one spectator every three

seconds:
      Burns 17:3OH



Orderly queues       ensure   that   even   large   crowds   (at   least   if

"orderly" is to be equated with "docile" or "co-operative") will

get in to the ground quickly:          Creaser 14:25B-D (Policing the

Mormon festival at Hillsborough).


Note also that there was nothing in the previous experience of
the Police or the club to suggest that the turnstiles would be

in any way inadequate:
   Mole 6:116C-E; Marshall 10:81C-E, 10:96C-D.



It is important to bear in mind that it was always recognised

that if there was a serious build up outside the turnstiles the

Police could take the simple, usual and wholly undramatic step

of securing the safety of the crowd by postponing the match.



Note further that Superintendent Murray in the Police control box
was    "almost sure"    that they would get everyone          in at 2.30:

11:81C. Murray only became concerned about the turnstiles until
2.45: 11:81F


Note also the "conspiracy theory":

   Greenwood 12:94G-95A
The Club, however, do not subscribe to that theory.   What they

would endorse is the view that a relatively small number of
determined and ruthless individuals and small gangs intended to

and did "beat the system".



Insofar as it is suggested that Leppings Lane is a natural

bottleneck which, with large crowds, becomes unpoliceable, see

the vast majority of the evidence that the build up on 15 April

was completely unprecedented. Even in those circumstances there
is some evidence which tends to show that the crowd could have

been controlled:
   Hand-Davies 13:46E (situation out of control by 2.35 by which

   time it was "too late").



   Creaser 14:16G-H
   cf e.g. Hand-Davies 13:38C-D



   Creaser 14:26B-C, 14:58H, *14:69C-E

   Proctor 16:42C-E


   Smith 16:62A



   Fry 16:76C-E




                               49
The flow rate through the turnstiles was also reduced by the

actions of the fans either "doubling up" or jumping over the

turnstiles themselves
   Sykes 15:4E; see also Copeland 21:10B-C; Rhodes 21:23G-H.


It does appear that at least one of the turnstiles was unable to
withstand the pressure outside in that the internal wall was

pushed out of line: Crawford 16:100F-101A; Branston 16:130A-C.
(e)     The gates in the perimeter fence were not marked as such;



There has been no evidence that,     even   if the gates   in the
perimeter fence had been marked as such, it would have assisted
any of the fans in Pens 3 and 4 in escaping from the crush. The
gates are intended to be manned and were manned on the pitch side

by policeman trained to react promptly to emergencies. That they

did not do is surprising but an emergency exit sign on the gate

could not have assisted. All the evidence has shown that the

fans were only able initially to exit singly through the gates

and thereafter, due to the build up of bodies, if the police

manning the gate were successful in catching hold of the fans

inside the Pens and pulling them out.
(f)        The gate in the perimeter fence in pen 4 was difficult

           to use since there were no steps leading to it;



See comments to 3(e) ante.


The    absence   of   steps   does   not   appear   to   have   contributed

materially to the problem. P.C. Illingworth stated that whilst
the fans could not come out in a constant stream because they had

to negotiate the step, the fans did in fact "flood out" when he

opened the gate:

      Illingworth 17-.135E-F, 17-.141C

      cf Hooson 29:32F-G


It is also to be noted that the Police, for good reason, did not

want steps in this Pen. The Officer Working Party seem to have

approved the Police position:

      Eastwood 28:73D-E
(g)        The tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4 was not of a uniform

           gradient and sloped steeply at the end leading to the

           terraces.


There is no evidence that the gradient in the tunnel in any way
caused or contributed to the surges into Pens 3 and 4.


The    tunnel   was     obviously   designed   with   safety   of   egress

uppermost in the architect's mind. The extraordinary actions of

the    Police   in opening Gate      C to allow an uncontrolled and

sustained rush of fans into the stadium would not and could not

have been foreseen. Without such an unusual and unprecedented

flood of people into the tunnel it is in fact safer than if it

was built with a shallower gradient:
      Seaman 23:13A-F
      Eastwood proof para. 62 - 80
      Eastwood 27-.60H-61C, 28:13D-E
4. Planning for and the stewarding of the semi-final itselfs
  The criticisms
   "(a) Foresight - since Liverpool had been given an inadequate

         allocation of seats, additional pressures outside the

         ground should have been foreseen;
   (b)   insufficient contingency plans to deal with the effects

         of opening gate C to relieve the pressure outside;
   (c)   Overcrowding inside the ground should have been foreseen

         and very great care should have been taken to avoid it;

   (d)   No stewards were available to direct persons entering
         the ground to ensure that the pens filled up evenly;
   (e)   Stewards ought to have monitored the ingress of the aod
         and,   with    police   help    if   necessary,   ought    to   have

         prevented spectators going down the tunnel to pens 3 and

         4;
   (f)   No steps taken to ensure that the capacities of pens 3

and 4 were not exceeded

   (g)   Insufficient    plans   for     communication     with    and/or   a

         failure to communicate with the police."




                                    54
(a)       Foresight - since Liverpool had been given an inadequate

           allocation of seats, additional pressures outside the

           ground should have been foreseen;



GG:       45, 46 cf 23, 204 ("inside")


See 3(d) above.


It is "common sense" that the Police requirement to reduce the

number of turnstiles would add very large numbers to the crowd

at the Leppings Lane end: Marshall 11:36B.



It is illogical and manifestly unfair to complain of a lack of

foresight on the one hand while suggesting that it was dangerous
to take account of previous years experiences on the other. The
club were entitled and bound to pay considerable heed to the fact

that the same exercise had been successfully accomplished on two

previous occasions and that there was no reason to anticipate any

dramatic difference in this year.


Foresight - additional pressure normally dealt with by postponing

the kick off regardless of the reason for the build up:

      Mole 6:109A-E. (Although there is some evidence of the Police

      on the day being intolerant of those who choose to come late:

      Murray 11:82C-D, llslllF, cf 11:112A-B; Bichard 19:48F-G.)


It also appears that there were large numbers of fans who arrived

without     tickets. See   particularly   the   evidence   of   all   the
turnstile operators.


All of the Police Officers agreed that not only was the build up
of the crowd wholly unprecedented but also the behaviour of the
crowd was of a type that had not been experienced before. This

feeling was true even of the Merseyside Officers:



   "Q...your concluding observation in relation to the crowds

   on this day that you never ever previously been confronted

   by   a crowd of supporters so unruly and so unwilling to listen

   to reason. A> Not at a football match, no, sir."
   Smith 16:70D
(b)       insufficient contingency plans to deal with the effects

of        opening gate C to relieve the pressure outside;



There was no contingency plan because it was never envisaged that

Gate C would be opened if there was a build up outside the

turnstiles.


Gate C is and was         the worst possible gate to open because

everyone knew that the central pens would be the first to fills

Marshall lls31D-34E, lls43B.


Gate C was not intended to be used as a pressure valve.                 The

Police used Gate C      as a means of resolving the severe problems

they had allowed to build up outside the turnstiles. However it

is accepted that the club was not told of the decision to open

the gates

      Duckenfield 8;44F

      Murray lls92C


In particular     it    is   to   be   noted   that   Chief   Superintendent

Duckenfield's recollection that Superintendent Murray was trying

to contact Mr. Lock to tell him of the decision to open the gates

is incorrects

      Duckenfield 9s33E-34B

      Murray lls81E-G


In these circumstances no blame can fairly be attached to the

club for failing to have or to put into effect any plan to deal
with the effects of the opening of Gate C.


"... I have never envisaged C gate as an entry gate of course...":
Murray 11:93 H


The Fire Service certainly did not envisage any circumstances

in which the Police would open Gate C:

   Seaman 23:35D-E



There   may   have   been   a misunderstanding   between   the   Police

Officers as to the best course to be adopted;

  Marshall, 10:102G-103C
   cf Purdy 15:30A-B


See Purdy who seems to have envisaged using Gate C as a true
pressure valve, being opened and shut as necessary to create a

clear area into which fans could be moved. This also seems to be

the course of action that Sergeant Morgan was expecting:

   Purdy 15:31A-B, 15:40G-H, 15:49C-E

   Morgan 16:5D-E



The true "contingency plan" was the power given to the Police to

postpone the kick off: see 3(a) above.


Marshall did not ask for the kick off to be delayed:

   Marshall 11:28A-B.
Although PC Buxton did make such a request it was apparently-
thought by someone (it is not clear who) that it was "too late":

   Buxton 18:15G-H


See also the evidence of Mr. Lock who, having monitored the build

up of the crowd on the Leppings Lane terrace, was on the point

of contacting the police to see if the Kick-off should be delayed

when his intention was overtaken by the opening of Gate C and the

subsequent events: see 4(e) post.


Delays were normally dealt with by postponing the kick off
regardless   of   the   reason   for the   build   up:   Mole   6:109A-E.
(Although there is some evidence of the Police on the day being

intolerant of those who choose to come late: Murray 11:82C-D,

11:111F cf 11:112A-B; Bichard 19:48F-G.)



It is to be noted that one of the Club's employees has some

recollection of Gate C being opened by the Police in 1981 but
circumstances of and reason for that opening should be looked at

with care:
   Thorpe 21:34E-F, 21:90D-91A



In 1981 it appears that the influx was both orderly - the Police
had lined up the fans against the wall prior to the Gate being

opened - and small in number and it seems likely that the fans

who entered through Gate C were those that had been removed from

the Kop by the Police and moved to Leppings Lane:

   Thorpe 21:3 5A-B

        This evidence is to be viewed in conjunction with that of Mr.
        Vaux   who did not see Gate C being opened even though he would

#       have been going through the turnstiles at that time and did not
        feel any sense of relief from the press of the crowd: 22:8D-10B.



#       It therefore seems to be highly unlikely that the Police had ever

        used Gate C so as to relieve pressure on the turnstiles, and it
        most be inconceivable that they would not have discussed this



    
#       with the club (even after the event) if they had done so.




                                        60
(c)        Overcrowding inside the ground should have been foreseen
           and very great care should have been taken to avoid it;


Before examining the evidence on this point the club would

reiterate the submission made in Part II: any system designed or

steps taken to avoid overcrowding inside the ground would have

been defeated, as a matter of certainty, by the opening of Gate

C without warning or precaution.



The danger of overcrowding had been foreseen: the radial barriers

were introduced in 1981 to help combat overcrowding:


      "...these barriers would be used as a means of preventing the

      overcrowding which had invariably taken place prior to 1981

      in that central area." Eastwood 28:60E


Mr. Mackrell was well aware of the dangers of overcrowding in the

Pens:

      Mackrell 30:75C-E



Thus Mr. Mackrell was anxious to confirm with Mr. Lock and Chief
Superintendent Mole the arrangement with the Police for the

monitoring and filling of the Pens:

      Mackrell 30:114E-115A


Thus:

"It is a prime responsibility of the [Police] Officers present

to see to the safety of people at the ground." Creaser 14:2H.
Nearly all witnesses stated that the crush did not occur until
about 2.55 or at about the time the players returned to the pitch

ready for the kick off: in other words the two surges described

by the fans in the pens did not occur until after the Police had

opened Gate C for the second time at 2.52. Up until at least 2.45

it seems that Pens 3 and 4 were not in any way overcrowded,

although they may have been quite full but no more than expected
by the fans in a "big match":



   Jackson, 2:2B and 2:3C: Reached seat at 2.55 - 3.00 by which

   time the centre pens looked "very, very full".



  Miss Bennett, 2:35C and 2:35E: "The pen felt full at about
   2.40 - 2.45...there was one big push about 2.55"


  Golding, 2:56 B and E: close to 3.00 "[The end of the tunnel]

  was very full - not what I am used to at Anfield...At first

  we wormed our way in [through Pen 3] then all of a sudden you
   just had no control..."



  Clarke, 2:74 A-C: in answer to Mr. Woodward Mr. Clarke agreed

  that he had got through the turnstiles at about 2.45 and

  proceeded into Pen 3 and that he wormed his way down in the

  normal way. It did not strike him that the Pen was over full

   "because there seemed to be space at the back...". See also

   2:75F Mr. Clark saw the players come out on to the field, it
  felt tightly squashed but it was acceptable: at Anfield it

  would be a normal situation,    typical of a big game.    Note
however   that   in   front   people   were   in   distress:   2:76A.
"...after that there is [at about the time of the toss up] a

push that comes from the back...": 2:76B.


Cruice,   2:95C: At about 2.52     (2:95B)    "it was pretty well

tightly packed". There was a push from behind "a couple of

minutes before the kick off": 2:95G-H.



Windever, 2:138D-E: It was when the players were on the field

that "a big crush come..."


Hughes (Mark), 3:3G - 5B: At 2.30 Pen 3 was half to three-
quarters full. From 2.30 gradually filled up. By about 2.45
-2.50 Mr. Hughes considered the Pen full. At "around 2.55"

it became uncomfortably full.


Hughes (David), 3:18E-G: "All I remember is the players coming

onto the pitch and then it was just an almighty rush and I was

just literally pinned...All I heard was an almighty "whoosh",

and the wind was taken out of people" . Until that surge he had

not suffered any discomfort: see 3:18B-C and G.


Devine, 3:80H: in answer to Mr. Woodward Mr. Devine agreed
that he was able to     make his way through the crowd in Pen 3

at about 2.50.



Garrett (Peter), 3:83B: "[Pen 4] started getting pretty full

at about 2.50. Just as the teams were coming out because I
      only saw one team come out, there was a big push then, a big

      heave forward and that was all I saw."




      nb Moody, 3:96D-E and 3:97C-D :"It was exactly 2.48 [when I

      got into Pen    3]...[It was]     extremely full,   uncomfortably
       full...we decided to edge to the right ...1 actually     touched
      the fence [between Pens 3 and 2] with my hand and then there
      was just an almighty surge, an incredible surge, and I just

      went sideways and forwards, I don't know..."



#     Postlethwaite, 3:142G - 143A : "It was just as the players
      came out the first surge. The second surge occurred a couple

      of minutes after the players had come out           [to start the

#     game]".



      nb Hicks    (in Pen 1 and 2), 4:7D:     "I would say at around
#     quarter to three...it was starting to look extremely busy and
      people were showing obvious signs of distress then."



0     See also   Burke 4:37D - 38E, Connolley 4:53C-D and 57G, Allen

       4 :142F - 143B .



#     See also   Inspector Bullas 14:99D-100E, 14:106F-G.


    A reasonable inference from the above is that the overcrowding

0   was caused by the sudden influx of large numbers of fans as a

    result of the two occasions on which the police opened Gate C.


                                   64
The opening of that gate was in itself a wholly unforeseeable
event - so far as the club were concerned. If that gate had not
been opened it would be reasonable to expect a steady build up
of fans but that, as at other matches, the fans would evenly
distribute themselves in Pens 1, 2, 5, 6, and 7 by means of the

gates at the top of the radial fences under the careful scrutiny

of the officers in the Police Control:


     See the very important evidence of Mr. Hilton, 3:154F - 155A

     as to the ease of access to these alternative pens whilst the

     crowd was building up as opposed to the impossibility of using

     the gates when there a large influx of people entering the
     ground via the tunnel as a result of the Police opening Gate

     C.


     See also Bullas 14:97F-G



Packing the Pens:
In   1981   a   crushing    incident   occurred   on   the   Leppings   Lane

terraces. The      radial    barriers were   introduced      to   prevent   a

recurrence of such an event and to aid the process of packing and

distributing fans on the terraces:

     Seaman 23:4G-H, 23:20C-D



The system introduced in 1981 was not of separate pens but of
interlinked pens. The means by which the Pens as introduced

should have been used is correctly set out in the evidence of

Evans although it is expressed as his opinion:
   Evans 26:6G-7C, 26:17H-18B, 26:19B

   See also Calvert 30:20C-21D, 30:26C-G, 30:30B-D
  And Lock 31:52E-54E, 31:65C


Prior to the introduction of the radial fences but after the

crushing incident it does appear that the Police indicated their

view that the stewards should be responsible for packing the

fans:

   Thorpe 21:35F-37B


This view never extended to expecting stewards to be physically

present on the terraces:
   Calvert 30:13B


It appears that the meeting did not produce an improvement but

an improvement did result from the introduction of the radial

barriers shortly thereafter:

   Calvert 30:13F-G


However the radial barriers seem to have been introduced with the

intention that the Police would control the packing of the Pens:

   Eastwood 27:130D-F; Seaman   ; Grimshaw 30:39A-D


In any event the Police certainly "took control" of the packing

of fans:

   Marsh 21:115H



Police responsibility for packing and monitoring the pens cannot
seriously be doubted. The Police had de facto responsibility for

the monitoring and filling of the Pens at League matches and

envisaged assuming responsiblity at Semi-Finals:

   Calvert 30:27E-G
The club does not seek to put the matter on the basis that a
formal agreement was entered into between themselves and the

Police - rather that there was a clear understanding as to what

should be done and that there is. complete agreement as to what

was in fact done.

This "system" (and it was perfectly sound) had been confirmed by

Chief Superintendent Mole on Mr. Mackrell's appointment as Club

Secretary:

   Mackrell 30:102G-103D, 30:114E-115A
   See also Lock 31:46G, 31:49F


At no stage have the Police ever sought to change that system or

remove the responsiblity from their shoulders:

   Mackrell 30:93G-H, 30 116C-E, 30:119C-E


Indeed the Police approved the Club's "Instructions For Match Day

Staff"    which   contained   no   reference    to    stewarding      on   the

terraces:

   Sewell 31:5B-D, 31:6C-F



Further   at   the   pre-season    training    of    stewards   the   police
representative gave no indication to the stewards or the Club

that the system was to be altered in any way:

   Sewell 31:12D-E
See also

   Calvert 30: 20C-21D
   Lock 31:46B-G, 31:47C-D, 31:84E-F
  Greenwood 12:28C-D, 12:29H-30A, 12:47D-48A       (Police Control

   responsible for monitoring the terraces).

   Creaser 14:2F-H, 14:29A

   Darling 14:74F
  Marsh 21:110G-112B



League Matches:


  Mole 6:112A-E,     7:44E-45A, *7:47F-48A,   7:56E-G,   7:82A-B (cf
  Murray who thought that the Police were never on the terraces

   and controlled the pens from the concourse: 11:64B-C).



   Creaser 14:3H-4B



 Semi-Finals:
   There is some evidence that in 1987 the Police packed the

   Pens and that in 1988 there was a change of policy:

           Creaser 14:46G-50C, 14:56D


   It is certainly true that in 1988 and 1989, the fans are

   expected to "find their own level":

           Mole 7:12H-13A; Duckenfield 8:105C; Creaser 14:14E-16F;

           Darling 14:74D-E.




                                 68
When fans were allowed to find their own level, the Police would

monitor the influx of fans very carefully:

   Calvert 30:26B-C

   Lock 31:52E-53C


This would mean that the Police would block off the tunnel if any
part of the terrace became full:

   Calvert 30:30B-D


There was no confusion in Inspector Calvert's mind that the

Police would in fact be carrying out the monitoring and filling

of the Pens:

   Calvert 30:55G-H


It appears that the Police in charge of the operation on 15 April

1989 either did not appreciate their responsibilities or failed
to properly discharge such responsibilities.


The Police were fully aware of the fact that stewards would not

be on the terraces and any change of policy or the continaunce

of the policy to let the pens "fill themselves" would have been

made with the benefit of that knowledge:

   Mole 7:21A-C; Duckenfield 8:104A, 9:23F-G. (See also Creaser
   14:5D-E)




And in the knowledge that it would be "unreasonable" to expect

stewards to go on to those terraces:
  Mole 7:41F.     (See also Creaser the absence of stewards "did

   not surprise" him: 14:5E.)


And in the knowledge that the club were unable to monitor the

pens from their own cameras:

   Duckenfield 9:24B; Murray 11:123E-124B.



On the day in question Inspector White, as usual, had inspected
the West Stand and knew of the precise location of the stewards:

   Thorpe 21:96E-G

No previous experience of overcrowding:
  Mole 7:13E-F.


Police control best situated to monitor the filling of the Pens:

  Mole 7:21G-H, 7:60F-G, 7:82E-F. See also Creaser 14:29A.


In addition Mole used to go down onto the perimeter track:

   Mole 7:59G-60A; Calvert 30:66G-67B; Lock 31:79G-80A

   cf Duckenfield: 7:126B.


Duckenfield and Greenwood were both aware of the importance of
not allowing the pens to overfill:
   Duckenfield 7:124B.


2.30 Duckenfield concerned about the concentration of fans and

puts   out   a    tannoy   message   because   he   could   foresee

"difficulties":

   Duckenfield 8:12H, 8:13A-B, 8:14D.
2.45 - 2.50 Duckenfield thinks that the central pens are "getting

on for being full":

   Duckenfield 8:87A-B.



As noted above the decision to open Gate C was taken without the
Club's knowledge or approval. It is clear that Duckenfield did

not monitor the central pens with the large influx of fans which

resulted from the opening of gate C:

   Duckenfield 8:52E-G.

There could be no control of the fans other than on the inside:

   Purdy 15;43F



Duckenfield   completely   forgot   to   deal   with   a   foreseeable

consequence of his decision, namely that all the fans would head

for the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4:
   Duckenfield 8:91E, 8:92A-B.


The tunnel could have been blocked off in "30 seconds"           if a

responsible officer had been informed:

    Creaser 14:32C-E.



It was standard procedure to close off the tunnel when the pens

became tolerably full if the "fill themselves" policy was being

operated:

   Calvert 30:20C-21D, 30:26C-G, 30:30B-D

   Lock 31:52E-54E, 31:65C
Even Duckenfield admits that it would be "unfair" to blame the
stewards or the club for the consequences of his decision to open

Gate Cs 9:29H.


Note that there is a conflict between the Police and the Fire
Service as to whether or not Police Officers should have been
placed on the terrace to           "control"   the gates    in the radial

fences.




Note some confusion amongst the more junior ranks of the police

as   to   their   precise   role    - monitoring    often    equated   with

"excessive packing etc":


     Darling 14:80G, 14:81D-E (note even though Darling is confused
     as to the role of the stewards he still envisages the report

     of overcrowding being made to Police Control: 14:82G-83B.),

     14:90G (monitoring of the pens is an "important" duty of the

     Police Inspector inside the ground.)


     Bullas 14:108G-H (West Stand Inspector who did not think that

     he had any responsibility for packing the terraces.)



     Burman 17:71C, 17:81B-D




This was true even of the junior officers in the Police Control
   Goddard 18:9 7A-C
   Bichard 19:61C-D


It is particularly interesting to note the difference between

Sergeants Crawford and Burns.             Sergeant Crawford,    who was in

charge of Pens 3 and 4 during Phase 1 felt that his only concern

was public order and would only go on to the terraces or control

access to the pens if so deployed by Ground Control:

   Crawford 16:96F-G, 16:97E-G, 16:114E-F


Sergeant Burns on the other hand categorically stated that his

duties included the patrolling of the pens under his control,

with   an    emphasis     on   ensuring    public   safety.    In   his   view
overcrowding was the biggest threat to the safety of the public

at football matches.

   Burns 17:29B-D, 17:47C



The position inside the ground was complicated by two decisions

of the Police:

   (a)      opening Gate C without informing the Club;
   (b)      instructing the turnstile operators to let fans into the

            Leppings Lane end regardless of whether or not they had

            the correct ticket or even any ticket at all.



On point      (b)   see   Bennett   15:64D-F;   Burns   17:31B-E,     Gutcher

18:39F-H.

Also note the evidence of the turnstile operators:

   Sales 20:122E-G, 20:123C; Saynor 21:4D; Copeland 21:9C-D.
Both decisions     effectively deprived         the   Club of      their only

practical means of control/monitoring namely the computer count

in the Club's control room.


It seems that the Fire Service do not think that stewards could
properly monitor the filling of the Pens although the Chief Fire

Officer thinks that there would only be some occasions on which

the Police would have to take over              from a steward who was

monitoring the Pens:

   Seaman 23:9A-11B


It is to be noted that one of the occasions when it would be
necessary for the Police to take over is when the physical

redistribution of the fans, as opposed to merely observing their

entrance, is required:

   Seaman 23:23E


Inspector Calvert and, by inference, the Police certainly did not

expect the stewards to be physically present on the terraces even

on the one occasion (1981) when the Police informed the stewards

and the Club of their view of the stewards role:

   Calvert 30:13C




Even   the   Police   ideal   view   of   the   duties   of    stewards,     as

expressed    by   Inspector   Calvert     would   result      in   the   Police
retaining overall responsibility for the monitoring of the pens
but with the   stewards being directed by the Police to,     for
example, close off the tunnel entrance if Police Control thought

that a particular pen was full:

   Calvert 30:32C-E
(d)        No stewards were available to direct persons entering the

      ground to ensure that the pens filled up evenly;



See 4(c) above.
The Safety Certificate does not require the Club to have stewards

positioned on the terraces themselves.


As noted above the Club were well aware of the dangers            of

overcrowding;    the radial barriers had been introduced,      inter

alia, to deal with that problem:

      Eastwood 28:60E


Mr. Mackrell was also well aware of the dangers inherent in the

use of Pens on terraces and, on his appointment, confirmed Chief
Superintendent Mole the existing arrangements for the filling of
pens:
      Mackrell 30-.75C-E, 30:102G-103D, 30-.114E-115A




The Police had requested extra stewards for the Kop, and thus it

is clear beyond doubt that they had consciously considered the
question of the need for stewards on "terraces".         These extra

stewards were provided by the Club. Extra stewards would have

been provided at the Leppings Lane end of the ground if such had

been requested by the Polices no such request was made:

      Lock 31:49F-50A
In addition on the day of the Semi-Final Inspector White had
inspected the West Stand and was informed of the precise location

of the stewards:
   Thorpe 21:96 E-G


Accordingly, the packing of the terraces, including the direction

of spectators, was not a duty of the stewards either at League

Matches or on Semi-Final day and no criticism can be levelled at

the Club for failing to provide Stewards to perform a function

that was and always had been performed by the Police unless there

was an express request from the Police so to do.


This criticism of the Club again has to be viewed in the light
of events that actually occurred: namely the wholly unforeseeable
opening of Gate C by the Police causing an immediate influx of
an extremely large number of fans. All the evidence of the fans

was to the effect that there were no stewards or policemen

positioned at the entrance to the tunnel or at the radial gates

at the back of Pens 3 and 4. The real question is whether or not,

in the absence of any prior warning that would have given the
club officials     sufficient   time   to   arrange   for   an effective

barrier to be placed across the tunnel, the stewards could have
directed the fans entering through Gate C into the alternative

Pens:

   In this regard the evidence of an off duty Police Officer Mr.
   Peter Garret, day 4, in answer to Mr. Glasgow is obviously

   very important: essentially Mr. Garrett agreed that it would

   be impossible for individual stewards or police officers to
  have directed the fans who entered through Gate C. See also

  Westergren 3:159F - 160D.



   This is supported by the fact that many of the fans who
   entered by Gate C found themselves carried along by the crowd,

   unable
      $
          to escape even if they had wanted to: see in particular

   Patrick Cunningham day 2 who tried to turn back but was unable

   to do so because of the sheer volume of people pressing

   through the tunnel; see also Foster day 1 (22A, 27), Bradley

  day 1 (29, 31A, 32A), Hennesey day 2 (9, 10), Barnbrock 3:40D
   -41A, Fitzmaurice 5: 2F - 3B and 12B-H (nb it is clear from

   the following pages that this witness was confused but he was

  one of the first to go through Gate C which may explain the

   lack of a crush at first - 5:21C); See also the evidence of

   Constance Sweet 5:62D-F (crowd pushing to get through Gate C,
  with the large mass of people fairly quickly disappearing).



It appears that at least one Police Officer in 1988 believed that

the control of the filling of the Pens      remained within the

province of the Police since it appears that the central tunnel

was cordoned off at about 2.55 by a line of Police in the 1988

Semi-Final: see Matthews 4:82E-F. Although this was apparently
done on this occasion without the knowledge or approval of the

overall commander (Chief Superintendent Mole) or the sectional

commander (Superintendent Marshall): see Mole 7:46C, 7:47A and
Marshall: 10:77D



The closure of the tunnel in 1988 (and in 1987) by the Police
seems beyond doubt:
   Creaser 14:1H-2C, 14:46G-51E; Sgt. Crawford 16:122B-G; Lang

   20:10A-11A; Thorpe 21:95G.


cf. the closure of the tunnel makes a "nonsense" of the "fill

themselves" policy: Mole 7:48D-E.




Closing the tunnel is the obvious option or the only option:

   Mole 7-.63F, 7 :64D.



And it was standard practice to close off the tunnel when any Pen
was full even when the policy of letting the fans find their own

level was being used:
   Calvert 30:20C-21D, 30.-26C-G, 30:30B-D

   Lock 31:52E-54E, 31:65C
(e)        Stewards ought to have monitored the ingress of the crowd
and, with police help if necessary, ought to have              prevented

spectators going down the tunnel to pens 3 and 4;


See 4(d) and       (e) ante for the system of monitoring that was

operated at Hillsborough.


Stewards    were   deployed where    the      Police both wanted    and/or

expected them. The Police were responsible for packing the pens.

Police were effectively responsible for monitoring the capacities

of the pens since they had the officers deployed in the most

advantageous positions.


Dr. Eastwood worked on the assumption that there would be good

monitoring of the Pens:
      Eastwood 27:47B-C


It would be unreasonable to expect the Club, in the light of the

understanding with the Police, to work on the assumption that the

Police would not discharge their responsibilities properly.


The stewards were briefed as to their role by Inspector White who

gave "clear and concise" instructions, outlining their duties in

the West Stand,       "saying that the Police would in no way be

responsible     for   showing   people   to    their   seats...":   Creaser
For the Semi-Final the Police had requested extra stewards for
the Kop. These were provided by the Club. Extra stewards would

have been provided at the Leppings Lane end of the ground if such

had been requested by the Police: no such request was made:

   Lock 31:49F-50A



In addition on the day of the Semi-Final Inspector White had

inspected the West Stand and was informed of the precise location

of the stewards:

   Thorpe 21:96E-G


No warning given by police to stewards and, as such, the stewards

were unable to take any effective action:

   Duckenfield: 8:43B-D

   Jackson: 10:29



See comments to 4(d) above. Effectively the Police accept that

the decision to open the gates was taken without consultation
with or authority from the club in the full knowledge that the

club did not, and could not be expected, to have stewards on the
terraces and were unable to monitor the filling of the pens from

the club cameras.



It is clear that Duckenfield was mistaken about Murray trying
to contact Lock over the decision to open the gates, and the club

control room: 8:42H, 9:24C.



There were no preparations for the opening of Gate C because, in
Duckenfield's       own words,     "I gave no specific          instructions":

8:44F, 9:14E.


It is       accepted   that by deciding to open            the gates without

informing the club the Police overrode any system of control:

9:2 1 C .



It is also accepted that a reception committee was necessary at

gate C: 9:21C.


See also Marshall's evidence that Gate C was the worst gate to

open because it was obvious where the fans would go.



Duckenfield        completely     forgot     to   deal   with   a    foreseeable

consequence of his decision: 8:91E, 8:92A-B.


In those circumstances it is "unfair to blame " the club or the
stewards: 9:29H.


In any event it is plain that the Club Officials were monitoring

the ingress of the crowd into the ground and that they were not

concerned by the build up at least until about 2.45:

     Lock 31:56C-57H




It   is     also   plain   that   Mr.   Lock      took   immediate    action   on

witnessing the opening and closing of Gate C for the first time:

     Lock 31:58C-60C, 31:66A-B, 31:670-686, 31:70E-F


                                        82
Immediately prior to the first opening of Gate C Mr. Lock was

thinking of enquiring whether Police Control were considering
delaying the kick-off but he was overtaken by the "unfortunate

coincidence of events";
      Lock 31:77G-78B


As soon as Mr. Lock returned to the Club Control Room after the

first opening of Gate C, he was informed of the second opening

of the Gates by PC Guest. Mr. Lock witnessed PC Guest attempting

to contact Police Control by the landline telephone and he left

the    Club   Control   to   go   to   the   Police   Control   box   whilst

unsuccessfully trying to contact the Ground Commander on the

radio:
      51:60D-E, 51:60H-61B



In the light of that evidence there can be no criticism of the

Club for failing to monitor the ingress of the crowd. The Club
Officials, principally Mr. Lock, clearly did monitor the fans'

entrance and after the first opening of Gate C took such action
as they could to deal with the situation. Such action and any

control that the Club might have had was then overtaken by the

opening of Gate C by the Police for the second time.
(f)       No steps taken to ensure that the capacities of pens 3

           and 4 were not exceeded;



It is very important to note that the Safety Certificate does not

prescribe individual capacities for each Pen but rather gives one

global figure for the West terrace and another for the North

West. It is also to be noted that the Safety Certificate does not
provide or require the deployment of stewards on the Leppings

Lane terrace:

      Eastwood 26:75C-F, 27:49A-C, 28:69E-70B




It appears that the Sheffield City Council were ignorant of the

need to secure an even distribution in the Pens:

      Bownes 29:63A-B, 29:118G


Mr. Mackrell was aware of the dangers inherent in the use of Pens
on    terraces   -    hence     his   request,    on   his   appointment,     for
confirmation         of   the     existing       arrangements     with      Chief

Superintendent Mole:
      Mackrell 30:75C-E, 30:102G-103D, 30:114E-115A



It is accepted that there is no facility for monitoring the

numbers in each individual pen as opposed to the terrace as a

whole.    The monitoring of the pens is thus based on a visual

assessment of the numbers in the pens coupled with the "global"

figure for the West terrace and, of course, experience.
The Club reasonably relied on the system that had been arranged

with the Police:

   see 4(d) and (e) ante.


The radial fences were introduced at the request of the Police.
In 1985 it was not suggested to the Club that it was necessary

to have separate entrances to the turnstiles in the interests of
safety.   The object,       and the sole object,      of that scheme as

expressed at the time was segregation:

   Eastwood 28:31F



It appears      that   in   1985   that the   Police were    assuring      Dr.
Eastwood that they would continue to control the packing of the

Pens:

   Eastwood 27:46F


In the ordinary course of things Pens 3 and 4 could be expected

to fill up gradually, in accordance with the steady stream of

fans coming through the turnstiles. Once the Pens were full it

was reasonable to expect that the fans would naturally spread

into the adjacent Pens by moving through the gates in the radial

fences at the top of the pens: these gates were locked open and

could be passed through easily until the extremely large influx

of supporters caused by the unforeseen opening of Gate C by the
Police.   See    the   evidence     of   Thomas   Hilton   day   3   for   the
difference between ease of access before the influx and after the

Gate C had been opened: 3:67, 3:156-157.
Note that the Fire Service accept the need for careful monitoring

of the Pens and wanted the Police to exercise control of the
gates in the radial fences:

   Seaman 22:148F-151E. See also Eastwood 27:46F



In the light of the arrangement between the Club and the Police,
which involved careful monitoring of the Pens if the "find their

own level" policy was being operated, the Club had no reason to
expect that the capacities of the Pens would be exceeded on 15
April 1989:

   see in particular Calvert 30:26B-G, 30:30B-D and Lock



There was a direct phone line and radio link between the police

control room and the club control room. Superintendent Murray

accepts not only that he could have asked for the admission total
through the turnstiles before Gate C was open but also that he

was in the best position to make such a request: 11:88G-89B.


Information was relayed to the Police Control Box throughout the
afternoon and it appears that the last communication by PC Guest
was about 5 minutes before Superintendent Marshall made his first

request for the Gates to be opened: Goddard 18:105B-H; Guest
19:105G-106B, 19:126F-G.
(g)    Insufficient   plans   for   communication   with   and/or   a

        failure to communicate with the police.



GG:    17   (194(ii) )


The decision to open Gate C, on both occasions, is admitted to

be a decision taken by the Police alone. At no stage did the
Police seek to communicate with or seek authority from club

officials in relation to the proposed opening of the Gate.



Essential that the people inside the ground should have been

informed of the decision to open the gates: 7:49B-C.


The Police had a club radio and a direct telephone link in their

control room (although Duckenfield did not know of the latter:

8:12D-H). In addition PC Guest was stationed in the club control
room and in a position to relay any information            (including

turnstile figures) that the Police thought that they required.

Information was relayed to the Police Control Box throughout the
afternoon and it appears that the last communication by PC Guest

was about 5 minutes before Superintendent Marshall made his first

request for the Gates to be opened: Goddard 18:105B-H; Guest

19:105G-106B, 19.-126F-G.
Emergency planning s
Criticisms:-
"(a) The planning for emergency, in the light of events, was

      inadequate;
(b)   No loud hailers provided to stewards and/or police;

(c)   Insufficient exits to cater for an emergency;

(d)   Training of stewards inadequate;
(e)   First aid equipment may have been inadequate - no oxygen

      available to assist resuscitation;
(f)   Emergency vehicle access inadequate - ambulance could
      only   reach   playing   area   after   advertising   hoarding

      removed."
(a)        The planning for emergency, in the light of events, was

           inadequate;


It is regrettable that the Club was not consulted by or involved

in the preparation of the plans for an emergency by the emergency

services.


It is clear that such plans were drawn up by the emergency
services. It is also clear that the details of the emergency

evacuation plan formed an important part of the Police training

of stewards:

      Mole 7:37D


It is submitted, therefore, that whilst the Club and its staff

were not involved in the drawing up of such plans, they were
fully    appraised   of   the   duties   that   the   emergency   services
expected them to perform in the event of an emergency.


In particular all planning prior to this event concentrated on

the need to evacuate the ground quickly and the established plan
was for police officers to man the pitch perimeter fence and for

stewards to man all main exit gates.
(b)       No loud hailers provided to stewards and/or police;


There were 5 loud hailers available at the ground:

      Sewell 31:20A


See also Mole 7:18G-H

      Greenwood 12:42A, 12:43B-C

      Nesbitt 12:104H

      Buxton 18:17H


There is no evidence that they were or would have been any more
effective than the tannoy system. That system is effective and

a "good system":

      Mole 7:7H.


Although when the crowd is very noisy it is sometimes not as

distinctive as normal:

      Mole 7:8B.
(c)        Insufficient exits to cater for an emergency;



The perimeter gates were not primarily designed or certified as

exit gates in the event of an emergency.



Whilst it is accepted that in the light of the 1986 Green Guide

the gates in the perimeter fence were too small,                  there does

appear to have been a rationale for not having emergency exits
at the front of a perimeter fence in that it could lead to
further crushing as a crowd that panics rushes forward.

See the opinions of:

      Greenwood 12:85B-87C

      Nesbitt 12:108F-110B



This    accords   with   the   view   of   the   Fire   Service    who   were
responsible for advising the Local Authority on the emergency

exits from the Pens:

      Seaman 22:145D-H


Further, there is some evidence that, notwithstanding the fact
that the gates were not intended for use in an emergency, if they

had been opened at an earlier stage people would have managed to

get out of the Pens:

      Illingworth 17:135E-F     cf Hooson 29:32F-G


It was not intended by anybody that these gates should beO under

the control of the club.
The emergency exits were carefully scrutinised by the Officer

Working Party and, in particular, the exits were found to be to

the satisfaction of the Fire Service. The primary means of egress

was seen to be through the tunnels:
   Seaman 22:141A-E; Eastwood 27:7F-9C, 28:37A-C


The Fire Service never envisaged a situation where the terrace

would have to be evacuated forwards:

   Seaman 23:49G
(d)     Training of stewards inadequate;


See 1 and 5(a) ante. We believe that the point, if still live,

has been adequately dealt with.




                                  93
(e)       First aid equipment may have been inadequate - no oxygen

          available to assist resuscitation;
The Safety Certificate itself did not specify the equipment which
was required.     That was regrettable because it must have been

readily foreseeable that a Safety Officer such as Mr. Mackrell
who, to the knowledge of the licensing authority, came on the

scene many years after the certificate was drawn up would not

know by reference to what it had been drafted.           Had he searched

the entire files he might have dicovered the list of "Matters

requiring attention"    (Core p 91) which had been copied to his
predecessor's predecessor in June 1979.              He would then have

learnt that a Minute-Man Resuscitator should have been provided.


A resucitator had been obtained in response to Dr. Purcell's

suggestion but this appears to have been coincidental.              It is
plain that in earlier years both the club and the Council had

been at fault in not dealing promptly with the First Aid room and
facilities.     Regrettably   that   Dr.   Bailey,    who   had   accepted

responsibility for this matter on behalf of the Council, sought

to discharge that responsibility by discussing the matter with

the St John's Ambulance officer while apparently deliberately

avoiding any direct contact with the club. (Core p 87).


In 1987 the Working Party commented on the First Aid facilities

and suggested that the St. John's Ambulance should be asked if

there was anything that was required:

      Bownes 29:113A-115A
The club asked the St. John's Ambulance if there was anything
that was needed.   It is important to note that Mr. Mackrell made

plain that anything, within reason, that was requested would be

provided. All that was required was an "emergency bag". This was

provided by the Club: Wells 19:28B-D


In so doing the Club reasonably believed that they were complying

with and satisfying the condition of the Safety Certificate:

   Mackrell 30:109G-110G, 30:127A-D


There was in fact a considerable amount of equipment available
from a variety of    sources   and it does appear to be highly
unlikely that the provision of any other equipment,      whether

required by the safety certificate or not, could have made any

difference to the tragic outcome:-



Oxygen was available: Wells 19:22G cf Philips 28:93C



Suction equipment for removing vomit or fluid from a casualty's

throat was also available: Wells 19:22H-23A.


The Fire Brigade attended with resuscitators: Hornsby 20:70A


Although such equipment needs to be operated by people who have

been fully trained in its use: Hornsby 20:70A



There is no other equipment that the St. John's Ambulance think

that they require even in the light of the tragedy: Wells 19:28G.
Defibrillators could not have been used on the day because they

are dangerous in crowded situations: Wells 19:29B-D




The evidence is that even if Doctors had been able to attend more

quickly or if more equipment had been available there would have
been no better assistance to the victims of the crush in Pens 3

and 4   than that actually received:
   Byrne 25:24F, 25:25D-E, 25:32E-G




The only equipment that one Doctor thought might have assisted

him was a tube to be placed in the trachea to secure the airway

during the transport of the patient to hospital.      This   is a

specialised piece of equipment and would be expected         to be

provided on an ambulance:

   Byrne 25:25G-26B


What really matters in the sort of situation that occurred at

Hillsborough is getting the patients to Hospital as quickly as
possible:

   Byrne 25:30D-E
(f)        Emergency vehicle access inadequate - ambulance could

           only   reach   playing   area   after    advertising    hoarding

           removed.


This criticism is entirely misconceived . The advertising hoarding

was    removed    immediately   and   caused   no    obstruction    to   the

ambulance:

      Morton 18:31F-H, 18:35B-D

      Godley 19:9 2E-F
      Castley 21:101B


Note that the fire emergency tender ("a larger vehicle than an
ordinary fire engine") got stuck on the porch as it attempted to
get past:

      Housley 20-.77F, 20:78D-F



This fact does not seem to concern the Chief Fire Officer who

only expected that access would be gained to the perimeter part

of the ground, such access being "quite good":

      Seaman 23:14B-F
6. Miscellaneous s
      The   criticism:-

      "(a) The collapse of a barrier in pen 3 may indicate a lack

            of strength."


The barrier in question had been tested, and had passed the test,

in 1988. Although it is correct to note that if the corrosion had
been    noticed   the     barrier   would   have     been   condemned,    such
corrosion as there was was hidden from any normal inspection:

      Eastwood 26:109D-E, 28:10G


Dr. Eastwood's unchallenged evidence is that the stanchion on the

barrier would not have broken had the horizontal member not

broken:

      Eastwood 26:107H-108B


Dr.     Eastwood's   tests    on    the   deformed    barriers    in     Pen   4
demonstrate that they were subjected to pressure at a level

considerably above the design and test loads:

      Eastwood 28:7C-F


It must be a reasonable inference from those tests that the

pressure in Pen 3 was at least as great.
It does appear as if people were in acute distress and some were

dead even before the barrier gave way:

      See Clark 2:64D, 2:64H, 2:65E, 2:78E-G

      Gains 2:152B and E-F
      McCaffrey 4:107A-B, 4:108F
See also the tendered statements of Johnson, Burridge and Howe
all of whom state that the barrier broke at the time Peter

Beardsley hit the cross bar - some ten minutes after the second

surge.



The removal of barrier 144 was sanctioned by the Sheffield City

Council/Officer Working Party:

   Eastwood 28:55A, 28:81G


It is likely that with the uncontrolled entry of the fans that

occurred as a result of the Police opening Gate       C that no
configuration of barriers could have prevented crushing in the

Pens:

   Eastwood 28:65B-C, 28:67A



There is some evidence that the bodies in Pen 3 were only piled

up against the first two sections of the fence to the right of

Gate 3 as it is viewed from the pitch, stretching back some three

or four steps: Morgan 16:17F-H, 16:18C, 16:18E


However the evidence does tend to suggest that the area of

casualties was much wider and, in particular, that people were
dead behind the broken barrier:
   Branston 16:134E-G, 17.-25H-26C

   Burns 17:37B-C
   Pearson 17:56F-57D

   Aitkin 17:64A-C

   Gutcher 18:43D-G
The New Criticisms - 22:132E-133C
     Failure to consider the effect of the removal of barrier

     on the capacity of the Pens;

     Failure to consider what effect the works in 1981 and

     1985 should have on the capacity of the terrace;

     Little if any consideration in 1985 or thereafter of the

     number of turnstiles needed at the Leppings Lane end to

     cope with any reasonable flow that might be expected of

     spectators into the ground;
     The First Aid Room never seems to have got its proper

     equipment;
     No one seems to have applied their minds properly to the
     problems of ensuring even distribution and ensuring even

     distribution of the fans on the terraces, coupled with

     and ensuring that the capacity of the pens were not

     exceeded.
(a)        Failure to consider the effect of the removal of barrier

144        on the capacity of the Pens;



On his appointment to the Club Mr. Mackrell took all reasonable
steps to check the proper capacities on the Leppings Lane terrace

and elsewhere:

      Mackrell 30:72D-75E


The Working Party and, more particularly the Sheffield City
Council had approved the removal of barrier 144 without any

reduction in capacity notwithstanding the fact that Mr. Strange

of Eastwood & Co and Inspector Calvert had raised the point with

a possible reduction in capacity in mind:

      Eastwood 27:51F-55B

      Bownes 29 1 56F-59E


In these circumstances it is submitted that the Club should not

be criticised for relying on expert opinion and in particular

that of the Licensing authority.
(b)        Failure to consider what effect the works in 1981 and

           1985 should have on the capacity of the terrace;


On his appointment to the Club Mr. Mackrell took all reasonable
steps to check the proper capacities on the Leppings Lane terrace

because he was aware of the substantial works that had been

undertaken at that end:

      Mackrell 30:72D-75E

      Core p. 379 and 385.
The Working Party and, more particularly the South Yorkshire

County Council had approved all of the works between 1981 and

1985 without requiring a reduction in capacity.


In those circumstances the Club cannot be criticised for relying

on    expert   opinion   and   in particular   that   of   the   Licensing

authority.
(c)     Little if any consideration in 1985 or thereafter of the

        number of turnstiles needed at the Leppings Lane end to

        cope with any reasonable flow that might be expected of

        spectators into the ground;



See 3(d) ante.
The truth is that a great deal of very careful consideration was
given to this precise point.   While it must be accepted that the

solution which was finally adopted was not ideal the fact remains

that it was drawn up by experts without any suggestion being made

to the effect that it put safety at risk and it was authorised

by the licensing authority without reservation.




                               103
(d)     The First Aid Room never seems to have got its proper

        equipment;


It is again accepted that both club and Council must have been

at fault in this regard in 1979 but it is again submitted that

in the recent past and at the material time the Club did not act

unreasonably   in   believing   that   it   had   complied   with   the

requirements   of    the   Licensing   Authority    and   the   Safety

Certificate in the provision of First Aid facilities: see 5(e)

ante.
(e)     No one seems to have applied their minds properly to the

        problems of ensuring even distribution of the fans on the

        terraces, coupled with ensuring that the capacity of the

        pens were not exceeded.


Insofar as this criticism is directed at the club it is believed
that it is misconceived. The history of the arrangements between

the club and the police as to the monitoring of the filling of

the pens has been extensively examined above and it would serve

no useful purpose to repeat the evidence again.   Our submission
remains that club and its officers were doing all that could

sensibly be required of them having regard to the requirements

of their certificate and way in which the Leppings Lane terrace

was being policed at all material times.



See 4(c), (d), (e) and (f) ante.
