                    CONFIDENTIAL
E.R.
                                            cc,   Ms Adams
                                                  Mr Yates
                                                  Mr Chilcot

                                                  Mr   Boys Smith
                                                  Mr   War§e^3
                                                  Mr   Goddard
                                                  Mr   Whalley
                                                  Mr   Mould
                                                  Mr   Smith
                                       /y         Mr   Mower
                                                  Mr   Gilbert
                                                  Mr   Lidington


   Mr Moriartv


                          HILLSBOROUGH:
       PUBLICATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT


       Mr Whalley has pointed out two errors in my note of the
   meeting held on 25 July.  In the first paragraph, the second
   sentence should read:  "Mr Whalley said that Lord Justice
   Taylor hoped to present the interim report to the Home
   Secretary on 1 August, with a view to enabling publication on
   4 August if the Home Secretary wished, before the new football
   season began on 19 August."  In the third paragraph I omitted
   to include the party of the bereaved and injured in those
   granted representation at oral hearings.  I apologise for
   these mistakes.

   2. After the meeting                 some additional pointsj^to
   me which I think it would be useful to record here:

        (i)   Lord Justice Taylor expects that the
              Interim Report will be published on Friday
              and would be concerned if it were delayed.
              Certainly there would be opprobrium if
              delaying publication meant that
              recommendations could not be implemented
              before the start of the season;

       (ii)   in order to give interested parties some
              advance notice, confidential copies could
              be made available for collection from the
              Home Office at 9 am on Friday 4 August,
              prior to full publication at 11 am;


                                                  /(i i i )




                     C,wj \srsL/Lia \i i iAL
                                       slTIAL
E.R.
                                 2.



       (iii)   if it was decided that the police should
               be given more rioh~C£~ / one way of doing
               this which would minimise the risk of
               leaks would be for HMCIC to take Mr Wright
               through the recommendations in the Home
               Office before Friday.

   3. The Home Secretary has now agreed to a Ministerial meeting
   under his Chairmanship taking place at 5 pm on Wednesday 2
   August, preceded by a briefing meeting for the Home Secretary
   at 4.30 pm.  Miss Murray is making arrangements for these
   meetings and I attach a copy of the letter I have sent to Alan
   Ring at the Secretary of State for Environment's office to
   confirm the arrangements for the Ministerial meeting.  The
   Home Secretary would be grateful if only the minimum number
   of officials who need to be present at the 5 pm meeting could
   stay.

   4.  I should be most grateful for advice by close of play on
   1 August on the report's recommendations, and I understand
   that you intend to submit separately advice on the question of
   prior disclosure.




   Private Office                           MISS C J BANNISTER
   3| July 1989                             Private Secretary




                      CONFIDENTIAL
                      From -. T   he   P r iv a t e S e c r e t a r y




                                                                              H   ome   O   f f ic e

                                                                            Q U E E N AN NE 'S G A TE
                                                                             L O N D O N SW1H 9 AT



                                                                              31 July 1989




    Q eo^ f ttc -


    This is to confirm that the Home Secretary will be
chairing a meeting of Ministers and officials from interested
Departments at 5 pm on Wednesday 2 August to discuss handling
of the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's interim report on
the events at Hillsborough.

    I understand that your Secretary of State and Mr Moynihan
will be present.  Mr Forsythe and Lord Trafford have also
agreed to be present, but the latter only if the report's
recommendations touch on the responsibilities of the
Department of Health.  I should be grateful to know as soon as
possible the names of officials in your Department, Scottish
Office, Department of Health and Welsh Office who need to be
there.

    We expect the interim report to be presented to the Home
Secretary on Tuesday 1 August, with a view to enabling
publication on Friday 4 August if the Home Secretary wished.
I will send copies of the report to you and private
secretaries to other Ministers involved as soon as it is
received.  Mr David Mould on 273 3099 is the official contact
point in the Home Office.

    The recommendations will be interim, based on evidence so
far considered, and we understand they will not cover longer
term questions such as all-seated stadia, financial questions



                                                                        /about



Alan Ring, Esq
Private Secretary
Department of the Environment
I




    about restructuring of grounds, football membership scheme or
    grounds other than football grounds.  The report will probably
    state that the recommendations should be implemented
    forthwith, but leave it to Ministers and other responsible
    parties to decide precisely when they should be implemented.
    The interim report is being produced to enable action to be
    taken before the start of the new football season.

        The purpose of the Home Secretary's meeting will be to
    decide whether publication should go ahead as planned on
    4 August; what the Government's initial reaction should be;
    what immediate action should be taken on the recommendations;
    and whether there should be any prior disclosure to interested
    parties to enable them to react sensibly to the report.

    I              ^ Z'W'-o tx (Usl                      h
        'ikd-c L , S ajrW J,                       c^sU M M,

    t
                                           MISS C J BANNISTER
