                                             cc     Mr Watts




Mr Turney


HILLSBOROUGH: INTERIM ADVICE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES

As requested I attach a hastily assembled first draft of a
circular and, (even more hastily assembled) a draft submission
along the lines discussed.
I understand incidentally the Football Association has issued
some advice to clubs.  (I have still to confirm this).

Whatever we propose we should keep colleagues in Scotland
informed because they too will have to follow suit if we issue.
(It would also be as well to keep DOE informed).




                                              2

                                        D J MOULD
                                        26 April 1989
DRAFT


From: A H Turney                          cc Mr   Yeates
      Fire and Emergency                     Mr   Craig
      Planning Department                    Mr   Harrison
      Extension 2798                         Mr   Moriarty
         April 1989                          Mr   Mower
                                             Mr   Watts
                                             Mr   Gilbert
                                             Mr   Kinghan, DOE
                                            {Mr   McClean, SED^ H\
1    Miss Nicholson

2    Miss Bannister



HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM : INTERIM ADVICE

Introduction


1.   This submission covers an initial draft circular for local
authorities on interim safety measures at football grounds which
might be addressed pending the report from the Inquiry by
Lord Justice Taylor.

Recommendation


2.     It is recommended that the circular should not be issued.

Background


3.   At the meeting on 24 April you asked us to consider issuing
some kind of interim guidance to cover the period until the
Taylor Inquiry reports. The attached draft circular is a first
attempt at such guidance.

Discussion


4.   Ministers are already aware of the difficulties in issuing
any sort of guidance which is liable to trespass into the
territory of the Inquiry and might be seen to prejudge the
Inquiry's findings. Equally, because the football season is now
drawing to close, promotion/relegation matches and 'play-off'
matches are liable to attract higher than normal crowds.

5.   We have not thought it right to suggest restrictions on the
numbers permitted to occupy the football terraces. Not only
would this prejudge the Inquiry but our published guidance
already quotes such figures; restrictions might be regarded as
'unreasonable' and subjected to legal challenge; and it is the
distribution as well as the number of spectators which is
integral to their safety.

Issues


6.   The    advice to local authorities is summarised below:


     a. ingress arrangements (turnsides and contingency
     planning), paragraphs 44 and 46 of the guide;


     b.    unobstructed gangways (paragraph 96);


     c.    sub-division of terraces (paragraph 102);


     d.    siting of crush barriers (paragraphs 112 - 114);


     e.    communications (paragraph 194(i)(ii));


     f. stewarding for control and direction (paragraph
     195(a)(c));


     g.    advance planning (paragraph 2 05)


     h. exit gates or access points in pitch fencing (paragraph
     215) .


7.   We do not propose in the circular to evaluate the advice in
the guide but merely draw attention to these particular passages.
Even then there is a real risk of encroaching into the work of
the Inquiry, especially items (b); (c); (d); above.
 ^ftonclusion


L 8.  For the reasons in paragraphs 4 and 7 it is recommended that
 a circular should not be issued.]




                                                                         A H TURKEY




                                                                    v

                          V*»       ^



         fV                                 .Sr            xl       Al




                  ,   ~ \y ~
          V ’             \                       , L3^ '


              «   *   •         •   “        r    .   i     *       K      \    >   '

                  v q %~r                                 ^^                            r*'
                              v .       ^                   J v          > ’r
                                ^                     fa        4   ,*^;,

                          JU 0°^
                          V                 JU
                                        DRAFT


  Chief Executive
y Cauiffes Councils
  Metropolitan District Grounds
  London Borough Council
  Common Council of the Acts of London



 Dear Sir/Madam

 SAFETY OF SPORT GROUNDS ACT 1975 - HILLSBOROUGH


  Introduction

  1.   As you know the Home Secretary announced in the House of
  Commons on 17 April that he had set up an Inquiry under Lord
  Justice Taylor to look into the tragic events which occurred at
  Hillsborough on 15th April. ffipSapy of the Home Secretary's
  statement setting out the terms*^>f reference of the Inquiry are
  atfeaefaxrd- foar   03Lae~xrt~YSfeT^rKe.]
  The Inquiry


  2.   It is not known at this stage whether it will be possible
  for Lord Justice Taylor to produce an interim report with
  recommendations which can be implemented in the short term before
  the next football season. If such a report is produced the Home
  Office will, of course, circulate details of the recommendations.


  Action

  3.   Given the wide remit of the Inquiry it would be clearly
                                                      / /V& T    ,
  wrong to pre-detenuine its findings (wh.6 th.e3r oi£ produced, in the
  form of interim measures) including any recommendations on the
  •Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds'. Even so, local authorities
  will [no^£mbt] [probably] have already begun reviewing terms and
  conditions at designated^sports^ [aoecer ] grounds in conjunction
  with the police, fire authority and ground operators,
  football^mithorities have already asked clubs to review safety
^ arraijgf^ments ].


  4.   Local authorities are also reminded that with the soccer
  season nearing its close the^p^oj ect of higher than normal
_ attendance for promotion^elegamon matches and for "play off11
  matches.

 5.   With the above considerations in mind the advice of the
 Guide to Safety at Sports Groujjds^set out below may be of
 assistance. In so doing th^general advice in t&e Guide on the
 importance of the inter-relation of components fsee paragraph 4
 of the Guide) should not be overlooked.
             S p ectato rs should be adm itted at a rate w h ic h is com patible
             w ith the dispersal arrangements for them inside the ground.

          44. W here admission to a ground or parts of it,is" controlled by
          turnstiles, these, by their number and location, control not only the
          rate of admission but, to a large extent, the dispersal of spectators
          w ith in a ground to their particular sections. Turnstiles should be of
          such num bers as to admit spectators at a rate whereby no unduly
          large crowds are kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster
          rate than the arrangements for distributing spectators w ithin the
          ground permit.




          46.     Contingency plans should be made to deal w ith situations

         . o ^ ’^         7    i',8b'e emr8nCeS a ‘ 2 9 ' ° U" d ^        P ™ - d in s u f f iS m
                              H      CroWdS lr° m 9a ther'n9 outside. This may. for
                          i       ° T " 9 addili° " al entrances, but local knowledge
         taken Into'                                M advice ,rom the W ™ should be
         taken into account m drawing up contingency plans                               Larqer
         systems                  T        l" terc° " ' " ’ u" i‘=a<ion systems and metering
         c lm Z L l ,           (S“    Chapler 121 and installation of a
         m anaoernpnt     -e[i monitoring system may be of assistance to
         m anagement ,n quickly identifying particular areas of difficulty




 A rra n g e m e n ts   should        be     made       tn
distribution o f the c ro w d eo n T h f t e ; L e " CtoUrDar iHthe ^
access and earess- tn                 ,                   provide ease of
particularly if a local emeraen                r° h ^        faci,itate   m ovem en t,
and     t„      contain       pressures ^)e^jre          <thevSe ‘ “ T     ^    ^
proportions. The provisions set out h *                        i. ^        dan9 er°u s
these conditions.                                                 assist in achieving




   G a n g w a y s (see Annex A)


   te?raceTsheisa   witShin0Ui ? ^ ° eT S0U
                                          ; eathat                    SP8Ctator °n the
  spectators can move quicklv on tn        9t3n9Way or exit- so that
  even, or in the eyent of emergencv' t                 ,he S" d °< a"
  pattern of gangways (not less than l ' i     ,may be achieved by a
  exit system.                              metres w ide) linked to the




means as g a n jw a y s ^ a n d ^ c m s h                    b8 Subdivided bY such
m inim ise the sway and surge of s p e c ta to r ^ '           3rran9ed 30 as t0
M a n y of th e hazards arising from crowd pressure on terraces
can be e lim in a te d by provision of well constructed, correctly
positioned and properly m ounted crush barriers.



S p a c in g o f c ru s h b a rrie rs
1 1 2 . The m axim um spacing of crush barriers w ill be dependent
on the g ra d ie n t of the terrace or -viewing slope. Paragraphs
1 1 3 -1 1 9 below give recommendations for the spacing and
strength of crush barriers.

1 1 3 . Ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the full
w id th of a terrace, w ith gaps only at the radial gangways.

11 4 . W here barriers are not continuous between radial gangways,
th e -a lig n m e n t of gaps in successive rows of barriers on a terrace
should form an angle of less than 60° to the barriers. There should
be no more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps. (See
Figure 3 overleaf).




            There should be a com m unications system capable of clearly
            relaying essential messages to all parts of the ground in both
            norm al circumstances and in an emergency.




         19 4 . A t larger grounds the following arrangements are likely to
         be needed:

                 i.     There should be inter-comm unication between the
                        central control and all turnstiles or banks of turnstiles
                        and all entry and exit gates used by the public.

                 ii.    M etering systems to record all admissions should be
                        installed at turnstiles and, to ensure that ground
                        capacities are not exceeded in any section, arrange­
                        ments should be made for central control to be
                        informed immediately a predetermined num ber of
                        spectators has been admitted through each turnstile.
E ffective stew arding should prevent overcrow ding in sections
o f-th e ground, reduce the likelihood and incidence of disorder,
help disperse spectators in such a w ay as to reduce c ro w d
pressure and provide the means to investigate, report and take
early action in an emergency.

1 95. M anning levels and stewarding requirem ents w ill vary
depending upon the size and configuration of the ground, the
nature of the event and crowd levels, but there are five basic
duties w hich stewards are called upon to carry out. These are:

      a.     controlling or directing members of the public w ho are
             entering or leaving the ground, to help achieve an even
             flo w of people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal
             of spectators on the terraces or viewing slopes.


     c.     m anning entrances, exits and other strategic points,
            especially exit doors and gates w h ic h ' are not
            continuously open w hilst the ground is in use;




  W h e re th e re is a disorderly elem ent am ong th e c ro w d in te n t on
  violence, additional safety measures are needed to contain and
  m inim ise the potential disruption, to isolate quickly, identify
  and rem ove the offenders and to prevent their re-entry on
  future occasions.




2 0 5 . Proper advance planning with the police is essential to
counter potential crowd disorder. There m ust be an effective
liaison between club and police for this purpose to including not
ju st the arrangements inside the ground but also the escort of
visiting supporters, their likely numbers, their separate entry to the
ground and their departure at the end of the match. There should
be debriefing meetings as necessary to evaluate existing
 arrangem ents and provide the flexibility necessary to deal w ith
 different circumstances.




           A pitch perim eter fe n c e /w a ll may not only delineate the playing
           area fro m the spectator accom m odation b u t m ay have to serve
           as a crush barrier, or in some situations as a barrier to discourage
           or prevent access to the playing area except in an em ergency.
 21 5 . For most major stadia, w hether used for association football
or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence w ill be required either to
 prevent access to the pitch as m entioned above, or at least to
discourage attempts by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates
or other access points (m inim um w id th 1.1 metres) should
nonetheless be provided for use in an emergency and, at those
grounds where a perimeter track is used as part of the exit system,
for the departure of spectators at the end of an event. Provision of
such gates or access points is particularly im portant to allow full
access to the playing area (or track) w here it is likely to be used as a
place of safety in an emergency. Such gates or access points should
be properly stewarded and clearly marked so that immediate access
to the playing area or perimeter track can be ensured.
  Resource Implications


^^6.    There are no direct resource implications arising from this
   circular.


  Other


  7.   Any enquiry about the contents of this circular should be
  directed to Mr A Brown 01-273    . Separate arrangements have
  been for this circular to be sent to Chief Fire Officers.


                                          _Yours faithfully




   Copies sent to:-
   Chief Officer of Police
   Chief Fire Officer
   Association of County Councils
   Association of Metropolitan Councils
   London Borough Association
   Association of District Councils
   Clerks to Police Authorities
   Clerks to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
   ■^Football Association
   Football League
   Rugby Union
   Rugby League
   Football Grounds Improvement Trust
   Football Trusty
                                                             obtii. /Uj1 f
                                               cc     Mr Watts
                                                      Mr Stickley



Mr Turney


INTERIM GUIDANCE TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES

1.   As requested, I attach one or two thoughts on the safety
considerations featured in the "Green Guide" which might be
suitable to highlight should local authorities wish to review
terms/conditions in safety certificates.

     (a)    Ingress arrangements set by the number, siting of
            turnstiles (or other admission arrangements}- which
            control the admission to and dispersal within the
            ground (paragraph 44) including provision for
            contingency planning in the event of large numbers of
            people (parafraph 46);

     (b)    arrangements for advance planning and liaison between
            ground operators and police (paragraph 205);

     (c)    requirements for stewarding for the control and
            direction of Spectators (paragraph 195 (a) and (c));

     (d)    adequacy of communication systems, especially between
            turnstiles and control centre/safety officer (paragraph
             194 (i) and (ii));

     (e)    adequacy of exit gates or access points in the pitch
            perimeter fence, especially if this fence forms a
            segregation barrier fence,   in the event of an
            emergency.

2.   Other possibilities could be:-

     (a)    need for clear unobstructed gangways (paragraph 96);

     (b)    method of sub-division as recommended in paragraph 102;

     (c)    the siting of crush barriers (paragraphs 112 to 114)
            which should help nofe:only control the movement of
             spectators/feot reduce pressures caused by forward
            movement. * ^

I rather think these might encroach too much on the Taylor
Inquiry.




                                          D J MOULD

                                          24 April 1989
From: R R G Watts                           cc    Miss Adams
      G1 Division                                 Ms Craig
      (2764)                                      Mr Yates
      19 April 1989                               Mr Moriarty
                                                  Mr Turney
                                                  Mr Mower
                                                  Mr Goddard
                                                  Mr Mould/
                                                  Mr Stickley, DOW
                                                  Mr Liddington
Mr Mawer

HILLSBOROUGH - POSSIBLE INTERIM SAFETY MEASURES

We have been considering whether there is any action which the
Government might sensibly take, in advance of the report of the
Taylor inquiry, on the question whether pitch perimeter fences
should be removed immediately or remain in place at least for
the time being, and on any other particular safety issues.

2. A note setting out the considerations which arise on pitch
perimeter fences is attached. The nub of the issue is that on
Lhe one hand we do not want to pre-empt Lord Justice Taylor’s
report more than is essential: the decision to go ahead with the
concept of all seated accommodation (and proceed with the
Football Spectators Bill) already limits his room for
manoeuvre.  If we were to act on perimter fences, pressures to
act on other issues now would grow (see next paragraph). On the
other hand, would the Government consider it right to stand firm
on allowing perimeter fences to remain if there were another
accident, however minor, involving crushing against the
perimeter fence, before the end of the present football season?
If not, it might be better to act now.

3. One other possible interim measure has come to the fore in
the press today, and we have received enquiries from DOE both
yesterday and today about it. This is whether the Home Office
should immediately advise local authorities to impose lower
limits on the maximum number of spectators than those already in
operation in the safety certificates for football grounds.
Apart from the problem of further pre-empting the Taylor
inquiry, the Home Office Guide on safety already recommends a
maximum crowd density level. There is no evidence that this is
unsafe provided the advice recommended in the guide is adhered
to in full. Moreover, the problem is one of distribution of
spectators; reducing the overall capacity of a terrace would not
automatically reduce the crowd density in a specific enclosure.
4. We have concluded that we do not have a basis on which to
recommend that the Government should immediately encourage the
removal of perimeter fences or act on other safety issues.
Nevertheless, we think that the Home Secretary will want to
consider the point. If he wanted to take some action now we
would put forward proposals for consideration.




                           R R G WATTS
                                             ANNEX




PITCH PERIMETER FENCES



1. There is no legal requirement to instal pitch perimeter
fences. There is guidance in the Home Office Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds advocating such fences for crowd control purposes
(paras 214-6, 209, 186). It is likely that the provision of
such a fence is in some cases, but not all, a requirement of the
local authority safety certificate.

2. If it were decided that the Government should now encourage
their immediate removal, fresh advice could be given by means of
a Home Office circular to local authorities, in effect amending
the advice in the Guide.

3.   There are other considerations:
      (i)   Some football clubs, according to press reports, have
            already decided urgently to remove pitch perimeter
            fences; and some are consulting the local authority
            who issued the safety certificate. So the issue is
            already a live, public one which does not necessarily
            call for Government intervention. On the other hand,
            other clubs are reported to have said that they could
            not remove the fences because their provision is a
            condition of the safety certificate. They may or may
            not want to keep the fences; their purported ground
            for doing so rest on the certificate requirement, and
            puts the ball back into the local authority's, and at
            one remove, the Government's court.

     (ii)   In the absence of advice from the Taylor inquiry, we
            do not have a sound basis for issuing fresh advice.
             The current football season will be over by the end
             of May. Even if the Lord Justice Taylor were to give
             interim advice on pitch perimeter fences, he could
             hardly do so before then, given that his very first
             task must be to establish the facts of the accident.


     (iii) The immediate removal of the perimeter fences,
           installed for crowd control purposes, could
           conceivably give rise to disorder in the ground and
           invasion of the pitch. But is the risk of this
           sufficient to justify not removing the possibility of
           another accident on the Hillsborough lines?

     (iv)    If we were to take action on pitch perimeter fences
             in advance of the Taylor report, how could we refuse
             to take other steps which would inhibit the inquiry
              (eg measures to restrict crowds building up outside
             grounds, or to reduce the number of spectators on
             terraces)?

Conclusion

4. Because of the need to avoid so far as possible pre-empting
the Taylor inquiry, and because of the need to have all aspects
of crowd safety and crowd control looked at together instead of
piecemeal, we conclude that the Government should not take
separate action on pitch perimeter fences in advance of Taylor.
There is a risk of a further accident involving crushing against
the fences; but encouragement to remove the fences, in the
absence of clear advice on the issue from the Taylor inquiry,
would lead to increased risk to safety from hooliganism.
