 LANCASHIRE AMBULANCE SERVICE -
                                (PRESTON HEALTH A U T H O R I T Y )
                        AMBULANCE           SERVI CE H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                             Broughton H ous e, 4 4 9 - 4 5 1 Garstang R oad ,
                                     Broughton, Preston PR 3 5LN
 Telephone: BRO UGHTON 8 6 2 6 6 6
                                                                                     O U R Kl . l     K B /E G
 (STD Code 0 7 7 2 )

 PLliASK ASK FOR:      Div. Officer:. R,...jaackbuxn                                 Y O U R RK1-V.

                                                                      Ambulance Control Centre
                                                                      Broad Oak Road,
                                                                      Accrington,
Mr. A. Brown,                                                         Lancashire. BB5 2BP.
The Home Office,
Queen Anne’s Gate                                                     29th September, 1989*
London, SW1H 9AT.


Dear Mr. Brown,

With reference to our telephone conversation of the 28th September, 1989, after
further discussions with my Chief Ambulance Officer he has asked me to write to
you formally on behalf of the Lancashire Ambulance Service to seek clarification
of the term ’’advanced First Aid” as referred to in Recommendation Ho. 41 of the
Home Office Circular 68/1989 (interim Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry).

I am of the opinion that the term can be misleading or open to a difference in
its interpretation of the skills required by a Medical Practitioner whose primary
concern will be to deal with serious injuries that eould be received by spectat­
ors in the event of a Football Ground incident. I would suggest that the Medical
Practitioner should be competent in:

    1) Advanced Airway Management;
    2) Endotracheal Intubation;
    3) Defibrillation;
    4) Cardiac Monitoring;
    5) Administration of Heart Drugs (Adrenalin - Atropine - Lignocaine - Diazepam)
    6) Ventapuncture (Drug Administration)
    7) Canulation (Method of opening a vein).

The above skills are not exhaustive in my view and can vary from one medical opinion
to another. Therefore I would suggest that it is imperative, if we are to uphold
the true spirit of the Recommendation's intention, that we have laid-down guidelines
whereby it will eliminate some Football (Hubs from non-compliance with the Recommen­
dation by employing a Medical Practitioner who might be competent in his own
speciality, but have limited experience in the Casualty-handling situation*. There­
fore the advice I am seeking from yourself would be used to maintain a standard of
criteria for the four Football Clubs in the Lancashire Area, and will also assist
the Football Club Secretaries in satisfying themselves that the doctor who they
employ meets the requirements of Recommendation llo. 41* The onus may rest with the
Club to employ the Medical Practitioner, but the Lancashire Ambulance Service and
the Lancashire County Council (as the Licencing Authority) need to satisfy themselves
that in the event of an incident involving serious injury to spectators, the doctor
has the required skills to deal with that situation effectively.

I would therefore appreciate your assistance in resolving this matter.

                                                            Yours sincerely.
c.c. Chief Ambulance Officer.
                                                                                 V so -

                                                            R. Blackburn.
  55. There should always be a command channel reserved solely for the Police Commander to communicate
with his senior officers round the ground.

   56. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines with
telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

  57. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual areas
outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important announcements should
be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This
arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.

      58. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.


    Co-ordination of Emergency Services
       59. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowd safety at each designated sports ground.

      60. Before each match at a designated sports ground the police should ensure that the fire service and


•
    ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of spectators
    expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning the
    control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control rooms of each of the
    emergency services.

      61. Lines of communication, whether by telephone or by radio, from the police control room to the local
    headquarters of all emergency services should be maintained at all times so that emergency calls can be made
    instantly.

      62. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated sports ground of emergency vehicles from all three
    services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility within
    the ground itself.

      63. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for the
    arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why they are
    required.


    First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
      64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.
    The club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

       65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms
     and the equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking
     professional medical advice and should be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

        66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000, the club should employ a
     medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be
     trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
     and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts should be known to those in
     the police control room and he should be immediately contactable.

            (b) At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000, the club should make
     arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned immediately to deal with any medical exigency
     at the ground. H e should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be
     known to those in the police control room.

       67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate ambulance authority should
     be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

       68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should be
     specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a requirement
     of the Safety Certificate.
  69. A “major incident equipment vehicle”, designed and equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be
deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.


Offences and Penalties
 70. Consideration should be given to creating an offence of selling tickets for and on the day of a football
match without authority from the home club to do so.

  71. Each of the following activities at a designated sports ground should be made a specific offence:-

    i.   throwing a missile;

    ii. chanting obscene or racialist abuse;

    iii. going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.
                                    i


  72. Consideration should be given to extending the courts’ powers to make attendance centre orders for
football related offences on occasions of designated football matches. The provision should be capable of
imposition on an offender aged 21 or over and subject to a maximum of 72 hours in the case of an offender aged
17 or over.

  73. Consideration should be given to the use of electronic monitoring (tagging) in the sentencing of offenders
convicted of football related offences.


Green Guide
  74. As a matter of urgency, the Home Office should set up a body to revise the Green Guide in accordance
with this Report, these Recommendations and the Report of the Technical Working Party (Appendix 3).

  75. In any revision of the Green Guide, the values to be achieved by way of percentage recovery after the
required loading tests on crush barriers should be specified. Acceptable values for various materials should be
specified.

  76. When the Green Guide is revised, the need to inspect crush barriers for possible corrosion should be
specifically mentioned and emphasised.




                                                         82
