HL/JB/Hillsborough                                           26th April 1989.



                                                will say:-




On the 15th April I went to Hillsborough to watch the football match.

There were seven of us altogether and we were in two cars.         We came

through Penistone, passed the ground and parked about 5/10 minute walk

away.      The time was then approximately 2.10/2.15 p.m.     We then walked

straight to the ground in a group.        Between us we had two Leppings Lane

Stand tickets, 1 Nottingham Forrest end of the ground ticket and four tickets

for the Leppings Lane ground.




When we got to the entrance to the Lepping Lane end there was a mass of people

there.       There were four mounted policemen but I saw no police on foot.       One

of the mounted policemen said "Stop pushing there's nowhere to go", - whatever

that meant.       Before we got through the turnstile a large concertina exit

gate opened for 1 0 / 1 5 seconds and two mounted policemen came along the side

and told someone on the other side to close it, which was done immediately.

I would say that about a dozen people got in in the       few seconds the gate

was open.       There was just a mass of people outside the ground.      There were

no queues formed.       At Anfield and Goodison we all form up in queues to get

into the ground     and there is no bother of any sort, but here there was nothing

like that.      When we got through the turnstiles into an open area which was

enclosed I saw no stewards and no mounted policemen or foot police.          Once I

got through the turnstiles T went to my left to get a couple of programmes.

When I got the programmes the three of us (we had lost one of our crowd by

then) went through the tunnel into the terracing at the Leppings Lane end.

To the best of my recollection as we came through the tunnel I think the

match was just in the process of kicking off.       There was no crush in the

 tunnel.     I want to make it quite clear that before going through the tunnel
none of us knew anything about the entrances to the Leppings Lane end to

the left and right of the tunnel.     There were no stewards pointing to these

entrances.




When we went through the tunnel it was very crushed and we thought we

would try to get to the area to the left of us where there seemed to be

plenty of space.   As we went towards the left we saw fencing which

prevented us from getting into the area but we really could not get very

close to the fencing because of the crush.      We then stood about two steps

into the crowd watching the match when suddently there was a strong surge

forward and I was carried say halfway down the terraces.      I managed to

find a   "spec" with my back to the barrier.     My two friends were with me

and we thought we would be alright and safeguarded by the barrier at our

rear.    The match was still in progress.      After perhaps a minute or so

there was a stronger surge forward and we were carried right down to the

front.    We finished about two/three paces from the front of the terraces.

We were just jammed tight and could not move either way.       There were people

screaming out at that stage saying they were being crushed.       People started

climbing over us and climbing over the fences.       The situation was absolutely

chaotic to say the least and it was clear that a lot of people were very

badly hurt.    As people tried to climb over the top of the fencing I did

see a number of policemen pushing them back off the top      of the fencing

back into the crowd and so preventing them from getting on to the pitch.

That made the situation even worse.         I then saw a small gate opened

approximately 7/8 yards to my right.      This gate was off centre from the

middle of the rear of the goal.     In other words slightly towards the North

Stand.    Eventually I and my two friends managed to get through this gate.

My legs were jammed by the crush behind me and the police pulled me out.

By that time the game had been stopped.




We eventually made our way to the car and when we were all there we drove

home.
r   »




        FROM                                             05.17.1939   12 *2 4                       P . 21




                                                 -   3   -



               I had a lot of pain in my left side and the following morning I went to

               Whiston Hospital.     I was X-Rayed and told that I had bruised ribs.          They

               were not strapped and X was told to take some painkillers.            On the Monday,

               17th April, I attended the Roseheath Health Centre in Halewood.             My doctor.

               Dr. Kinloch, was away so I saw his locum Dr. Taylor.             I saw Dr. Taylor

               again on the 24th April and he put me off work for another two weeks, so

               that will mean I have been off work for three weeks.             I have not worked

               in the public house but fortunately my wife has been able to take care of

               things for me.      I have suffered a great deal of pain - bruising of my

               ribs and I still have pain and furthermore I am still shocked and depressed

               at the incidents that I saw happen.



               I would like to add that there was general talk in the public house that

               I manage, by some of the customers, that the previous year when some of

               the lads had been to Sheffield, when they came through the turnstiles there

               were stewards directing them to the entrances to the terraccs of the Leppings

               Lane end on either side of the tunnel.           ----------------------
