                                                                             Hh c jc
     HOME OFFICE
     Queen Anne’s Gate-London SW1H9AT
                                        Direct line    0 1 -2 ^ 3       2952
                                      Sw itchboard     0 1 -2 1 3 3 0 0 0




Supt. E Hewitt, MA                                                  Your reference
Staff Officer to the Chief Constable
Greater Manchester Police                                           O u r reference
PO Box 22 (S West PDO)
Chester House                                                       Date
                                                                              25      May   1989
Boyer Street
-MAM€HESTERr^Hr€—©RE     ---------------------------

IN CONFIDENCE
                                            Afyv .                      *•




EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


We spoke yesterday about the possibility of written evidence from
ACPO (presumably from Mr Anderton's sub-committee) to the Taylor
enquiry. I have since heard from the secretariat to the enquiry
that letters have in the last few days gone to several
organisation including ACPO (I think to Mr Wright as President)
inviting written evidence, to be submitted if possible by
12 June.


As discussed I attach a very provisional draft of evidence the
Police Department here are preparing as part of the Home Office
evidence. Our role is very much to see that the right legal
framework exists and that agencies in or for whom we have some
interest or responsibility make appropriate practical
arrangements. I think it would be helpful if we both had sight
of the draft evidence we might each consider submitting, to avoid
any inadvertent contradictions and to minimise overlap.


For example, there may be parts of the attached draft which ACPO
feel are too specific to police operations and should come from
them. Intelligence and covert operations might be in that
category.  I copied to Mr Phillips my letter of 23 May to
DAC Wells about the FA Cup Final and what I saw of attempts by
Merseyside fans to force entry without tickets.


Can I invite Mr Anderton and/or Mr Phillips to consider whether
they now foresee ACPO submitting written evidence, and whether
they have any comments on this draft, please?
I am copying this letter and enclosure to HMCIC; to the Staff
Officer to Mr Wright, South Yorkshire; and to Deputy Assistant
Commissioner Wells and Commander Robinson (TO 20), Metropolitan
Police.




                              F J SMITH
                             F8 Division
