From the Chainnan.                                     Flexible ManufacturingTechnoiogy Lt
                                                       Carden Avenue, Hollingbury,
 MB/JMH                                                Brighton BN1 8AU, England.
                                                       Telephone: Brighton (0273) 507255
  17th April, 1989.                                    Telefax: Brighton (0273) 553254
                                                       Cables: KAYTEEYEM Brighton
                                                       Telex: 87121
  Mr D Morris,
  Private Secretary,
  10 Downing Street.
  London,
  SW1A 2AA.

  Dear Mr Morris,
  Recently we exchanged correspondence with regard to the possible
  visit of the Prime Minister to FMT, and I do trust this is going to
  be possible. However, my reason for writing to you now is the deep
  distress and grief I feel with regard to the terrible accident at
  Hillsborough.
  Please find enclosed a report I prepared following a visit to the
  Tottenham Hotspur Football Club on 3rd April 1985. The report
  highlights the same type of terrible incident which took place, but
  without the same horrendous consequences. At the time the report
 iwas sent to Mr Niel McFarlane, Minister of Sport, Mr Justice
 |Popplewell following the Bradford disaster, as well as the Police
  Authority in Tottenham, and the Chairman of Tottenham Hotspur
 |Football Club.
  No satisfactory response was received from any of the above
 Iregarding: this matter,and. those of us         concerned were most
  distressed. Despite almost the same tragic circumstances occurring
  to Mr Yates and myself and youngsters with us, as occurred on
  Saturday at Hillsborough we could not bring those in authority to
  the realisation that a serious problem existed.
   It is tragic that 93 people must be killed before authority is
   prepared to take action, and I am sure that all concerned in the 3rd
   April 1985 incident would be prepared to recount this incident, if
   required.
   I am sorry to write this to you, but the Prime Minister’s office
   should be made aware that the Saturday tragedy is not just an
   isolated incident. I feel such a deep sense of grief and injustice
   over this matter that I trust you can bring this report to the
   attention of the appropriate persons charged with taking action.
                                          Yours sincerely,




                                          M BrighK^OBE
                                          Chairman.
REPORT REGARDING VISIT TO TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR FOOTBALL CLUB,
                       3RD APRIL, 1985




This report has been prepared by M. Bright, Chairman and
Managing Director of KTM Ltd., Member of the Executive Board
of the Machine Tool Trades Association, member of the
Government ACARD Committee on Advanced Manufacturing Technology.


On Wednesday, 3rd April 1985, accompanied by two visitors
from West Germany - Mr. Michael Keidler, President of Ronsberg
Football Club, and his sou - a visit was made to the Tottenham
Hotspur versus Everton game.       Mr. Keidler, on a personal
visit to the U.K., will be seeing Everton play Bayern Munich
on 12th April 1985, and was, therefore, interested in seeing
this match.


As it was short notice and no seats were available, we
decided to purchase terrace tickets, and arrived at the
ground at 5.45 p.m. for an 8.00 p.m. kick-off, finding a
suitable terrace position shortly afterwards;       We, together
with two other foreign visitors, looked forward to a splendid
evening.


At 7.40 p.m. the terrace was completely full and the two
policemen in our area could not keep gangways clear.       More
and more people poured through the stairways leading from
the entrance concourse.    The policemen gave up as .the pressure
mounted from people jammed in the stairway, and removed
themselves to the relatively free area of the concourse.
The people who could not enter the terrace from the stairway
began pushing -sometimes five to ten people in a group
together - creating tremendous pressure on the people in
front.     In front of us was a barrier, and the people directly
against the barrier began to panic and lash out to try and
relieve the pressure from the rear.       People around us, who
had for two hours been exchanging good-natured banter,
became terrified and panic-stricken, swearing and tearing at
each other to try and remain upright.


                               -   1-
Mr. Keidler, who was wearing a belt, had it held by a man'
who was trying to remain upright, and the belt, was eventually
torn_JLrom his waist.   Mr. Keidler's fifteen year old son was
in danger of being crushed against the barrier, and was
obviously distressed.     Luckily we had selected a position
close to the stairs leading to season ticket enclosures, and
we were able, by pleading and pushing, to make our way to
the entrance concourse.


At the entrance concourse is situated an enquiry booth
associated with the club, and there were approximately two
hundred people who were in a similar position to us.        Some
were middle-aged couples, one was a man with two teen-aged
daughters, some were men with sons - all were equally
distressed.    The person at the enquiry position said to all
the assembled parties that this was not his problem as he
was only a member of the security staff.     Indeed, each
security person on duty stated that it was a club responsibility
and not his.


Also situated at the entrance concourse is a police enquiry
position.     Constable 2334 and Constable 507 both made it
clear that the problem was not a police problem but a club
problem.    Sergeant Y49, who was behind a glass screen,
refused to come and discuss the problem with those in the
enquiry office.
                                                    t


When we left the police office and re-entered the concourse,
the people at the club enquiry office were in heated argument
with the security person, who insisted that he was only
security and everybody should go home and claim refunds from
the club, in writing.


At no time could any of those involved in this area bring
forward a responsible club official.     Also, no club stewards
at all were on the terraces to ensure that all was in order.
At approximately 8.15 p.m., when all concerned v/ere becoming
resigned to the fact that no redress could be obtained, the
situation was then complicated by the arrival into the actual
concourse of two officers on horseback. Mr. Keidler, his son
and I were so concerned at this turn of events that we
immediately left to try and obtain redress from the main
office.

At the main office once again senior security personnel made
it clear that this was a club problem, and that we should
write in.              This answer was given after we had been kept
waiting until 8.45 p.m. together with four or five other
people.           The cards of these people are attached if verif­
ication of any facts is required.


No senior club official would come to see us and listen to
our complaint.              Eventually an assistant from Mr. P. Day, the
Club Secretary, came down.                    She at first made it clear that
we must write in, secondly she stated that they could not
understand our problem as the computer showed that the
ground was not at full capacity, thirdly she made it clear
     i   "   .......

that seats should have been bought for such an important
game.        She eventually reluctantly took our names and addresses
and stated that Mr. P. Day would telephone the following day.
This telephone call was not forthcoming the next day.
                                                                   i




I have felt it necessary to record this incident, in which
so many people were involved, for the following reasons.


1.       I have spent many years developing international
         relationships, and I am deeply ashamed that this incident
         reflects badly upon our country, our national sport,
         and on a world-renowned football club.


2.       With the efforts now being made at ministerial level to
         overcome such problems, perhaps a factual report may
         help certain decisions to be made to ensure such
         incidents cannot happen in the future.


                                     -   3-
3.   Having been a keen football supporter in my earlier '
     years, but never having experienced such incidents,
     I have found the scenes of violence on television
     inexplicable until this recent personal experience.


4.   This personal experience has clarified for me that some
     of the underlying root causes do not lie with the
     supporters.    Therefore, this report may help to
     highlight areas where the management of clubs have a
     significant responsibility to ensure they are properly
     stewarding and caring for the people under their control.


In conclusion, because of my serious concern, I have written
to the Chairman of Tottenham Hotspur Football Club and to
the Chief Superintendent of Tottenham Police, and I have
requested answers to the following questions :


a)   Was the East Stand area oversubscribed on    the night in
     question, and, if not, why was it impossible for gangways
     to be kept reasonably clear?


b)   In the event that an accident occurs on the terraces
     on such an evening as 3rd April, what is the procedure
     for the people concei-ned to receive aid?


c)   Why was there a total absence of club officials both
     within the stand area and at the main offices?
                                                   *




d)   Why are there no club stewards on the terraces
     ensuring that the appropriate disciplines are being
     maintained?


e)   Both the private security people and the police disclaim
     responsibility for stewarding and general management of
     resources.    Who is actually responsible?


f)   If the police are responsible,'why did Sergeant Y49
     disclaim responsibility for any element of crowd control
     or stewarding?
g)   Are the police only responsible for action when there
     is trouble?


h)   How many policemen in total were involved on the night
     in question, and at what cost?       Are all policing costs
     borne by the club or do the ratepayers bear any of the
     burden?

i)   Were there any serious injuries/incidents on the night
     in question.   If so, perhaps this evidence or that of
     the people who are listed in the attachment may be
     of help.


j)   How is terrace capacity calculated, and how is the
     terrace capacity monitored in relationship to the
     number of people through the turnstiles?


k)   In the calculation of terrace capacity, is it necessary
     to involve the statutory Health and Safety body?       Also,
     do the police approve terrace capacity calculations?


1)   Are there penalties involved in exceeding the agreed
     terrace capacity?



Due to the distress caused to me personally, my German
guests as well as many other people, I believe as of right
that these questions should be answered as quickly as possible.




                                   M. Bright


MB/BMB
8.4.1985




                          -   5-
Attachment showing names and addresses of three people
involved in the problem reported regarding the Tottenham
Hotspur - Everton match on Wednesday, 3rd April 1985.
