THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975

DESIGNATION

How does the Safety of Sports Grounds Act work?


The principle mechanism for achieving spectator safety is by the
issue of a safety certificate for a sports ground designated by
the Secretary of State.
   I

How is designation done?

Designation is by Order, subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament. The individual ground is named in the
Order.


Are there limits in designation?


The Safety of Sports Grounds Act provides for the designation of
sports grounds which have accommodation for over 10,000
spectators.


Is there provision to change the 10,©00 limit?

Yes; the Secretary of State has power to vary the limit, either
up or down, by Order - subject to the negative resolution
procedure of Parliament.

How many grounds are designated?


91 out of the 92 football league grounds are designated. The
exception is the ground used by Torquay Utd which holds less than
10.000 spectators.

What is the designation policy?

All sports grounds identified as having accommodation for over
10.000 spectators and used for either association football, rugby
union, rugby league, cricket are designated.  (This follows HMG's
acceptance of the Popplewell Inquiry recommendation).


SAFETY CERTIFICATES

Issue of the Safety Certificate

The issue of the safety certificate is the responsibility of the
local authority, who is under a duty to issue one.


Contents of a safety certificate

A safety certificate will contain terms and conditions "necessary
of expedient” to secure "reasonable" safety. For example, it
includes conditions on authorised numbers of spectators to a
ground, or any part of a ground; the exits/entrances to the
ground; size, location, strength of the crush barriers.

Effects of the Popplewell Inquiry on the 1975 Act

The 1975 Act was amended as from 1 January 1988 by Part II of the
Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 which
reflected HMG's response to the Popplewell Inquiry.

Has Hillsborough a safety certificate?


YES

Is the ground inspected?

There is a duty on the local authority to arrange for an annual
inspection of the ground. Inspections are carried out in
accordance with guidelines from the Home Office. These are in
addition to any test/inspection requirements set by the safety
certificate.

SAFETY GUIDELINES FOR GROUND OPERATORS

The Home Office/Scottish Office "Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds" is intended to provide advice to both ground operators
 ^     and "certificating" local authorities on spectator safety.

       Status of the Guide


       The Guide is a voluntary code but may be called up in terms and
       conditions in safety certificates.



)^ '   Adequacy of the Guide


       The Guide was revised in October 1986 in the light of
       recommendations from the Popplewell Inquiry.


|ST    Does the Guide contain advice about the ingress to sports
       grounds?


       Yes. The Guide specifically highlights the dangers of crowd
       pressure and over crowding and includes advice on crowd
       dispersal, crush barrier specification stewarding and controlled
       egress.


16-    What is the purpose of cirush barriers on a standing terrace?

       Barriers control the movement, density and pressure build up on a
       terrace. It is necessary to comply with the strength and spacing
       requirements, of the guide or reduce the capacity of the terrace.

17,    Any additional studies on adequacy of cirush barriers?


       Home Office engineers have attended tests on crush barriers with
       engineers carrying out the test procedures advocated on the Guide
       to Safety at Sports Grounds. There have been no indications that
       the procedure recommended in the Guide were inadequate.

       Is the advice in the Guide adequate?


       This is something which the Inquiry will wish to examine.
|C^ Does the Guide contain advice on First Aid?


  The Guide reminds ground management of their responsibility to
  provide adequate first aid provision and first aid staff.


  [Note: St John's Ambulance have recently pressed for compulsory
  minimum first aid provision to be the subject of regulations.     We-
  have said we believe this to be a wrong approach. Safety
  certificates are the main safety mechanism and their
  terms/conditions can be tailored to individual needs. It is also
  doubtful whether the provisions of the Act are wide enough to
  make such regulations. We have told St John's that we      will
  include expanded advice on the subject when updating the Guide
  this year.]


  RESPONSIBILITY FOR SAFETY

  Who is responsible for safety?


  Prime responsibility lies with the ground operators to ensure the
  safety of their customers.


  Who is in charge: the club or the police?


  It will be one of the tasks of the inquiry to examine the
  arrangements made by the club and the police for the stewarding
  and policing of spectators at the match. There is invariably
  close consultation between the police and clubs over such
  arrangements.


  IF PRESSED:


  The police have responsibility for the preservation of the peace
  and the maintenance of public order. If they perceive a threat
  to public order or public safety, they have a duty to take action
  to counter it. This is an operational Judgement for the senior
  police officer.
4^2- What part of the Popplewell Inquiry were not implemented?

     The Government did not accept the need for the issue of "annual”
     safety certificates; (b) power to revoke safety certificates.

     The 1975 Act works in a way that revocation is unnecessary. A
     safety certificate can however be amended if circumstances change
     so as to justify such a course.  (designated grounds are
     inspected by local authorities annually).
Does the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 make specific
requirements as to the provision of pitch perimeter fencing to be
contained in safety certificates?


No. The 1975 Act provides that terms and conditions in safety
certificates should be necessary or expedient to secure
"reasonable” safety.


Has the 1975 Act been changed as to the contents of a safety
certificate?


Yes. It was changed following the Popplewell Inquiry and how
makes no stipulation as to the contents of a safety certificate.

What were the previous provisions?


The 1975 Act previously reguired a safety certificate to include
terms and conditions:


(a) specifying the maximum number of spectators to be admitted;

(b) as to the number, size and situation of entrances and exits
     (including means of escape) and means of access to them;

(c) requiring those entrances and exits and means of access to
     be properly maintained and kept free from obstruction;

(d) as to size, strength, number and location of any cr^sh
     barriers.

Whv the change?


The reason was that the Popplewell Inquiry recommended
application of the 1975 Act to all sports grounds not simply
sports "stadia". By widening the scope of the Act it was
necessary to be less specific as to the contents of safety
       certificates.


2.7»   Does this mean safety certificates no longer have conditions as
       described above?


       No. It merely makes discretionary what was previously mandatory
       and ensures that the issuing authority are not restricted inwhat
       they can include in a safety certificate.


2j£. What advice is contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
     on access through Pitch Perimeter Fences?

       The Guide recommends that:


            "Gate's or Other access points (minimum width 1.1 metres)
           should be ... provided for use in an emergency and, at
           those grounds where a perimeter track is used as part of the
           exit system for the departure of spectators at the end of
           the event. Provision of such gates or access points is
           particularly important to allow full access to the playing
           area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a place of
           safety in an emergency ..."
Should there be a Home Office inspectorate to check that safety
measures at grounds are up to standard?


A sports ground requiring a safety certificate is so designated

by the Secretary of State by Order under the 1975 Safety at

Sports Ground Act.   Thife issue of the safety certificate is the

responsibility of the local authority.    Responsibility for safety

at the sports ground rests with the operators of the ground.
There is therefore no direct Home Office monitoring of individual

grounds; but the Home Office guide to safety at sports ground
provides advice to both ground operators and "certificating"
authorities on spectator safety.   Before issuing a certificate

the authority is required to consult the police, and either the
fire brigade or the building authority.    The Home Office would be
likely to hear if a certificate were issued when the police or

fire brigade were dissatisfied.
Drv Moats

Dry moats were considered when the issue of Pitch Perimeter

Fences was originally raised in 1973/4.    The reasons for their
exclusion are still valid:


     i.     spectactors trying to gain access to the pitch
     could be injuried falling into the moat;


     ii.    players in the pitch could be injuried falling
     into the moat;


     iii.     the construction of a moat at most grounds would
     be impractical in that it would reduce the size of the

     pitch, would require major construction work, and would
     tend to undermine the pitch and the spectator terrace.
Background note



History of Pitch Perimeter Fences



1.   Pitch perimeter fences, preventing crowd access to the pitch,
did not form a part of the original concept of crowd control.
The recollections of the Home Office structural engineer is that
they were introduced fcat the drafting stage of the Guide in 1974
after the change of Government at the request of the Minister of

Sport (Mr Dennis Howell) as a crowd control measure.


The issue of perimeter fences was first raised in 1973 during
seminars, arranged by the Home Office to advise police, fire
brigade and local authorities on the application of the Guide.

Discussion of such fences was introduced into the seminar as a
crowd control measure.



It has always been essential that access to the pitch, via gates
in the fence, should be provided.        This is clearly stated in

all editions of the Guide, and was reviewed and           in

Popplewell (Page 81, Rec 34 and 35).
APPEAL FUND



Can further details be given about the appeal fund


As I announced in my statement, an appeal fund has been set up by
the civic authorities of Liverpool, Nottingham and Sheffield.
The Government will be contributing £500,000 immediately toward
this fund. I understand that an appeal fund has also been
established by Liverpool Football Club and I am advised that
discussions are taking place about the two funds being merged.

BACKGROUND


The three cities appeal is entitled "The Hillsborough Disaster
Appeal11. Its terms of reference are "An appeal fund for
assistance to those who have suffered injury or loss as a result
of the Hillsborough disaster". The appeal is based at the Co­
operative Bank, West Street, Sheffield.
AMBULANCE SERVICE


What -was the response of the ambulance service to the incident

I understand that before the match began 2 ambulances were
located at the ground together with an attendance from the
St John Ambulance Service. The first call for additional
ambulances was received by the ambulance service at 8 minutes
past three. Within 17 minutes a total of 10 additional
ambulances had attended.

BACKGROUND


There is criticism of a slow and badly coordinated response by
the ambulance service in today's "Times" and elsewhere. These
criticisms will be matters for the inquiry to consider.

FIRE 'BRIGADE


What was the response of the fire brigade to the incident


The brigade received the first call about the incident at 14
minutes past three. The first appliance reached the scene some
six minutes later and was quickly joined by five other appliances
together with support vehicles. A further four appliances were
called for and, in total, 65 fire brigades staff attended.

BACKGROUND


When the brigade arrived at the scene all rescues had taken
place. Brigade staff used resuscitation equipment to treat
casualties - one set of resuscitation equipment is carried on
each appliance. Other brigade staff gave mouth to mouth
resuscitation and gave general assistance.
HOSPITAL SERVICE


What was the role of the hospital service, can further
-information be given about the number of injuries

As I said in my statement, 94 people died in this tragic incident
and 174 people were injured. The injured were taken to the
Northern General Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. Of
these 94 people were treated and discharged on the day. 80 were
admitted. The latest information I have is that 44 people are
                                            I

still in hospital of whom 18 are in intensive care units.
How many police on duty?


773 police officers were on duty in connection with the match of
whom 225 were inside the ground. Outside the ground there were
548 officers including 30 mounted police and 26 dog handlers.

Casualty bureaux


Both South Yorkshire Police and Merseyside Police ran large scale
casualty bureaux to handle calls from members of the public
anxious about friends or relatives who had attended the match.
        STATEMENT ON SHEFFIELD: NOTES FOR SUPPLEMENTARIES



    -   Procedure in the event of a complaint bv a member r>f the pnt-n in


        If a member of the public makes a complaint against an officer or
        officers of the South Yorkshire Police it will fall to be dealt
        with under the procedures set out in Part IX of the Police and
        Criminal Evidence Act 1984. In that event the material gathered
        in the course of the public inquiry would be directly relevant to
        the resolution of the complaint.

#




                                                                             *
                                         HOME S E C R E T A R Y ' S S T A T E M E N T

 Supplementary              on immunity

 Will w i t n e s s e s at the inquiry be given                         i mm unity from any criminal
 or d is ci p l i n a r y p r o c e e d i n g s ?

 1.        The q ue s t i o n of w h e t h e r         any     immunity       should    be offered       to

 witnesses          in resp ec t       of p os s i b l e c ri minal           p ro c e e d i n g s w h ic h might

 be brought would          be a m a t t e r for the A tt or ne y G e n er al to consider.
                                                    m i gh t be
 2.        [The q ue st io n of w h e t h e r immunity      /offered from dis ci pl in ar y

 proceedings          to any pol ic e w i t n e s s e s             w ould be                   a m a t t e r for

 the C hi ef C on s t a b l e         of the force c o n c e r n e d           in c o n s u l t a t i o n w ith the

P olice C om pl a i n t s         A u t h o ri ty .]

B ac kg r o u n d

 1.        Any w i t n e s s     at the inqu ir y may re fu se                  to an sw er q u e s ti on s w hich

may i n c r i m i n a t e him.           It is not u n c o m m o n          for the A tt or ne y G e n er al        to

o ffer a limited               i mm un it y   from c r im in al        proceedings         to w i t n e s s at

public       i n q u ir ie s    in r e s pe ct     of any e v i d e n c e w h i c h       they may give at

the inqui ry          and this was done at,                    for example,          the Red Lion Square

and B r i x to n      Inquiries          conducted        by Lord          S c a r m a n u nder the   Police Act

1964.        If Lord J u s t i c e        T ay l o r c o n s i d e r e d    that    the conduct       of the

i nqu ir y was        or was       likely       to be p r e j u d i c e d       if an offer of immunity

w er e not mad e         it w o ul d      be for him           to a p p r o a c h   the A tt o r n e y Gene ra l

and    requ es t      him to c o n s i d e r an offer of immunity.

2.       The q ue s t i o n       of d i s c i p l i n a r y   proceedings          is m ore difficult,

particularly           as,      in c e r t a i n   circumstances,              the Police C o mp la in ts

A u t h o r i t y may di re ct        disciplinary             char ge s     to be p r e f er re d    if the

C hi ef C o n s t a b l e      does   not p r e f e r char ge s            himself.     But   there     is no

re as on     to suppose,           at the p r e se nt          stage,       that    disciplinary       offences

will    h ave       been c ommitted,           as oppo se d        to errors         of judgment.
E*

     3.   It is not p os s i b l e for immun it y          from civil pr oc ee di ng s   to be

     offered,   since any   i n di vi du al   is free to b ring civil proceedings if

     he thinks he has a case.




                                               -   2   -
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL



A - General Note


Part I of the Football Spectators Bill deals specifically
with excluding football hooligans from grounds.        It has
always been the case that new admission procedures required
when the national football membership scheme comes into force
will have to qualify for a safety certificate in the normal
way.    Safety must always be paramount, but excluding
troublemakers must in principle be a contribution to safety.

B - Will the scheme cause crowd problems?

It is clearly necessary to design and implement the system of
membership checking such that disorder does not result.
This will be a major consideration for the Government/ the
police and the football authorities.            Saturday has
demonstrated only too tragically that there is olreadya
problem about last minute crowds at matches.         Potential
suppliers of membership and eqiupment have said that it is
possible for cards to be checked in no extra time than it
now takes for people to pass through the turnstiles.

If the computer equipment should fail,       the   scheme will
provide for orderly procedures for coping.
 ■   •
it

                                    2.


     C - Where next for the Bill?


     The Bill is an enabling framework.      The Government has
     already given a full commitment not to implement the
     membership scheme within that framework until arrangements
9    have satisfactorily been worked out. That commitment still
     stands and obviously now embraces the lessons to be learned
     from these tragic events.

     D - Popplewell


     I would remind the House that it was a recommendation of the
     Popplewell Inquiry in 1986 that consideration should be given
     to some form of membership scheme for Football League clubs
     in England and Wales.-




                                                   t
 FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION

 Should future semi finals be held at Wembley?
 Should this season's FA Cup competition.be abandoned?

•These are matters for the Football Association.


What were the first aid arrangements at the match?

As is normal practice at Football League and FA Cup matches,
the St John's ambulance were in attendance. I am sure this
is something the Inquiry will wish to examine.


How were the tickets to the match allocated?

This ^ will be investigated during the Inquiry.                 /




Background

The Football Association allocated 27,783 tickets to
Nottingham Forest Football Club and 23,542 to Liverpool. The
discrepancy is a reflection of the fact that ticket
allocations are determined by crowd segregation arrangements
at the ground. In this case the police advised, for traffic
flow reasons outside the ground, that the Liverpool
supporters should be accommodated in the Leppings Lane end of
the ground. The same arrangement was made when the same
teams met in last season's FA Cup semi final.
                                      HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                                          Type of Inquiry


  1.   The Tribunals and Inquiries Act                 1921 provides a statutory

 procedure for inquiring into an event of national importance.                                The

 Act enables witnesses to be subpoenaed,                   whereas a non-statutory

 departmental inquiry does not.                The Salmon Report into Tribunals of

 Inquiry   1966   set out criteria which should be satisfied before the

 Act is invoked.       The Report stated that the Act should "always be

 confined to matters of vital public importance concerning which

 there is something in the nature of a nation-wide crisis of

 confidence".     S e r i o u s and   tra gi c as the H i l l s b o r o u g h d i s a s t e r was,

 the issues which it raises do not really satisfy the criteria in
 the Salmon Report.

2.     It is not necessary for the 1921 Act procedure to be used,
whenever a disaster occurs which results in loss of life.                              The

Popplewell Inquiry showed that a non-statutory inquiry is perfectly
capable of carrying out a thorough investigation of the facts of a

serious accident such as the Hillsborough tragedy and of making

recommendations to remedy deficiencies.                    If there is serious doubt
whether witnesses who have relevant evidence to give will be

prepared to give that evidence without being required to do so

there may be a case for considering whether a statutory procedure,

such as that provided for under the 1921 Act, which enables witnesses
to be compelled to give evidence, should be invoked.                           But there is
no reason, at present, to suppose that that will be the case.
E x p e r i e n c e has s hown that     1921    Act inq ui ri es        tend to be extemely

leng th y and not n e c e s s a r i l y m or e        e f f e c t i v e at e l i c i t i n g the truth

than e x t r a - s t a t u t o r y inquiries.         What   is required,        in the present

ci r cu m st a nc es ,   is a speedy i n v e s ti ga ti on ,       w h i c h can a s c e r t a i n the

facts and r e c o m m e n d m e a s u r e s   to p r e ve nt such a d i s a s t e r h a p p en in g

again.      The i n q u i r y w h i c h has bee n set up is the m os t a p p r o p r i a t e

m ea ns   of s e c u r i n g that   o bjective.




                                                  -   2-
