From:   M J Pyne                                                      cc Mr Edmundson
        Operational Policing
        Policy Unit
        Room 528, QAG
        ® 273 - 2433
        18 February, 1998



Mr Michael

ANY QUESTIONS: FRIDAY 20 FEBRUARY

I enclose briefing on a couple of issues for your appearance on this programme.

HILLSBOROUGH

The Home Secretary announced on 18 February that he, together with the Attorney-
General and Director of Public Prosecutions, had accepted the Judge’s conclusions
that there are no grounds for a further public inquiry or any basis for a renewed
application to quash the inquest verdict or to reconsider the decisions of the
prosecution and disciplinary authorities.

LINE TO TAKE

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has conducted a thorough and independent scrutiny of the
evidence submitted by the families.

The Home Secretary has considered the Judge’s report carefully and, rightly, accepted
his conclusion that the evidence does not add anything significant to the evidence
available to the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests.

I recognise the bitter disappointment of the families but I hope that when they have
had time to consider the report in detail, they will understand why the Home Secretary
has reached this conclusion.

Does this mean no-one is to blame?

Lord Taylor’s Public Inquiry immediately following the disaster identified its causes.
He did not attribute all the blame to a single cause or person but he made it clear that
the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police control. This has been
accepted by South Yorkshire Police who have apologised on many occasions.

Was video evidence concealed / disappeared?

Two tapes (not police tapes) were stolen from the club and remain lost. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has determined conclusively that the footage on the tapes would not have
had any relevance to the investigation o f the disaster. There is no evidence that they
were taken by the police as part of a cover-up.
Other video evidence

The suggestion that the police blamed their failure to see overcrowding on the terraces
on a defective camera is simply not correct. There was abundant evidence at the
Taylor Inquiry and Inquest that the police had a good view and could see the terraces
from their control box without the aid of cameras.

The Coroner and the 3.15 cut-off point

The cut-off point has been widely misrepresented according to Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith. The Coroner ruled that he considered all those who died had received the
injuries from which they died by 3.15. It was never suggested by the Coroner that all
those who died did so before 3.15 or that the medical evidence was to this effect. It
was only in relation to how, by what means, the deceased came to their deaths that the
cut-off point was imposed.


KERBCRAWLING

The offence was made recordable last year, allowing the police take fingerprints and
DNA samples following conviction, which can assist in the investigation of more
serious crime. Consideration is currently being given to a possible amendment to the
Crime and Disorder Bill to introduce a power of arrest for kerbcrawling.

Other measures to combat kerb-crawling are also under consideration. At present under
the offence of kerb crawling, a person must solicit a woman (or different women) more
than once or in such circumstances as to cause a nuisance before a prosecution can be
brought. This hampers the police in tackling kerb crawling and we are therefore looking
at whether to the law should be amended to remove the need to prove persistence (or
nuisance or annoyance) on the part of the kerbcrawler before the offence is committed.

LINE TO TAKE

Aware of the nuisance caused by the activities of kerbcrawlers. We are considering
whether police powers should be strengthened by making kerbcrawling an arrestable
offence or possibly removing the need to prove persistence.

This must await a suitable legislative opportunity.
