I   '   !•   _ i




                                 Police Policy Directorate                                         Home Office
                                                                                                   50 Queen Anne's Gate,
                                 Paul Pugh                                                         London SW1H 9AT
                                                                                                   Telephone: 0171-273 3141
                                 H ead o f Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)                 Fax:       0171-273 2703




                   Richard Wells Esq QPM MA (Oxon) Cl Mgt
                   Chief Constable
                   South Yorkshire Police
                   Snig Hill
                   Sheffield
                   SS38LY                                                            9 February 1998




                   HILLSBOROUGH: PUBLICATION OF EVIDENCE


                   I would be grateful for clarification on some documents which were considered by
                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith during his scrutiny.

               As you know, when the Home Secretary announced the scrutiny, he said that he
               would publish the Judge’s report and, as far as possible, make public the evidence
               which the Judge considered. Most of the key material considered by the Judge is
               contained in the Appendices to his report, which will of course be published. Much
               of the remaining material which he considered is already in the public domain, in the
               form of transcripts of public proceedings or other published material.

              There are some documents, which the Judge considered which, as far as I am
              aware have not previously been made publicly available. Some of these are
              documents which are technically the property of South Yorkshire police, and in
              particular the following:

                         (i)         the statements made by South Yorkshire police officers which the
                                     Judge refers to in part 2 of chapter 4 of his report. Some are contained
                                     in Appendix 7, but the great majority are not.

                         (ii)        the South Yorkshire police operational orders for the 1988 and 1989
                                     FA Cup semi-finals at Hillsborough.

                         (iii)       the report produced by David Phillips, then deputy chief constable of
                                     Devon and Cornwall in August 1990.

                         (iv)       the report prepared by Mr Noel Bume considered by the Judge in
                                    chapter 6 of the report.




             fi'oppu\hou\mijc\pp0364pd.doc
   When the report is published the Home Secretary will want relevant material which is
   not otherwise in the public domain to be placed in the Library of the House of
   Commons. The documents would therefore not be “published" in the conventional
   sense, but, through being available to Members of Parliament. They would in
   practice be publicly available.

   I would be grateful if you would let me know urgently if you consider that there any
   reasons why the documents to which I have referred should not be placed in the
   Library of the House.

   I would be grateful also for clarification on your approach to video tape material held
      South Yorkshire police. The Judge’s report makes clear that the police tapes
  TB1, TB2, TB3, and TB4 were made available in their entirety to the Taylor Inquiry,
  and were available for inspection by the representatives of all parties. In that sense*
  they have already been in the public domain. They have also previously been
  available by South Yorkshire police to Yorkshire Television. I assume therefore that
  there can be no objection to material from these tapes being made available if it
  were requested.

  I understand that tape VRM2 is a tape of what happened in the mortuary at the
 ground. It seems to me therefore that it would be quite inappropriate for it to be
 made publicly available. I understand, however, that on request from relatives from
 victims, South Yorkshire police are prepared to provide still pictures taken from this
 tape of individual victims to the relatives of those victims. Perhaps you could confirm
 that that understanding is correct.

 In relation to other material obtained by the scrutiny from South Yorkshire police,
 and in particular the body files relating to individual victims, I do not think that any
 question of making the material publicly available arises.




                                      PAUL PUGH




f.'oppu'hou'miic\ppOJ64pd.doe
