                                                                 Parly No. I 04176




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR WRITTEN ANSW ER




Lord Alton of Liverpool: To ask Her M ajesty’s Government what account the
Home Office and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith took, in deciding against a fresh
inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy, of missing video tapes, changed
statements by police officers, conflicting medical evidence and complaints of lack
o f impartiality in the original coroner’s process and in the granting of immunity
from prosecution to police officers upon taking early retirement.




DRAFT REPLY


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered all the material evidence submitted to his
scrutiny about the Hillsborough disaster. My Rt Hon Friend the Home Secretary
accepted his conclusion that there were no grounds for a fresh inquiry.


Chapter 2 of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report deals with the video evidence. He
found that there was no new video evidence and the only missing video tapes were
two tapes stolen on the day of the disaster which remain missing. They were not
police tapes and the Judge was satisfied that they would not have shown anything
significant.


Lord Justice Stuart-Smith deals with the changed statements by police officers at
Chapter 4 of his report. He concludes at paragraph 106 that allegations of irregularity
and malpractice are not substantiated.




: :odma\meridio\edrm#90201# 1
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith examined closely the evidence of Dr Ed Walker and others
relating to the treatment of victims of the disaster (Chapters 3 of the report). He found
no grounds to suggest that the original inquests were flawed or that complaints of bias
against the Coroner were justified.


No police officer was granted immunity from prosecution. The Director of Public
Prosecutions considered a report following the disaster but concluded that no officer
should face prosecution. On the direction of the Police Complaints Authority,
disciplinary charges of neglect of duty were preferred against two officers. However,
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired on ill-health grounds and, as he was no
longer a serving officer those proceedings could not be completed. The disciplinary
charges against the second officer, Superintendent Murray, were dropped as the PCA
considered that it would have been unfair to pursue what was, in essence, a joint
charge against one officer only.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90201# 1
BACKGROUND


Lord Alton's Question refers to the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith scrutiny of
new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.


2.      The Home Secretary published Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report on 18
February and announced that he had accepted the scrutiny's conclusion that there were
no grounds for further action in relation to the Taylor Inquiry, the inquest or the
criminal or disciplinary proceedings. The Home Secretary’s statement and the
summary of the scrutiny report are attached behind.




:•.odma\meridio\edrm#90201# 1
