From:        J L Goddard                         cc: Ms Rex
             F8 Division                             Miss Snow
             Ext. 3314                               Ms Craig
                                                     Ms Harrison
             29 January 1990                         Mr Yates
                                                     Mr Chilcot
                                                     Mr Hammond
                                                     Mr Moriarty
                                                     Mr Boys Smith
                                                     Mr Turney
                                                     Mr Mower
                                                     Mr Bolton
                                                     Mr Mould
                                                     Mr F Smith
                                                     Mr Gilbert
                                                     Mr Godfrey


Mr Walters




TAYLOR REPORT:    STATEMENT AND OPPOSITION DAY DEBATE



Further to Mr Turney's note of 26 January I attach some
additional background material for the debate.




                           J. L GODDARD


                               J L GODDARD
PART II OF THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989



BACKGROUND NOTE


The aim of Part II is to cut down on violence and disorder at
key matches abroad by preventing convicted football hooligans
from travelling to them.    The Act gives the courts the power
to make a restriction order on a person convicted of a
relevant offence.    Such an.order would be for a fixed period
of two years (or five years if following a period of immediate
imprisonment).    A restriction order imposes a duty to report
at a police station, when required to do so, on the occasion
of a designated match abroad. There is also provision for
making restriction orders following convictions in countries
other than England and Wales (Italy, for example) for
corresponding football-related offences.


2.   It is intended to bring in the main provisions of Part II
as soon as the practical arrangements are complete, which may
be in early May.


3.   Part II has generally been well-received and has been
welcomed by Lord Justice Taylor.
ARREST PROCEDURES                            (Recommendation 48)



BACKGROUND NOTE


There is a general requirement under section 30 of the Police
and Criminal Evidence Act for anyone arrested at other than a
police station to be taken to a police station by a constable
as soon as practicable after the arrest so that the custody
officer will have an early opportunity to consider the
question of detention.   This does not seem to cause any
difficulty for attaining the objective of Recommendation 48.


Taylor recommends a review of arrest procedures inside and
outside grounds with the objective of the arresting officer
being away from his post for the minimum of time.
56-1.JS



NATIONAL FOOTBALL INTELLIGENCE UNIT (NFIU)




BACKGROUND NOTE


NFIU is a newly established central police unit formed to
collate, nationally,    intelligence on the most serious and
persistent football hooligans.


2.     The unit comprises 6 police officers on central service
and is funded (£300,000/year) under common police service
arrangements.     The officer in charge, Supt Adrian Appleby,
took up his post on 2 October 1989.


3.     NFIU will also promote best practice in the use of
intelligence by local forces and will be a point of
communication with foreign police forces.


4.     Every effort is being made to provide NFIU urgently with
a specialist computer tailored to their particular needs.       It
is hoped to have this computer facility in service by the end
of Ma r c h .


5.     Taylor made encouraging remarks about the NFIU and saw it
as a key ingredient for the future.    [287-8].
CCTV




BACKGROUND NOTE


Closed circuit and hand-held video systems greatly assist the
effective policing of football matches.    The police can use
them to spot trouble inside a large crowd of spectators,
direct officers to the scene, and record evidence of criminal
offences for use in court.   All of the major grounds have had
a fixed system installed and all grounds have access to hand­
held video systems.   The provision and maintenance of these
systems is funded by the Football Trust.
SPORTING EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC) ACT 1985



BACKGROUND NOTE


The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 bans the
possession of alcohol on the way to or from designated matches
on football special coaches and trains.


2.   The Act also makes it an offence to try to enter a ground
when drunk or in possession of alcohol and to possess and
consume alcohol within view of the pitch during the period of
the match (from 2 hours before until 1 hour afterward).
Although there is provision for magistrates to grant exemption
orders for premises with no view of the pitch,   the police are
empowered to close any bar in the ground should trouble occur.


3.   The Act also makes it an offence to possess any bottle,
can or other container capable of causing injury when in or
entering or trying to enter a designated ground.


4.   All Football League grounds, Wembley Stadium and non-
League grounds when used for matches involving League clubs
are designated under this Act.
ELECTRONIC TAGGING                            (Recommendation 73)



BACKGROUND NOTE


At present the electronic monitoring of sentenced offenders is
on a voluntary basis.    To impose "tagging" upon offenders,
including convicted football hooligans, would require
legislation.   One of the objectives of the current electronic
monitoring pilot studies is to provide information about its
usefulness.    The evaluation of the current pilot studies will
not be completed before the Spring.    It is too early to reach
conclusions on these studies.
ATTENDANCE CENTRES                           (Extracted from Taylor Report
                                                        (Recommendation 72)
BACKGROUND NOTE


326.         At present section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982
empowers courts to make attendance centre orders for young people
under 21 who:


       (a)   have been convicted of an imprisonable offence;
       (b)   have defaulted on payment of their fines etc; or
       (c)   have failed to comply with the requirements of a     probation
       or superivision order.


Attendance centre orders may not be used for those who have
previously been given a custodial sentence except in special
(undefined) circumstances.      The minimum length of an order is 12
hours, except for those under 14.      The maximum is 24 hours under 17,
and 36 hours for those aged 17 to 20.


327.         At present there are 137 centres:   111 junior centres for
those aged under 17, and 26 senior centres for those aged 17 to 20
(males only).     The senior centres are, for the most part,    in the
larger connurbations.     The Home Office has recently reviewed the use
of the junior centres and some with low attendance figures are being
closed.


328.         Most centres are in school premises.    They are normally
open for 2 (junior) or 3 (senior) hours every other Saturday,
usually, but not invariably,     in the afternoon.   Each centre is
staffed by an officer in charge, normally an off-duty or retired
police officer, assisted by other instructors.       Regimes include
physical education and at least one other activity.


329.         Subject to these factors, attendance centres orders can be
made at present against those convicted of football related offences.
They cannot however be imposed on anyone over 21, or anyone who has
had a custodial sentence.
SPECIFIC OFFENCES IN THE GROUND           (Recommendation 71)



BACKGROUND NOTE


Lord Justice Taylor expresses concern at the undercurrent of unruly
behaviour which can result in disorder.    He pays particular attention
to three activities:   (i) throwing coins and other missiles,   (ii)
chanting obscene or racist abuse, and (iii) going onto the pitch
without reasonable excuse.   The first two activities are outlawed in
general terms by the Public Order Act 1986 but Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendation 71 is for each of the three activities at a designated
sports ground to be made a specific offence.
                                                      (Recommendation 11)
"STATEMENT OF INTENT": POLICE/CLUB DIVISION OF FUNCTIONS



BACKGROUND NOTE


Lord Justice Taylor is concerned that it should be clearly understood
which functions should be discharged by the police and which by the
clubs' stewards.   In his interim report he recommended that the
proposed arrangements should be set out in a 'written agreement.'
The term 'written agreement' led the police and their authorities to
fear the ramifications of a binding legal contract.    The Home Office
have already advised chief officers that the form of a "statement of
intent" should be used since this would not fetter the chief
officers' operational independence nor involve him in any contractual
obligation.   Lord Justice Taylor confirms in is final report that
this is an appropriate means of meeting his recommendation.
TOUTING                                  (Recommendation 70)



Line to take


The Government will be considering carefully and sympathetically this
recommendation.   [In the past it has seen difficulties in proposing a
ban on ticket touting but we shall look at this again in the context
of the particular circumstances of football.]



BACKGROUND NOTE


Lord Justice Taylor is concerned that the activities of touts at
football matches can put at risk the maintenance of safety and the
prevention of disorder [277].


At present a football club is free to eject someone from its own
premises if the club does not wish him to remain (for example a tout
offering tickets in the club's car park).   A police officer is free
to ask someone to move on, and has the power to arrest him in a
public place if he is obstructing the highway or is engaging in
behaviour likely to cause a breach of the peace.   A police officer
also has the power of arrest if he reasonably suspects tickets to be
held by a tout to be stolen or forged.   However Lord Justice Taylor
believes that there should be a specific prohibition for the police
to enforce in the form of an offence of selling tickets for and on
the day of a football match without authority from the home club to
do so [recommendation 70].
