           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007



Trevor Hicks                                                  Your reference:
Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                             Our reference:

                                                             Date:        ^     December 1997




Thank you for your letter of 5 December.

When I began work in July, I understood that your Group had important new evidence for me
to see. You gave me your submission in September. I met you to discuss it with your
barrister, Alun Jones QC, and I have since considered it in great detail.

As you know I also visited Liverpool, where - in addition to the open session to which all the
Hillsborough families could come - 1 had private meetings with you and Mrs Hicks and with
many of the other families who were affected by the disaster. I have also had numerous
meetings here in London, some with relatives of victims and some with police, lawyers, the
Coroner and other people who were involved. These meetings continue.

I do not need to tell you that I am looking at very serious matters. It is important that I
should let the Home Secretary have a report within a reasonable timescale and you are quite
right that the work cannot be an ever-moving feast. My letter of 25 November nevertheless
made it clear that last Friday was not an absolute ‘deadline’, as you put it, for the submission
of material to me. I said when I began the scrutiny that I expected to report to the Home
Secretary by the end of the year, and I believe that I should be able to keep to that timetable.
But my letter said that this could change if further important new evidence is presented to me.

You say that you have new evidence which you regard as important (and information from
the video of the temporary mortuary). I should be grateful if you could let me know more
about the nature of this evidence and why you believe it to be important. Perhaps you could
also let me know when you received it, from whom, and when it was asked for. If it is, as
you suggest, under investigation or awaiting expert opinion, please let me know the nature of
the investigation or opinion and who is carrying it out or providing i t Would you also let

C:\HILLSBOR\MAIN\HICKS.203
me know when I can expect to receive it.

I note that you will be sending me the evidence relating to Sarah. I hope that you will do so
as soon as possible. I should also be grateful for any response you have to my letter of 21
November.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




                                               2
