                                                            pars p (_



    From          Mrs G I Moody               c:    HMCIC
                  F2 Division
                  273 2621
                  8 November 1991




    Mr Goddard
    F8 Division

    HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


    Mr Pickering copied to you the attached letter from Mr George
    Howarth MP on this subject.   Although ostensibly on the
    subject of the retirement of Chief Superintendent

«   Duckinfield - a matter which I have covered in the attached
    draft - the meat of the letter seems to lie in the request in
    the last paragraph that the role of the South Lancashire
    Police be properly investigated.   I would imagine that the
    answer to this must lie in a reference to the Taylor enquiry,
    but that was not commissioned by this division and I would
    welcome material suitable for inclusion in the letter covering
    these points.




                                    MRS G I MOODY




     G IM -042.G IM
         Thank you for your letter of 5 November addressed to the Home
         Secretary about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.


         As you know, our sympathies are very much with all those who
         were in any way caught up in this tragedy, but the way in
         which your letter is written makes me think that you must be
         under some misapprehension as to the scope and purpose of
         police disciplinary hearings.                    Such a hearing is held in
         private and is concerned only with whether/the officer
         concerned may have failed to conform to police discipline.
             woula not therefore in any way contribute to public
         knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do more
         than receive and consider evidence already Jcnown as .to. the                                     «
         propriety of Mr Duckinfield's conduct.                          / Moreover the most
         serious punishment which the disciplinary tribunal would have
         been able to impose, had Mr Duckinf ield been found guilty,
i
—'
         would have been dismissal or requirement to resign./                                         Mr
         Duckinf ield '^s'-resig^ati^n-means—that this endis already                                           u^.pes*Jtoj-*t

         achieved.                      ~ » J     —                  .                 ~                                   t
                                                                                                               pCw              „

         It would not be proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr                                              tr           ^
         Duckinfield7s case since the Home Secretary is the appellate
         authority in police disciplinary cases,but I can and should
         say that it needs too to be remembered that it is by no means
         certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found Mr
         Duckinfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred


         G IM -042.G IM                                   -                                i ,    V

v"                       v ve                         \                      *
              u ro '~'           ^   ^ ..^ ie e           ^                            *XV«c- -
     ^                                                                           ‘vX

                                V- k-    U                    ^   |aX;   '
against him.     If, as seems to be the case, he is a sick man
it would not be right to refuse him retirement on medical
grounds in order to hear charges which may or may not be
proved and whose most serious result could only be that he
leave the service he has already asked to leave voluntarily.
This, however, like the other matters raised in your letter,
is   jimatter^ for   the South L^ne&shire Police Force^and I
suggest that your concerns might best be discussed with the'v\   t


Having said this, I find it difficult to see what further
areas can usefully be explored when the Taylor enquiry...
                                                                  Ito flU K



          T ^ T                        HOUSE OF C O M M O N S * K i S T i /                              L
                                         L O N D O N S W A OAA                               V   f « W
                                                                                       >*1       (u W M
                    5th November 1991

                    Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.                          •;
                    Home Secretary                                   '-/;V?
                    50 Queen Anne's Gate                                  "•'
                    London SWIH 9AT                       • i,,




                    Dear Home Secretary                                                /
                   RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                                  ’
                                                                                   4




 4)              I arn_writing to protest at the way in which South
S£r.,,K        (^Lancashire Police have effectively side-stepped the
                 proposed disciplinary investigation into Chief
                 Superintendent Duckenfield for his ‘part in the
                 Hillsborough tragedy.

                   As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
                   tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
                   not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
                   detailed investigation around the responsibilities of
                   those concerned has yet been undertaken or published.
                   *his means, in effect, that specific responsibility
                   fo*1 certain decisions will never, unless you
                   intervene, be fully pinned down.

                   Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
                   Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
                   he was allowed to take early retirement on the basis
                       .is ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
                   subject of a proper medical examination. However,
                   if- the families of those sadly killed at that event,
                   °5‘ irT eed' any of the survivors, are to b e ’satisfied
                   S• • ^    justice they -were promised by the then Prime
                   Minister has been obtained, then surely the policing
                   of the event, irrespective of the medical circumstances
                   of anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
                   investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
                   disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
                   seems to me, really matter.

           U-A.M
                                                                       (continued)....
                             -
    _          r‘vv‘W'   f   ' '           Cc   ^          fa          <Lt>£

^                                  ^                r r   lll
Having met a large group of the families* I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the w h o l e process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor's Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.
X have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
However, I do believe it is within your powers to look
very closely at the implications of South Lancashire's
Police decision to effectively evade an investigation into
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication.'^
There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of <the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything y o u Id be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.
V.Tiilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.
It is in this part that I seek your intervention in finding
some way of properly investigating in detail the role of
South Lancashire Police in general and the role of the
officers’ responsible specifically, in the policing of
that day of that event.
Yours sincerely




c.c. Mr    Peter Joynes
     Mr    P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Mr    Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
     Mr    Eddie O'Hara M.P.
     Mr    Eddie Loyden M.P.
     Mr    Eob Parry M.P.
     Ilr   Bob Wareing M.P.
     Mr    Frank Field M.P.
     Mr    Joe Benton M.P.
     Kr    John Evans M.P.
     Mr    Gerry Bermingham M.P.
