E. Rex Makin & Co.
SOLICITORS
                                                                                      E. Rex Makin, l l .m .
                                                                                      Brian D. Woodhams
                                                                                                               u            Associates
                                                                                                                            Robin S. G . M akin .L L .B .
                                                                                      Dewi H. Williams, b .a . :            Christine Holmes, LL.B.
                                                                                      Leslie E. Cheesman      <             Jonathan S . Zalin, l l .b .
WHITECHAPEL (Entrance Leigh Street)                                                   John J. O’Leary, b .a .
LIVERPOOL LI 1HQ                                                                                                            Paul Brimelow, l l . b
                                                                                                                            Clive D. Mackintosh
TELEPHONE 051-709 4491                                    DX 14168 LIVERPOOL                                                 FAX 051-708 8638




          Mr. D»G. Church,
                                                                             Date:'                 ^ S t h j y l y 1989
                                                                                                           -       -:v


                                                                             Our Ref:


                                                                              Your Ref:




                                                                                                                   \v




          Dear Mr. Church,



          We hope this letter does not cause you too much grief following the
          catastrophic fatality, In respect o f which we are making a claim
          following the Hillsborough disaster on your behalf.      We do not believe
          it is in your interests to give running progress reports because we
          believe, rightly or wrongly, this might impair the healing process.

          We can, however, tell you we have reason to believe w ith confidence
          there will be no difficulty when the claims are capable of being assessed
          in disposing of them amicably because there Is no real fight to be put
          up on the issue of liability.     As soon as we have any definite news
          we will contact you.

          We are aware that various meetings are being held in which this firm
          does not participate because we can see no useful purpose in doing so
          because we are in^-direct contact with those who .are making the
          decisions.    If ttiere are any particular meetings which come to your
          knowledge and you would like to attend on your behalf, w ill you please
          let Mr. Makin/or Mr. Stqnehouse of this office know.

          I f you have     ny queries will you please contact us immediately.

                                                                                                .                       ■   v>-    ;

                                                                                                                              -a
          Yours truly,




                             This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct of investment busittet*
