                                                Cc-   Us
                                                      CAas<-~                                tScvsJ^-G'fr^K
                                                                                             C 7 ^ _ v -e _

                                                  \^ ) ^ 0 ^ 5 » jk   L s O w ^ - j a - '^                    Lp0

NOTE OF MEETING BETWEEN THE HOME SECRETARY AND THE HILLSBOROUG
FAMILIES ON SATURDAY, 7TH MARCH 1998 IN SOUTHPORT FLORAL HALL

Present:

Jack Straw MP                                                          j^ V
Colin Pickthall MP
Jane Kennedy MP
Andrew M ille r MEP
Richard Corbett MEP
Louise Ellman MP
C ouncillor Jack Spriggs
Ed Owen

Hillsborough Families

John Glover
Joan Trayner
Margaret Aspinall
Patricia Joynes
Rose Robinson
Trevor Hicks
Ann Adlington
Sue Roberts
Julie Fallon
Sidney Edwards




1.     Trevor Hicks thanked the Home Secretary for meeting the group but added that
the Group were outraged by the Home Secretary's decision and repeated the assertion
that his decision and the Scrutiny had been a whitewash and a cover-up.

2.     M r Hicks raised concerns over the Scrutiny's Terms of Reference particularly on
the definition of 'new ' evidence. He accused Lord Justice Stuart Smith of attacking the
families' evidence w hile glossing over much of the police evidence. He added that the
families did not get what they were promised which was a fair and just hearing. They
did not want to re-run Taylor or re-run the inquests although he said that was now being
used against the families. He said that the group had not wanted these re-run because
they wanted to be seen as reasonable.

3.    He described Lord Justice Stuart Smith as using legal purism which failed to
address the real issues. He accepted that the Scrutiny was detailed and thorough but
had not been independent and even-handed.




                                           1
J




    4.     M r Hicks said that on some accounts the Judge was factually wrong and he
    particularly raised the issue of the theft of the tapes. M r Hicks said what was important
    was not the content but the theft itself and that this was an example of the police
    establishment covering up. He added that the Coroner had lied to the jury about the
    tapes.

    5.    M r Hicks also pointed to the fact that the police had altered statements which he
    described as disgraceful.

    6.     M r Hicks also raised the point that the families were denied access to the Report
    before it was published on the grounds that to allow the families access would be a
    breach of Parliamentary privilege. Yet he complained that the South Yorkshire Police
    obtained the Report more than a week before the Home Secretary's statement. Again,
    this was an example of unjust treatment, he said.

    7.     M r Hicks said that the Home Secretary had trapped himself by not consulting the
    families before making his final decisions.

    8.   M r Hicks concluded that the families, the public and the Labour Party in
    Merseyside rejected his decision.

    9.     In reply the Home Secretary said that there was no basis whatsoever for
    describing what had happened as a cover-up. He said that setting up the Scrutiny was
    one of the first things he had done after the election. Many people, he said, had
    advised him to leave the issue alone, that it would only raise hopes. But he had seen
    the Granada TV programme and recognised concerns and decided that he had to
    establish a scrutiny of the evidence.

    10.    M r Straw said a full inquiry would have been premature. Taylor had been
    thorough. The Coroner's decisions had been looked at lay a Divisional Court and the
    police had been investigated by the West Midlands Police so that all appeal processes
    had been covered. The Scrutiny however had been set up with wide references and
    headed by a senior judge.

    11.    He defended the Terms of Reference of the Scrutiny and added that the no-one
    had ever doubted there may be new evidence. The issue was whether that evidence
    was significant. He added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith was bound to test any evidence
    that came forward but that did not mean that he was biased. He also added that police
    witness statements are being published despite arguments over legal professional
    privilege.

    12.    The Home Secretary then talked about M r Hicks' accusation about the new
    video evidence. The Home Secretary said that this was for him the crucial trigger for
    setting up the scrutiny but he pointed to the inconsistencies between Hicks' account
    and the families' Counsel on whether the content of the tapes was important. He added
    that the evidence on the tapes did not alter the fact that Taylor and Stuart Smith had
    pinned the main blame for the disaster on the police.




                                                2
13.    The Home Secretary admitted that there had been a lot wrong with the initial
investigation by the police but that the crucial point remained that it was the failure of
police control that led to the disaster, regardless of what might be on the tapes.

14.    Trevor Hicks admitted that he was grateful for the Home Secretary setting up the
Scrutiny.

15.   Julie Fallon added that what she found most upselling about the whole episode
was that the police were allowed to lie, steal and withhold evidence and that a Labour
Government was allowing it to happen.

16.    The Home Secretary made a couple of extra points. He refuted the idea that he
could have consulted the families before making his final decision. He said this would
have dragged the inquiry on. He also said that he was not happy about South Yorkshire
PoNce having the Report a week before anyone .else. He then went on to say that he
went to football matches w ith his children and that he had been outraged by the fact
that guilty people were able to get off scot-free. He did not think it was OK for officers
to do this. "It is outrageous", he said, for Duckenfield to be getting off in this way. But
he added that we cannot put the clock back. His priority was to ensure that the system
was changed for the future.

17.   Julie Fallon then came in again and said that the Home Secretary was the only
person in authority who had dealt with the families who had shown even a glimmer of
humanity, and added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith had simply not listened.

18.   The Home Secretary added that he was prepared to arrange to meet the families
in Merseyside again but added that he would not pretend that he w ill in any way
change his decision. The meeting was being adjourned until that time, he said.

19.   Colin Pickthall added that Ann Taylor had said in the House last Thursday that
she would like to find time for a debate on Hillsborough.




Ed Owen
Special Adviser

9th March 1998
