DRAFT 22.5.89



INQUIRY INTO SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS EVENTS


HOME OFFICE EVIDENCE


Foreword



     This constitutes the response of the Home Office to the
Inquiry's oral request for written evidence. We understand that
what the Inquiry would find most helpful at this stage is a
factual account of the provisions and operation of the Safety at
Sports Grounds Act 197 5 and its relationship to other relevant
legislation, together with a commentary on the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (the "Green Guide"). Also included is an account
of policing and crowd control issues.

     If the Inquiry would like further information on any point
the Home Office will of course provide it where it can.
CONTENTS
                                             Paragraph No.

PAST I - BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT
Introduction                                     1
Popplewell Inquiry                               5
The Legislation                                  7

PART II - THE SCOPE AND OPERATION OF THE SAFETY
          OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED)
General                                           19
Fire Safety and Safety of Places
 of Sport Act 1987                                20
Designation under the 1975 Act                    21
Safety Certificates                               24
Appeals                                           33
Offences                                          36
Serious risk to spectators                        41
Duty of enforcement                               44
Power to modify the 1985 Act                      52

PART III - FIRE AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
General                                           54
Regulated Stands                                  55
Statutory Guidance under Part III                 57
Regulations under Part III                        58

PART IV - THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (THE GREEN GUIDE)
Origins                                          59
Application of the Guide                         62
Popplewell Inquiry                               64
Revised Guide                                    65
Other developments                               67

PART V - CROWD CONTROL AND POLICING
                                                          PART I.



BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT



Introduction

1.   Specific legislation in the form of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) for securing the safety of
spectators at sports events was introduced to implement the main
recommendations of the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at
Sports Grounds by Lord Wheatley (Cmnd 4952) set up after an
accident at Ibrox Park, Glasgow, when 66 people died. The terms
of reference for that Inquiry were:

     "To make an independent appraisal of the effectiveness of
     existing arrangements for crowd safety at sports grounds in
     Great Britain, and of the improvements which could be
     brought about within the (then) present framework of the
     law: and to consider the nature of any alterations in the
     law which appear to be needed."

2. The accident had no relation to crowd misbehaviour, but
resulted simply from an unexpected revived interest in the game
when a goal was scored after substantial numbers of spectators
had already begun to leave the stadium, and then turned back.
Previously the only major soccer stadium disaster since the war
had been at Burden Park, Bolton, on 9 March 1946 when 33 people
died and many more were injured. The cause of that incident was
essentially over-crowding and crowd pressure which caused crush
barriers to collapse (Report by R Moelwyn Hughes KC Cmnd 6846).

3. The main concern of the Wheatley Report was with crowd
safety in the context of the hazards of uncontrolled crowd
movement, with the measures appropriate for mitigating such
risks, and with a regulatory system to ensure that necessary
safety measures were taken.
4.   The statutory framework of the 1975 Act, providing for local
authority certification of designated stadia, follows broadly the
pattern outlined in the Wheatley Report; and the specific range
of detailed safety measures (relating to such matters as
gradients, crush barriers, gangways and flow-rates) in the
accompanying Technical Report formed the basis of the (non-
statutory) guidance subsequently incorporated in the initial
version of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, the "Green
Guide" first published in 1973 (see Part IV).

Popplewell Inquiry

5.   The fire at Valley Parade Football Ground, Bradford, on 11
May 1985 led to an examination of sports groundsafety by the
Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
Grounds led by Mr Justice Popplewell (Interim Report Cmnd 9585,
Final Report Cmnd 9710).

6.   The Popplewell Inquiry commented that the 1975 Act had been
operating satisfactorily at designated grounds but recommended
changes to make the legislation more effective and for the
extension of safety controls. The Government's response was
published in a Consultative Document in June 1986 (see Annex A)
(including proposals for changes to the Fire Precautions Act
1971), which was subsequently reflected in the changes brought
about by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.

The Legislation

7.   The position found by the Wheatley Inquiry is set out in
detail in paragraphs 13 - 18 of the Report: in essence it was
that the patchwork of legislation then existing might have
provided some protection for spectators but was inadequate. The
procedure set up by the football associations requiring clubs
with a ground capacity of over 10,000 to submit an annual
inspection certificate and the voluntary consultations which took
place with the police over attendance levels were also considered
by Lord Wheatley to be defective, despite what was acknowledged
as the generally responsible approach of the clubs and football
authorities.   The present day position is summarised below.

Outdoor sports events

8.   The main controls for securing safety of spectators at
outdoor sports grounds are those imposed by the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) and the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act).   Part II of the 1987
Act amended the 1975 Act with effect from 1 January 1988 (see
paragraph 20 below).

9.   Part III of the 1987 Act, which came into force on 1 January
1989, is free standing of the 197 5 Act. It introduces a system
of safety controls at sports grounds which are not designated
under section 1 of the 1975 Act (see paragraphs 54-58 below).

10. Both the 1975 Act and Part III of the 1987 Act apply only to
outdoor sports grounds defined as:

     "any place where sports or other competitive activities take
     place in the open air and where accommodation has been
     provided for spectators consisting of artificial structures
     or natural structures artificially modified for that
     purpose".

(The Acts apply to England, Wales and Scotland but do not apply
to Northern Ireland. The 197 5 Act and Part III of the 1987 do
not apply to the Scilly Isles but may be extendedto do so by
Order of the Secretary of State.)

Indoor sports events

11. Public entertainments held indoors such as music and
dancing, have for sometime been the subject of a separate system
of licensing under the London Government Act 1963 and the Local
Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982 (in Scotland the
Civic Government (Scotland) Act 1982).
However, certain specified exceptions apart, the licensing
regime, administered by District Councils or London Borough
Councils did not extend to indoor sports.   Part IV of the 1987
Act changed this with effect from 1 June 1988 by extending the
licensing requirement to any premises used for sporting events to
which the public are invited as spectators. Except where sports
complexes are concerned, a licence is only required if the sports
event which constitutes the entertainment is the principal
purpose for which the premises are being used. Licensing
authorities may attach such terms and conditions as they think
fit.

Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974

12. Separate evidence will be submitted by the Health and Safety
Executive (HSE) on the operation of the Health and Safety at Work
etc Act 1974 (HSW Act) as applied to spectator safety at sports
grounds. Briefly, however, section 3 of the HSW Act is wide-
ranging in that it places a duty on an employer to conduct his
undertaking in such a way as to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, that persons not in his employment who may be
affected thereby are not exposed to risks to their health or
safety. A sports or other entertainment 'undertaking' would fall
within this category. It is the stated policy of the Health and
Safety Commission that, as a general principle, they and the
Executive wish to avoid duplication with other authorities. The
HSE would not therefore generally attempt to enforce the
requirements of section 3 of the 1974 Act when they overlap with
specific duties imposed by other legislation where other
authorities have responsibility for policy and enforcement. The
1975 Act represents more specific legislation and HSE does not
enforce section 3 of the HSW Act to secure the safety of
spectators at sports grounds. This arrangement is agreed between
HSE and the Home Office.

13. In practice HSE are concerned primarily with the health and
safety of employees at a sports ground (eg players, ground staff,
contractors) and the protection of spectators from the effects of
the event taking place in the arena (eg stock car and motor
racing). HSE also have policy and enforcement responsibilities
at sports events held elsewhere than at a sports ground defined
under the 1975 Act (eg motor cycle scrambles).

Building Act 1984

14. Section 71 of the Building Act 1984 makes provision for
local building authorities (District Councils and London Borough
Councils) to take action in respect of ingress and egress,
gangways and passages after consultation with the fire authority.
As identified by the Wheatley Inquiry (paragraph 13 of the report
in relation to the provisions of section 59 of the Public Health
Act 1936) the extent to which these powers can be applied to open
terracing in sports grounds is open to question. Provision is
also contained in sections 77 and 78 for a local authority to
take action to make safe buildings which appear to be in a
dangerous condition.

15. In practice, whereas Building Act powers may have been used
occasionally in respect of sports grounds they are in general not
needed because of the specific powers contained within the 1975
Act (which provides for the exclusion of sections 24 and 71 of
the Building Act to a sports ground or stand which is the subject
of a safety certificate).

Fire Precautions Act 1971

16. The Fire Precautions Act 1971 (1971 Act) (as amended by the
Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 and the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987), is the main legislative
instrument for controlling fire safety in occupied buildings in
Great Britain. It is intended to provide for the protection of
persons from the risk of fire and its central feature is the
requirement for occupiers of premises, put to uses designated by
order of the Secretary of State, to obtain a fire certificate
from the local fire authority.
17. Under the Act a use of premises can be designated if it
falls within at least one of the following classes of use: as, or
for, any purpose involving the provision of sleeping
accommodation; as, or as part of, an institution providing
treatment or care; for purposes of entertainment, recreation or
instruction or for purposes of any club, society or association;
for purposes of teaching, training or research; for any purpose
involving access to the premises by members of the public,
whether on payment or otherwise; or as a place of work.

18. The provisions of the 1971 Act could therefore be applied to
buildings, such as stands at sports grounds. However it was
always recognised that the burden certification would impose on
fire authorities and those to be certificated meant that a policy
of selective designation would have to be followed, having regard
to the classes of occupancy which had given rise to significant
fire casualties. In the case of sports grounds it has also been
recognised that fire safety for spectators could be achieved
through the general provisions for spectator safety contained in
the 197 5 and 1987 Acts set up specifically for that purposes.
kh.5.18/green.d
PART II
THE SCOPE AND OPERATION OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
(AS AMENDED)

General

19.   The main provisions of the 1975 Act (as amended by Part II
of the 1987 Act) are -

     a.    A power, exercisable by the Secretary of State by
order,todesignate sports grounds which in his opinion        have
accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators.          Once
designated, a ground will require a general safety
certificate from the local authority.

      b.   A power for the Secretary of State to vary the
           threshold figure of 10,000.

      c.   An obligation on the local authority to issue a general
           safety certificate, and a discretionary power to issue
           a special safety certificate (see paragraph 25 below).

      d.   A discretion for the local authority to set terms and
           conditions in the certificate which are necessary or
           expedient to secure reasonable safety at the ground.

      e.   A right of appeal to the courts, in relation to the
           issue of safety certificates and their contents, the
           procedure for which is set out in regulations made
           under the Act.

      f.   Rights of the police and either fire authorities or
           building authorities, to consultation, access to
           grounds and information and to appeal against terms and
           conditions in safety certificates.
     g.    A power to local certificating authorities to
           restrict or prohibit the admission of spectators to a
           sports ground (or any part of it) if there is a serious
           risk to spectators.

     h.    Powers of entry and inspection to sports grounds; and
           prescribed offences.

     i.    A duty on local certificating authorities to enforce
           the provisions of the Act and arrange annual
           inspections of designated sports grounds.

Fire Safety and Safety of Places of   Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act)

20. Part II of the 1987 Act amended the 197 5 Act in the
following ways:-

     *(a) The distinction between a sports "stadium" and sports
          "ground" originally made in the 197 5 Act was abolished
          (section 19 of the 1987 Act). This resulted in
          consequential amendment to section 2 of the 1975 Act
          which no longer provides for mandatory terms and
          conditions and the insertion of a new section 15A which
          enables modification of the 1975 Act to be made in
          respect of different classes of sports ground.

     (b)   A new power was given for the Secretary of State to
           vary the 10,000 threshold at which a sports ground may
           be designated (section 20 of the 1987 Act).

     (c)   Where safety certificates contain terms/conditions on
           police presence at a sports ground specific provision
           was made for the extent of that presence to be reserved
            for determination by the relevant Chief Police Officer
            (section 21 of the 1987 Act).

     (d)   All appeals were re-directed from the Secretary of
           State to the courts (section 22).
     *(e) A new power was given to local certificating
          authorities to issue (subject to a right of appeal to
          the courts) a notice prohibiting or restricting the
          admission of spectators to a ground, or part(s) of it,
          if there is a serious risk to their safety (sections 23
          and 24 of the 1987 Act). This power replaced the
          earlier emergency procedure.

     *(f) A duty was placed on local certificating authorities to
          enforce the 1975 Act's provisions and, for that
          purpose, to arrange inspections of designated grounds
          at least once a year in accordance with any guidance by
          the Secretary of State (section 25 of the 1987 Act).

All these changes came into effect from 1st January 1988. Home
Office Circular 71/1987 (see Annex B) introduced these provisions
to local authorities.

Designation under the 1975 Act

21. The power to designate a sports ground with accommodation
for over 10,000 spectators as requiring a safety certificate is
exercised by the Secretary of State by order subject to the
negative resolution procedure of Parliament. For Scotland this
is done by the Secretary of State for Scotland. For Wales, the
Secretary of State for Wales has been content that designation of
Welsh grounds should be covered in the same designation order as
English grounds. That order is made by the Home Secretary.

22. A summary of the effects of designation of a ground on the
ground operator is summarised below.

     (a)   The management must apply for a safety certificate and
           no spectators may be admitted until such an application
           is made (s. 1(1) and s.12 (1)(a)).




* Denotes a recommendation of the Popplewell Inquiry.
     (b)   An applicant must furnish the local authority with
           appropriate information in order for a safety
           certificate to be issued (s.3 (4)(5) and s.12 (l)(a)).

     (c) The holder of the safety certificate must comply with
          its terms and conditions (s.12 (l)(d)).

     (d) The holder is required to give access for entry and
          inspection of the premises and records (s.12 (6)(d)).

     (e) The holder if required to inform the issuing authority
          of any proposed changes which are likely to affect
          spectator safety (s.8 (1) and s.12 (6)(c)).

     (f)   If the owner/occupier is aggrieved by the inclusion or
           omission of a particular clause in a certificate he has
           the right to appeal within certain time limits
           (s.5(3)).

A breach of the requirements at (a) to (e) above can lead to the
commission of an offence under s.12 of the Act.

23. Designation was initially applied in phases, beginning with
major international stadia (eg Wembley, Twickenham) and grounds
used by football clubs in Division 1 of the Football League. The
second phase in 1979 extended designation to grounds used by
clubs in Division 2 of the Football League. Thereafter, until
1985 grounds of clubs promoted to Division 2 were designated each
year. The fire at Valley Parade, Bradford led to the extension
of designation to all football league and rugby league grounds
able to accommodate over 10,000 spectators. Designation was
later extended still further to all football grounds (ie "non­
league" grounds), rugby union, rugby league and cricket grounds
identified as having accommodation for over 10,000 spectators
 (Popplewell Inquiry, Final Report, recommendation 2). A list of
designated grounds is at Annex C.
Safety certificates

24. The main instrument of control under the Act is the safety
certificate issued by the local authority. A general safety
certificate is needed in respect of every ground which is the
subject of a designation order. The certificate enables the
local authority to impose such terms and conditions as are
necessary to ensure a reasonable standard of safety at the ground
in question.

25. Safety certificates are of two kinds, general and special.
A general safety certificate is the main continuing form of
control and is issued for an indefinite period in respect of a
specified activity or activities regularly taking place at the
ground. A special safety certificate may be issued at the
discretion of the local authority for a special event or other
circumstances not covered by the general safety certificate.
Such an event might be an evangelistic rally which might call for
special arrangements if, for example, seating were provided for
the congregation on the playing area. A special safety
certificate can be issued only in respect of a sports ground for
which a general safety certificate is already in force.

26. Designation of a sports ground by the Secretary of State
requires the occupier to apply for a general safety certificate
if spectators are to be admitted to the ground. The local
authority must then determine if the applicant is a "qualified
person" (ie someone who is likely to be in a position to prevent
contravention of the terms and conditions of a safety
certificate), and if they do so determine they must issue a
general safety certificate. In this respect the general safety
certificate is different from a fire certificate issued under the
Fire Precautions Act 1971: the latter is issued only after
necessary safety works have been completed, whilst the safety
certificate under the 1975 Act can be issued almost from the
outset and is an instrument of continuing control.  (In practice
local authorities and clubs often discuss arrangements for safety
and set voluntary crowd 'limits' until remedial work is carried
out) .
The issue of a special safety certificate, however, is left to
the discretion of the local authority because only they can judge
whether it is appropriate to issue it for the special occasion in
question.

Local certificating authorities consultation

27. The local authorities in England and Wales responsible for
the issue of safety certificates were, until April 1986, the
county, and metropolitan county councils and the GLC. They were
required to consult the police and the local authority
responsible for building control (the building authority) about
the contents of safety certificates. Following local government
reorganisation in 1986 certificating responsibilities under the
1975 Act in London and the metropolitan county areas were
transferred under section 16 and schedule 8 paragraph 7 of the
Local Government Act 1985 to the London borough councils and the
metropolitan district councils (who are building authorities).
As a result the consultation requirement was also changed, so
that in London and metropolitan county areas the certificating
authority is required to consult the police and the fire
authority. Elsewhere the certificating authority, ie the county
councils, is also the fire authority: the requirement there is
for the police and building authority to be consulted.

Modification/cancellation/transfer of certificates

28. The local authority has power to amend or replace a safety
certificate; and, by the same token, the holder can apply to the
authority for amendment or replacement.

29. The only circumstances in which an authority can cancel a
safety certificate is if the holder dies or (if the holder is a
body corporate) is dissolved. But the holder of a safety
certificate can surrender the certificate to the local authority,
and then it ceases to have effect.
30. Similar procedures to those for applications for safety
certificate apply to the transfer of a safety certificate. An
application may be made by the existing holder or the prospective
new holder. The issuing authority has to determine if the new
holder is qualified and, if so, there is discretion given to the
authority to transfer the certificate. The authority has to copy
the transfer application to the appropriate Chief Officer of
Police and either the building authority or fire authority (see
paragraph 27 above).

Alterations to certificated stadia

31. The holder of a safety certificate must give notice to the
local authority of any proposals for alterations or extensions to
the stadium if such works are likely to affect the safety of
spectators. This requirement is particularly aimed at
alterations to exits or entrances including means of escape in
the event of an emergency.

Procedures and fees

32. The procedures and time limits for applications for general
and special safety certificates are set out in the Safety of
Sports Grounds Regulations 1987 (SI No 1987/1941); these include
provision for the local authority to have discretion to charge
fees for the issue of safety certificates at a level that covers
the administrative costs.

Appeals

33. There are four decisions by the local certificating
authority against which an appeal may lie:-

     (a)   Determination by the local authority that an applicant
           for a safety certificate is not a "qualified person" -
           (s.5 (1)).

     (b)   Refusal by the local authority to issue a special
           safety certificate (s.5 (2)).
     (c)   Inclusion or omission of anything in or from a safety
           certificate (s.5 (3)(i)).
     (d)   Refusal by the local authority to amend or replace a
           safety certificate (s.5 (3)(ii)).

The procedures and time limits for appeals are laid down in the
Regulations (SI 1987/1941).

34. The applicant for a safety certificate may appeal against a
local authority decision under (a) to (d) above. Appeals under
(c) and (d) above can also be made by the Chief Officer of Police
and either the building authority or fire authority (see
paragraph 27).   Anyone else who is or may be concerned in
ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate may also appeal under (c) and (d) above.

35. If a local authority serves notice that an applicant is not
a qualified person, he is deemed to have withdrawn the
application for the safety certificate. An appeal against that
decision suspends the withdrawal at least until the appeal is
determined. Similarly, while the outcome of an appeal is
pending, the condition appealed against does not apply (s.7 (3)).

Offences

36. There are a number of offences in connection with safety
certification which can be committed by the management of a
sports ground and/or the holder of a safety certificate. Once a
designation order comes into force, it is an offence:
(i) if spectators are admitted

     (a)   at a time when no safety certificate has been applied
           for (s.12 (1)(a)) or

     (b)   if an application for a certificate has been made but
           withdrawn or deemed to have been withdrawn (s.12
     (c)   to an activity at the ground not covered by a safety
           certificate (s.12 (l)(b).

     (d)   on an occasion following surrender or cancellation of a
           certificate, when no certificate is in operation (s.12
           (l)(c).

(ii) to contravene any term or condition of a safety certificate
     (s.12 (1) (d)).

37. It is also an offence for spectators to be admitted to a
sports ground in contravention of a prohibition notice issued
under s.10 (s.12 (l)(e)) - see paragraphs 41-43 below.

38. A person found guilty of an offence under these provisions
may be fined up to the statutory maximum on summary conviction
and on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for not more than
2 years or a fine, or both.

39. There is a defence provision for a defendant to prove that a
breach took place without his consent and that he took all
reasonable precautions and exercised due diligence to avoid the
commission of such an offence by himself or any person under his
control.

40. The above are penalty provisions bearing upon the management
of a stadium/holder of a safety certificate. There is also
provision for (somewhat) lesser offences in relation generally to
the certification procedures. Thus an offence is committed by
any person who does not provide information to the Secretary of
State for the purposes of his estimating the crowd capacity of a
stadium or who provides to the Secretary of State or a local
authority false information; or who fails to notify a local
authority of proposed alterations to a stadium; or intentionally
obstructs a person authorised to enter and inspect the premises
or otherwise fails to answer the questions in the exercise of
these powers (s.12(6)). Offences in this category attract on
summary conviction a fine of up to statutory maximum (s.l2(6)).
Provision also exists for any regulations introduced to provide
that a breach of those regulations constitutes an offence
(s.12(5)).

Serious risk to spectators

41. The certification procedures described above provide the
main framework for securing the reasonable safety of spectators
under the 1975 Act. There is also a general, reserve power under
section 10 of the Act for local authorities to issue a notice
prohibiting or restricting the admission of spectators to a
ground, or any part of it, if the risk to their safety is judged
to be serious enough to justify doing so.

42. There is a right of appeal to a magistrates court against
such a notice (which must be copied to the police and building
authority or fire authority) by an aggrieved person - a defined
term intended to cover those who would be expected to have
responsibility for safety at a sports ground. A further right of
appeal to the Crown Court may be expressed against any order of
the magistrates court by the aggrieved person, the local
authority, the police and either the building authority or the
fire authority. Time limits in which to appeal are laid down in
the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987.

43. Paragraphs 13-20 of the Annex to HO Circular 71/1987 (see
Annex B) contain advice to local authorities on how the section
10 power might be exercised.

Duty of enforcement

44. New section 10B of the 1975 Act provides for local
certificating authorities to enforce the Act's provisions and,
for that purpose, to arrange inspections of designated sports
grounds at least once every year in accordance with guidance from
the Secretary of State. Guidance was issued under cover of HOC
72/1987 (see paragraphs 48 and 53 and also Annex D).
The 1975 Act contains power for local authorities, police and
either fire or building authorities (see paragraph 27 above) to
authorise entry for inspection of a sports ground, and to examine
and copy records relating to attendances. This power is also
extended to the Secretary of State (see paragraph 48 below).

Exercise bv local authorities of their powers and duties

45. The Home Office has only limited information on how local
authorities have exercised their powers under the Act. The local
authority is informed when an Order is made designating a ground
in respect of which that authority will be responsible for the
issue of a general safety certificate; and explanatory background
information is provided on how the Act works and their
responsibilities under it. Most local authorities have in the
past made a practice of furnishing the Home Office with copies of
safety certificates (and sometimes of special certificates) that
they have issued (although there is no obligation on them to do
so). It is not normally the practice for local authorities to
seek advice of the Home Office about specific conditions attached
to safety certificates. Technical opinion may be sought by both
authorities and ground spectators (or their professional
advisers) from time to time on the interpretation of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds and how the Guide's principles may be
applied to the problems at a particular ground. Home Office
involvement here has, by necessity, to be limited even where it
can be given because of the lack of knowledge of individual
grounds and the problems posed by their design and configuration
when in use.

46.   In general, the approach to certification and inspection
most favoured by local authorities is understood to be the team
approach.    This was acknowledged by the Popplewell Inquiry
(Final Report 3 - 6 9 ) as an effective method notwithstanding the
inherent difficulty of balancing the views/input of different
disciplines.    This approach also ensures the consultation
requirements of the 1975 Act (see paragraph 27) are fulfilled as
well as bringing different skills to bear on safety problems.
47.   The organisation of the teams is a matter left to local
authorities who are best placed to determine the arrangements
which most suit them.    The lead may vary: for example, in some
authorities the building control may be the lead department, in
others the engineering department may assume the lead role.
The legal or chief executive's office may co-ordinate the
required action.   Typically, a safety team is likely to consist
of personnel from building control, engineering, fire, police and
may also include environmental health and electrical engineering.

Other powers of the Secretary of State

48.   As well as the authorities referred to in paragraph 44
above, the 1975 Act empowers the Secretary of State to authorise
entry for inspection of a sports ground and to examine and copy
records relating to attendances. The reason for this power was
to ensure the Secretary of State could discharge the functions as
an appellate authority (now discharged by the courts, see
paragraph 20d above) and also for designation purposes.

Regulations

49.   In addition to the powers connected with designation of
grounds, the Secretary of State has powers under Section 6(1) of
the 1975 Act to make regulations to:-

     (a) prescribe the procedures for the issue, transfer and
     amendment of safety certificates;

     (b) give authorities discretion to charge fees in respect of
     applications for issue etc of safety certificates; and

     (c) prescribe the time limits for appeals to the courts.



50.   Under section 6(2) the Secretary of State may by regulation
make provision for securing safety at sports grounds, and under
section 18 (1A) (inserted by section 19 of the 1987 Act) for
different provision to be made for different classes of sports
ground.

51.   Regulations have been made covering (a) to (c) in paragraph
49 above (SI 1987/1941).   The powers under Section 6(2) and
18(1A) have not been used.

Power to modify the 1985 Act

52. Under section 15A of the 1975 Act (inserted by section 19 of
the 1987 Act) the Secretary of State may modify the provisions
of the 1975 Act as applied to different classes of sports ground.
This power has not been used.    Along with the regulation making
powers of section 18(1A) , it was intended to allow maximum
flexibility in the way the Act, and certification measures under
it, was operated.   In this way, if particular safety
requirements were applicable only to a particular class of
designated sports ground, it would be possible to include
suitable terms and conditions in any safety certificate issued
for a sports ground of that class without affecting the contents
of safety certificates for other sorts of sports ground.

Statutory Guidance bv the Secretary of State

53.   Statutory guidance on annual inspection of designated
sports grounds by local authorities has been issued under cover
of Home Office Circular 72/1987 (See Annex D). The aims and
objectives are set out in the supplementary notes to the
statutory guidance.   The inspections might best be described as
monitoring inspections which are in addition to, but do not
replace, the more detailed inspection regimes envisaged by the
safety certificate requirements, or those already carried out by
local authorities when amending safety certificates. The
statutory inspections ensure at least a minimum inspection of
grounds by local authorities, providing an opportunity to observe
and require to have remedied any obvious safety deficiencies at
the ground.
PART III

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

General

54 As mentioned in paragraph 9 above, Part III of the 1987 Act is
free standing of the 1975 Act.   It applies to grounds which are
not designated under the 1975 Act but which have covered stands
for spectators and as such complements the provisions of the 1975
Act.

Regulated Stands

55 The 1987 Act provides for stands (as defined) at non­
designated sports grounds which can accommodate at least 500
spectators under cover (either seated or standing) to require a
safety certificate for the stand.    Such stands are termed
regulated stands.    A summary of the system is described in a
Home Office publication giving advice to ground managers on the
effects of Part (III) of the 1987 Act (see Annex E). Local
authorities determine - subject to a right of appeal, but in
accordance with statutory guidance from the Secretary of State
(see paragraph 57) - which stands are regulated stands.     Advice
to this effect is served on the person who appears to qualify for
the issue of a general safety certificate.    Thereafter, the
system operates very much as that under the 1975 Act.
Application for a safety certificate has to be made if spectators
are to be admitted to the regulated stand.    The local authority,
once they have determined who is qualified to hold the safety
certificate, must issue a certificate containing terms and
conditions which are necessary or expedient to secure reasonable
safety when the stand is in use for viewing specified activities
at the ground.   (Note: the safety certificate does not have
effect if the stand is used for some other purpose, eg an
exhibition held within it).    Provision is made for consultation
as in the 1975 Act, appeals to the courts, offences, powers of
entry and inspection and a duty of enforcement.
A detailed account of Part III of the 1987 Act together with
general advice on certification was sent to local authorities
under cover of Home Office Circular 96/1988 (see Annex F).

Statutory Guidance under Part III

57.   There have been two sets of statutory guidance issued by
the Secretary of State

     (a) under section 26(8) of the 1987 Act, on the
     determination of a regulated stand and

     (b) under section 34 (2) of the 1987 Act, on inspections.

The first of these is intended to set a yardstick for calculating
the notional occupancy of the stand accommodation to determine
whether a stand requires a safety certificate.   The second lays
down guidance on inspections of regulated stands which is similar
to that in respect of inspections carried out annually of
designated sports grounds (see paragraph 53).   The frequency of
inspection is however variable depending upon the size of the
stand accommodation.   Home Office Circular 97/1988 covers both
sets of guidance (see Annex G).

Regulations under Part III

58 Regulations on the procedures for applications for and the
issue of safety certificates, appeals, and authorising local
authorities to charge to cover costs of work resulting from
applications were made in October 1988 (The Safety of Places of
Sport Regulations 1988, SI 1988/1807).   These regulations,
together with the Part III of the 1987, Act came into force on 1
January 1989.
kh.5.18/ssggreen.dm

PART IV

THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (THE GREEN GUIDE)

Origins

59. In 1973 in the follow-up to the Wheatley Report and while
the 1975 Act was still in preparation, the first Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds was issued by the Home Office and Scottish
Office. The Guide covered much of the ground originally outlined
in Appendix A to the Wheatley Report, but also took into account
further technical work and tests carried out on, for instance,
strength tests for crush barriers (see paragraphs 71-72 below).



60. The booklet was published explicitly as a general guide to
measures for improving safety at any sports grounds, though the
point was made in the introduction that the recommendations had
been framed mainly with football in mind.

61. In December 1976 a revised version was introduced in which
some of the technical material had been updated in the light of
experience; and an additional section was added at the end
(section 14 in the present Guide) incorporating the
recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd Behaviour, under
the chairmanship of the then Minister for Sport. Reflecting this
development the Guide was re-titled The Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds (Football).

Application of the Guide

62. The Guide was drawn up for (and continues to be aimed at)
safety in existing sports grounds. The design, configuration,
location, age, condition and use of these can vary substantially.
The Guide therefore provides principles, together with some
technical advice on physical requirements, to achieve reasonable
safety.
This acknowledges that absolute safety in circumstances where
thousands of people are assembled in a (relatively) confined area
is not attainable - and not in fact required by the 1975 Act. In
this respect both the Guide and the 1975 Act reflect the
principles of the Wheatley Inquiry (paragraphs 8-11, 20 and 68 of
Cmnd 4952) of flexibility in the application of guidelines to
individual grounds.

63. For the above reasons the Guide is not a statutory code but
safety certificates issued under the 1975 Act (or Part III of the
1987 Act in respect of regulated stands) may call up on the
recommendations in the Guide in their terms and conditions.

Popplewell Inquiry

64. The Guide was further reviewed by a Technical Working Group
set up in September 1985 by the Popplewell Inquiry. The overall
conclusion of the group was that the Guide, whilst in need of
some revision and expansion, had stood up well to close
examination and justified the high regard in which it was
generally held (Popplewell Final Report, Appendix E).

Revised Guide

65. A revised edition of the Guide, in line with the Inquiry's
recommendations, was issued in October 1986. Distribution
included the main representative sporting bodies, all then
designated grounds, local certificating authorities, Chief
Officers of Police and Chief Fire Officers.

66. Changes were made to the format and structure of the Guide
but it still relied (and continues to rely) heavily on the
technical material of the earlier Guide. New sections on
management responsibility and stewarding were added and the
section on fire safety was substantially expanded. Amendment was
also made to the crowd control section (now section 14).
Other developments

67. Shortly before the fire at Bradford City FC, following a
serious outbreak of violence in the spectators enclosure and
pitch invasion at the match between Luton and Millwall on
13 March 1985, the recommendations in the Guide on crowd control
were subject to review to see if they needed to be strengthened
and amplified to take account of crowd violence hazards. This
decision was conveyed to the FA in correspondence from the Prime
Minister in April 1985 as part of an initial range of anti­
hooligan initiatives, including effective pitch perimeter
fencing, that had been agreed between the football authorities
and the government in the light of the Luton v. Millwall
incident. Specific reference was subsequently made in the Guide
to the need for a special police presence (as determined by the
Chief Officer) inside major football grounds in order for
management to discharge properly their safety responsibilities
(paragraph 204 of the Guide).

Pitch Perimeter Fencing

68. The Luton v. Millwall match drew into focus the question of
pitch perimeter fencing - that is fencing designed specifically
to prevent access to the pitch - and the disorder witnessed at
that game. Pitch perimeter fencing is also addressed in the
Popplewell Report (Interim Report recommendation 24 and Final
Report Chapter 4. 136). The Bradford fire demonstrated the need
for sudden access to the pitch in an emergency, whereas the
absence or inadequacy of the fencing at Luton (and later at
Birmingham on 11 May 1985) contributed to the disorder which
could so easily have led to a more serious loss of life - as
evidenced by the tragedy at Heysel and indeed, albeit to a lesser
extent, at Birmingham. The present version of the Guide still
recognises these considerations and in seeking to reflect the
desire of the Popplewell Inquiry to be more explicit refers to
the possible need for pitch fencing. At the same time the Guide
 (paragraphs 214-215) also draws attention to the need to allow
full access to the playing area in an emergency.
Crush barriers

69. Crush barriers are intended to combat known, inherent
dangers which arise from crowd pressure and surging. Such
barriers are essential to help control any build-up of pressure
in the crowd.

70. The principles of their strength, spacing and location are
intended to limit this build-up so that serious injury is not
caused to those pressed against them. Although uniformity of
crowd dispersal is unlikely ever to be achieved crush barrier
construction should be such that at the maximum overall level of
crowd density recommended in the Guide (54 persons per 10 square
metres) barriers will not collapse and those pressed against them
in any crowd surge will not suffer injury - although they may
experience some discomfort.
