                                                                    Nid^oWi fa

GUIEfcl ID SftEBIY AT SPORTS GROONDS - fGREEK GOITER


CH&ETER 4 - INSPECE1CKS AMD TESTS

                                                        Need 'results of these
Inspections and tests should be carried out by          tests should be submitted
suitably qualified persons on behalf of management      to the Licensing
to ensure that the safety standards of the Guide are    Authority for approval'
maintained.


36.   A detailed inspection of the ground, including    Need 'sufficient time
all components and installations, should be arranged    should be allowed by this
annually by the management. It should be carried        person to adequately and
out by a person with a relevant and recognised          methodically conduct this
professional qualification, and experience of           inspection and report'
inspecting existing structures.


 37.    Engineers commissioned to assess structural
 safety of buildings may find the appraisal
 techniques recommended by the Institution of
 Structural Engineers (ISE) in the "Appraisal of
 Existing Structures", published in 1980, of
 assistance. Hard and fast rules on the extent to
 which a structural appraisal is necessary for
 individual buildings are difficult to lay dcwn: much
.will depend upon the type of installation, its size,
’condition, materials used in construction and
 standard of maintenance. A full appraisal is
 however unlikely to be necessary unless defects are
 identified or in evidence front the analysis of
 information on the structure and visual inspection.


38.   Testing of crush barriers (see also Chapter 9)    Need the details of all
should be carried out in accordance with Annex C of     parts of the barrier
this Guide. When the guidelines are first applied
to a particular ground, a representative sample of      Include
barriers of all types from all areas of the ground      - assessment of
should be selected for testing. Thereafter testing      configuration of crush
of barriers should take place every 4 years unless      barriers
from visual inspection doubts are raised as to their
strength/integrity, in which case they should be        - and assessment of the
retested. Testing should be carried out by or under     effects of corrosion
the supervision of a suitably qualified engineer, ie
a structural or civil engineer.


39.    Following each event, a general visual
inspection of the ground should be made for signs of
damage which might create a potential danger to the
public. Particular attention should be paid to the
condition of terraces, viewing slopes and
stairways. Crush barriers and balustrades should be
examined for deformation or any other overt signs of
weakness. The fire precautions measures should also
be inspected for damage, and alarm and other
electrical installations should be checked to ensure
compliance with the relevant British Standards.


40.   Warning, detection, lighting and public
address systems are vulnerable to vandalism., and
this should be borne in mind when installing them.
All automatic fire detection and fire warning,
emergency lighting and public address sytems should
be tested 24 hours before an event, in accordance
with the methods laid dcwn in BS 5839: Part 1 and
BS 5266: Part 1 respectively. There is currently no
British Standard for public address systems. In
case any of these systems is not operating properly
and cannot be fixed before the event, contingency
plans should be formulated, in consultation with the
emergency services, for the use of acceptable
substitute measures or (if necessary) the closure of
any areas of spectator acccsnucdation until the fault
is remedied.


41.   Before an event, and at major soccer grounds
in particular, steps should be taken to ensure that
the ground does not contain any accessible items
which could be used as missiles (eg piles of bricks,
stones etc).


42.   The ground should be inspected before and
after each event to ensure there are no
accumulations of combustible waste and that any
hazardous materials (if essential to be stored) are
safely stored well away from public areas.


43.   Records should be kept and maintained of all      Who should these records
inspections and tests together with a record of         be sent to? Is there a
remedial actions taken.                                 need for a central system
                                                         for recording and
                                                         alerting other clubs?
CH&PTER 9 - 0 $ K H BSKREERS AND B&NERATLS
                                                       Need re-draft of whole section

Marry of the hazards arising from crowd pressure on    Materials for barriers are not
terraces can be eliminated by provision of well        mentioned. Should wrought
constructed, correctly positioned and properly         iron be permitted in view of
mounted crush barriers.                                its unpredictable properties?
                                                       What about corrosion
                                                       resistance and corrosion
                                                       traps? Areas of likely
                                                       corrosion shall be identified
                                                       and recorded. Should the
                                                       stability of barriers be
                                                       considered?

Dimensions and design features
                                                       i) are barriers that do not
110. In order to locate the tcp rail against that      comply to be disregarded for
part of the body most able to tolerate pressure the    calculation purposes?
height of crush barriers should be between             ii) is l.lm still the optimum?
1.02 metres and 1.12 metres above the nosing of the    iii) is height to centre, top
step immediately behind the barrier, with a            or bottom of barrier the
preferred height of 1.1 metres.                        relevant dimension? Use of
                                                       nets? Medical basis of 1.2m?
                                                       Diagram required, defining
                                                       height, measurement etc.


'111. Crush barriers should be designed so that        Should a minimum barrier depth
 there are no sharp projections or edges. Although a   be specified? - a broader rail
 barrier with a top rail of 50mm internal diameter     is better, eg 100mm rail shown
 tube has been favoured at many sports grounds,        to be more tolerant.
 research has shewn that there would be advantage in
 the use of a flat rail of 100mm vertical depth.


Spacing of crush barriers

112. Hie maximum spacing of crush barriers will be
dependent on the gradient of the terrace or viewing
slope. Paragraphs 113-119 below give
recommendations for the spacing and strength of
crush barriers.


113. Ideally, crush barriers should be provided          Full lengthbarriers would be
along the full width of a terrace, with gaps only at   preferable,
the radial gangways.


114. Where barriers are not continuous between         What is basis for allowable
radial gangways, the alignment of gaps in successive   number of gaps? Is two too
rews of barriers on a terrace should form an angle     many?
of less than 60° to the barriers. 'There should be
no more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps.   Better diagram required.
(See Figure 3)
115. Where there are gaps in the line of crush          (1.1m = 2 shoulder widths)
barriers these should be at least 1.1 metres and not    What is the basis of 1.4?
more than 1.4 rretres in width.

                          (e p p o ii'i) I«■ ”!«**“
116. Column A in Table i provides the maximum           Are values in Table 1 still
distances between barriers conforming to the greater    valid? - 'as described above'
strength requirements of crush barriers as described    is vague.
above; column B provides the maximum distances          Weaker barrier should be
between barriers conforming to the lesser strength      satisfactory for landing
requirements. Interpolation may be made between         barriers etc. Chapter 78?
these figures.                                          Header barriers?
                                                        Should advice be given when
                                                        terrace is level?




117. A distinction is made between barrier              There should be one standard
intervals required in "peak" viewing areas. The         of crush barrier (peak viewing
term llpeak" viewing areas describes the most papular   is a weak definition).
parts.of the terraces where there is a tendency for
spectators to crcwd together and become so
emotionally involved in the occasion that their
reactions can cause additional pressures to be set
v?) in those sections of the ground. The peak
viewing areas are particularly associated with
football grounds and are typically behind the goal
areas, although other parts of the terraces known
locally may ccme within this category.


Strength of crush barriers and handrails

118. Existing crush barriers and handrails should       Table 2 should be labelled
be capable of resisting the forces indicated.in the     'Characteristic Design Force'
existing test load columns of Table 2^when applied      or Safe Working Design Force
in a test as described in Annex C.                      and Test Force.

                                                        KN should be kN and 'lbs f'
119. New crush barriers or handrails should be          should be Ibf. Is the
designed to resist safely a horizontal force as         magnitude of the 'New Design
indicated in the existing test load columns of    v     Force' to change? Standardise
Table 2 applied as a static load acting on the top      no of decimal places in table
rail of the barrier or handrail at right angles to      (eg 2.189 to 2.2).
                                                        Or should it be parallel to
                                                        slope? Should handrails be
                                                        tested parallel to the rail?
the longitudinal axis. The foundations of new        the longitudinal axis.
barriers or handrails should be designed to resist   'The substructures of new
the overturning movements and sliding forces,        barriers or handrails should
induced by the forces described in the "new design   be designed to the relevant
force*1 column, with a factor of safety of 2.        British Standards. In all
                                                     cases the overturning moments
                                                     and sliding forces frcm the
                                                     barriers shall have an overall
                                                     factor of safety of 2.
CHAPTER 1 5 - PnC H HKCMETEK FENCE/WAIi


A pitch perimeter fence/wall may not only delineate     This_ is incompatible with the
the playing area from the spectator accommodation       medial basis for crush barrier
but may have to serve as a crush barrier, or in sane    height. Consideration should
situations as a barrier to discourage or prevent        be given to the provision of a
access to the playing area except in an emergency.      sterile zone. Diagram
                                                        required.

214. The type, strength and height of a pitch           If required, perimeter fences
perimeter fence or wall will vary according to its      should have a standard format
location and required function. At one extreme, at      with reference to height,
a certain type of ground or small stadium vised by      design, strength, width and
very few spectators, there may be no need for a         spacing of gates.
perimeter fence or wall at all; or if such a wall or
fence exists it may need to consist of little more
than a rail to mark the playing area. At the other
extreme, at same major soccer stadia, where
restriction on crowd movement forms a necessary part
of the safety measures, it nay be necessary to have
a fence which prevents access to the pitch in normal
circumstances (see also Chapter 14, paragraph 209)
but allows for access in emergency. Even at these
grounds however specification of the pitch fence nay
vary for different parts of the ground.


215. For most major stadia, whether used for            See Taylor.
association football or other sports, the pitch
perimeter fence will be required either to prevent
access to the pitch as mentioned above, or at least     Gates must    be provided of
to discourage attempts by spectators to enter the       sufficient    width, - is 1.1m
playing area. Gates or other access points (minimum     sufficient    and should a
width 1.1 metres) should nonetheless be provided for    maximum be    specified?
use in an emergency and, at those grounds where a
perimeter track is used as part of the exit system,     Should the spacing of gates
for the departure of spectators at the end of an        also be specified?
event. Provision of such gates or access points is
particularly important to allow full access to the
playing area (or track) where it is likely to be
used as a place of safety in an emergency. Such
gates or access points should be properly stewarded
and clearly marked so that immediate access to the
playing area or perimeter track can be ensured.


216. If spectators can lean on the perimeter fence      See opening paragraph above.
it should be deemed a crush barrier and fulfil the
conditions of height and strength specified in
Chapter 9 although if the fence is of solid
construction its height may be more than
1.12 metres. This is bepause the pressures acting
on a person forced against such a fence are
distributed over a large area of the body, unlike
the situation with a normal carush barrier, where the
pressures are localized.
ANNEX C                                                Basic philosophical question -
                                                       should mechanical tests be
TESEINS OF CEE5H BARRIERS AND HMS3R&HS                 used to assess what is really
                                                       the severity of corrosion?

                                                       Consideration should be given
                                                       to using corrosion-resistant
                                                       materials and design.

1.    For crush barriers the test is to consist of     Difficult or impractical to
the application of an evenly distributed force of      achieve an 'evenly distributed
either 6.OKN/metre width (400 lbs f/foot width) or     force'. Eastwood's method
4.3KN/metre width (290 lbs f/foot width) of barrier    achieved a test load
as mentioned in Chapter 9.                             distribution that is a
                                                       reasonable compromise. Refer
                                                       to 'A' and 'B' strength
                                                       requirements. Diagram of
                                                       typical test method. (kN Ibf.)

2.    For handrails the test is to consist of the
application of an evenly distributed force of either
4.3KN/metre width (290 lbs f/foot width) or
2.74KN/metre width (188 lbs f/foot width) of
handrail as mentioned in Chapter 9.
                                                       No guidance on the number of
                                                       'bays' to be tested at a time.
3.    The force is to be in the form of a static       Eastwood tests two - if only
load acting on the top rail of the barrier or          one is tested then the
handrail at right angles to the longitudinal axis      uprights are not subjected to

•
and applied in about ten equal increments.             the full force that would
                                                       occur from loading on a
                                                       multi-bay barrier. Why 10
                                                       increments? how does this
                                                       help?

4.    The force to be applied for three consecutive    'any deformation' - seems
periods, the full force being maintained for 5         vague, is absolute or relative
minutes each period. The interval between              deformation measured? - what
applications to be as short as possible, ie to         about successive or
enable complete unloading and reloading only. A        'successful' tests which
record should be kept of any deformation during the    permanently bend a rail
loading periods, during the periods of maintained      further each time?
loading, or during the recovery period.

                                                       75% of what? The datum for
5.    If on the removal of the force for the third     deflection is ambiguous and
time the recovery of deformation is at least 75% the   the positions of measurement
barrier or 'handrail may be deemed to have satisfied   may need to be specified and
the loading requirements.                              should include measurement of
                                                       the vertical posts as well as
If this requirement is not met but the recovery is     the horizontal rail.
more than 50% then the test should be repeated and     Magnitude of deflection
if on retest the recovery is at least 75% the          recovery may be more important
barrier or handrail may be deemed to have satisfied    that %. Is the second test
the loading requirements.                              necessary?

If the recovery is less than 50% on the first test
or less than 75% on the retest, the barrier or
handrail shall be deemed to have failed to meet the
loading requirements.
         6.    If during any test, even though the barrier or   Corrosion must be referred to
         handrail satisfies the above loading requirements,     in this paragraph, plus scsne
         doubt should arise for any reason (including such      reference to methods of
         matters as cracking of the terracing or distortion     inspection and to the degree
         of connections) as to the safety of the barrier or     of corrosion which is not
         handrail, a detailed investigation should be carried   acceptable.
         out. Unless the results of this investigation
         remove the doubt as to the safety of the barrier or
   P^'^handrial, (the barrier or handrail,"] as the case may
irep*e»M be, should be deerred to have failed the test.
iv*

       7.    A record should be kept of all the barriers        Could a typical test sheet be
       and handrails tested and of their performances           given as an example?
       during the tests.
