                                                  HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 01-273 3 1 4 6
 $
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000

                          fV Ikoijr
Our reference:
Your reference:



                            e
     R M Whalley Esq
     Secretary
      iillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
     tome Office                                              U
     Room 662
     50 Queen Anne's Gate
     London SW1H 9AT                                 16 November 1989




     You told me that Lord Justice Taylor would welcome our views on
     the suitability of attendance centre orders for those convicted of
     football-related offences.  He would also like to know the present
     position on intermittent custody or weekend imprisonment.

     I attach a paper about attendance centres.  It explains the
     statutory basis on which they operate; describes how they are
     managed and run; and offers some comments on their suitability for
     football hooligans.  Whether an attendance centre order is
     suitable for an individual will depend upon the circumstances and
     his personal characteristics.  Some of those convicted of
     football-related offences can sensibly be given attendance centre
     orders.  However, we doubt whether the disposal is suitable for
     determinedly anti-social offenders.

     We considered a year ago whether attendance centres would be
     suitable reporting places for football hooligans prevented from
     attending matches abroad, under Part II of the Football Spectators
     Bill.  We concluded they could not be used for this purpose,
     mainly because centres were unlikely to be open at the times and
     places that football matches are being played.

     On intermittent custody, in 1984 the Government issued a Green
     Paper seeking views on the desirability and practicability of
     introducing a new disposal of this kind.  In the 1986 White Paper
     on Criminal Justice (Cmnd 9658), it announced that it had decided
     not to pursue the idea.  The view among respondents to the Green
     Paper was that a new disposal of this kind was not necessary and
     there was no agreement about the kind of offender for whom it
     would be suitable.  Many felt that it would replace existing
     community sentences rather than custody; and there was no
agreement over the form it should take.  The additional costs were
a significant factor.  Ministers have considered the issue again
since 1986 but their view remains the same.  Their approach to
sentencing is set out in last year's Green Paper on Punishment,
Custody and the Community (Cm424).  Custody should be used only
for the most serious and violent offenders.  When it is not
necessary, offenders should be dealt with in the community.
Ministers are considering what fresh powers courts might need to
encourage greater use of community disposals and their proposals
are likely to be published in the New Year.




                                             MISS J M GOOSE
ATTENDANCE CENTRES:    FOOTBALL HOOLIGANS

1.     Under section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982 courts
have the power to make attendance centre orders for young people
under 21 who


     (a)    have been convicted of an imprisonable offence; or


     (b)    have defaulted on payment of their fines etc; or


     (c)    have failed to comply with the requirements of a
            probation or supervision order.


Attendance centre orders may not be used for those who have
previously been given a custodial sentence except in special
(undefined) circumstances.     The minimum length of an order is 12
hours, except for those under 14.     The maximum is 24 hours for
those under 17, and 36 hours for those aged 17 to 20.


2.        The network of centres is managed centrally by the Home
Office, which has delegated the management of individual centres
to local agents.     In most areas, the agent is the Chief Officer of
Police.     At present there are 137 centres:    111 junior centres
(some mixed) for those aged under 17; and 26 senior centres for
those aged 17 to 20 (males only).     A list of the centres is
attached.     The need for centres is determined by the numbers of
young people coming before the courts locally, and they are mostly
in towns.     Some 50 new centres were opened between 1979 and 1984.
There is a reasonable geographical spread of jiinior centres in
England and Wales, but senior centres are, for the most part, in
the larger conurbations.     With the fall in number of juveniles
under 17 being dealt with by the courts, the number of attendance
centre orders has also dropped.     The Home Office has recently
reviewed the use of the junior centres and a number with low
attendance figures are being closed.


3.        Most centres are in school premises.    They are normally
open for 2 (junior) or 3 (senior) hours every other Saturday,
usually, but not invariably, in the afternoon.    A typical order
might be completed in 9 sessions over an 18 week period.      Each
centre is staffed by an officer in charge, normally an off-duty or
retired police officer, assisted by other instructors.     Regimes
include physical education and at least one other activity.      Each
centre determines its own programme in accordance with general
guidance from the Home Office.   The range of activities is very
wide and includes instruction in socially useful skills (first-
aid, life-saving) and handicrafts (woodwork, pottery).     The aim is
to encourage the young people to make more constructive use of
their free time during an enforced period of loss of leisure.


4.     Attendance centre orders are used for those convicted of
all kinds of offence except the most serious offences of violence.
There is no reason why they should not be used for those convicted
of football-related offences.    However, there would be
difficulties in their systematic use for determinedly anti-social
football hooligans.   Attendance centres are not secure.      Although
they are run in a disciplined environment, the staff have no means
beyond their own authority of enforcing discipline and some
centres have no police officers on their staff.    Football
hooligans are unlikely to be the most assiduous attenders.
Imposing an attendance centre order on a person who is unlikely to
attend and will be returned to court with a view to a different
order being made is counter-productive.    The activities at centres
are unlikely to be attractive to many football hooligans.       Those
who do attend may well be disruptive and undermine the
constructive work being done with other, more co-operative
offenders.


5.     If the intention is to take football hooligans out of
circulation while matches are in progress,   it should be noted that
attendance centres can only be run on Saturdays, even on Saturdays
their hours do not necessarily co-incide with the times of
matches, and local education authorities might not be prepared to
lease their premises for use as centres, if they thought there was
a risk of damage to their property.    Some authorities are already
 reluctant - or refuse - to do this.
6.        This is not to say that attendance centre orders should not
be used for some football hooligans.     The orders continue to have
a useful place in the range of sentencing options available to the
courts.     However they should be used for those young people,
whether football hooligans or not, for whom they are suitable and
who are likely to respond to the activities.




C1 Division
Home Office
November 1989
JUNIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRES IN ENGLAND AND WALES


Accrington
Barnsley
Barrow-in-Furness
Basingstoke
Bedford
Bilston
Birkenhead
Birmingham (2)
Blackpool
 Bolton
 Bournemouth
 Bradford
.Brighton
^Bristol
 Bury St Edmunds
 Cambridge
 Canterbury
 Cardiff
 Carlisle
 Chesterfield
 Colchester
 Corby
 Coventry
 Crewe
 Derby
 Dewsbury
 Doncaster
 Droitwich
 Gateshead
 Gloucester
 Great Yarmouth
 Grimsby
 Guildford
 Halifax
 Hertford
 Ipswich
 Kings Lynn
 Kingston upon Hull
 Lancaster
 Leeds
 Leicester
 Lichfield
 Lincoln
 Liverpool (2)
 London (central)
 London (Croydon)
 London (East)
 London (Isleworth)
 London (North)
 London (North West)
 London (West)
 London (Romford)
 London (S idcu p )
 London (South)
 Luton
Macclesfield
Manchester South
Mansfield
Medway (Chatham)
Middlesbrough
Milton Keynes
Netherton
Newcastle upon Tyne
Northampton
Norwich
Nottingham (2)
Oldham (2)
Oxford
Peterborough
Plymouth
  Portsmouth

•
Prescot (St Helens)
Preston
Reading
Rotherham
St Albans
Salford (2)
Scunthorpe
Sheffield
Slough
Smethwick
Southampton
South Durham (Newton Aycliffe)
South East Northumberland (Ashington)
South Tyneside (Hebburn)
 Stockport
 Stockton
 Stoke on Trent
 Sunderland
 Swansea
Telford
 Tonbridge
 Torbay
 Tynemouth
 Warrington
 West Cumbria (Workington)
 Wickford
 Wigan
 Wrexham
 York

JUNIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRES FOR GIRLS IN ENGLAND AND WALES

There are 7 junior centres for girls only at

Cleveland
Leeds
London
Manchester
Merseyside
Sheffield
West Midlands

These are to be amalgamated with nearby b o y s ' centres.
SENIOR ATTENDANCE CENTRES IN ENGLAND AND WALES

Bedfordshire (Luton)
Bolton
Bristol
Cleveland (Middlesbrough)
Coventry
Derby
Dewsbury
Doncaster
Essex (Chelmsford)
Hampshire (Fareham)
Leicester
London (4)
Manchester
 Medway (Chatham)

•
Merseyside
Nottingham
Preston
Runcorn
South Wales (Cardiff)
South Yorkshire (Sheffield)
Tyneside (Blaydon)
West Midlands (Birmingham)
West Yorkshire (Leeds)




j26
                                                                                          £*r*Acr fRo*4

                                                                                                 ^    otJ


relationship b etw e en the A ttorn ey G eneral, the prosecution and the judiciary        J v sT tC rd '-
in a way which w ould not contribute to public con fidence or serve the interests
o f justice.

    9. The G ov e rn m e n t has therefore gon e on to’ consider a third approach
which might a chieve the original aim while avoiding the drawbacks o f the other
options. This third op tion w ou ld be to build on and give statutory force to the
existing arrangements by which the Court o f A p p eal gives guidance to the
C row nC ou rt on matters of sentencing principle through guideline judgem ents
and that guidance is prom ulgated to the judiciary through the Judicial Studies
Board. The C o u r t' s practice of providing judgem ents of this kind and the
Board's work in bringing them to the attention of judges is already making an
important contribution to achieving greater consistency in the senten ces
i f f c s e d . T h e Court of A p p ea l is con cern ed to m ake sure that guideline
j W f e m e n t s are available for all types o f case in which they w ould be helpful
and practicable, and it is ready to provide them for new classes o f case w here
thev are not available already and to ensure that existing guidelines are
periodically review ed and kept up to date. This practice could be further
d evelop ed and reinforced if the Judicial Studies Board were given a statutory
dutv to assem ble and publish, for the benefit of judges and for the information
of the wider public, the Court of A pp eal's guidelines as they apply to particular
 classes of offence or particular classes of offender. G uidance o f this kind,
 published under the authority o f Parliament, m ade readily available in a single
 and readily com p rehensib le d ocu m ent and kept regularly up to date, w ould
 both reinforce sentencing standards and provide a sound basis for well
 informed public debate.

   10. The G ov e rn m e n t has thus considered 3 main options:

   l a) R eviving the proposal which was included in the Prosecution o f O ffences
        Bill.

   (b ) G oing further and in addition conferring on the Court o f A pp eal the
        pow er to increase the sentence passed in a particular case referred under
        (a).

   (c) Giving statutory form to the Judicial Studies B oard's function of publish­
       ing the Court o f A p p e a l’s sentencing guidelines and arranging for it to do
       so in a much m ore coherent and much m ore accessible form.

    11. The G ov e rn m e n t has considered these options with very great care and
 believes that (c) is likely to be the m ost generally acceptable and the m ost
 effective in reinforcing sentencing standards and public confidence. The
 G overn m ent w ould w elc om e further com m en ts on this proposal, but it is at
 present d isposed to include the legislation to give effect to it in the planned
 Criminal Justice Bill.

 Sentencing Options
    12. Parliament has provided the courts with a w ide range o f sanctions to deal
 with convicted offenders. Prison senten ces may be suspended either wholly or
 in part, and the non-custodial options available include com m unity service;
 fines; probation (with or w ithout specific conditions) and. for young offenders,
                                           i
attendance centre orders. In its consultative d o cu m ent on the idea of j n j e r m i t
tent custodv" (C m nd 9281) the G ov e rn m e n t panvassed opinions on the
nossibilitv of a n ew . primarily punitive, semi-custodial senten ce, involving
deten tion for onlv part o f the day or part o f the w e e k . as a further alternative to
?uT cu s°od v The R esp onses to 'th e d ocu m ent suggested, h o w e v e r that the
 existing s e n te n c in c pow ers alread> cater adequately for most o f those who
 m i a h t be suitable 'for such a sentence. There was no significant m easure ot
 agreement on the form which a new sentence might take, and many ot those
 who responded exp ressed the view that it was more likely to replace n o n ­
 custodial m easures than full custody. M oreover, the creation ol: the• ^             ar>
 fMilities w ould involve additional costs. For these reasons the G overn m en t has
i f l ) d e d not to pursue the proposal.

    13 The courts do have a p ow er, under section 134 of t h e Magistrates
 Courts A ct 1980. to order offend ers to be detained for up to four days in police
 cells The G o vern m ent's view is that if there were to be a senten ce mvol mg
 sustained overnight d eten tio n other than in prison, it should involve accom
 m odation and supervising agencies, suitable for that p u r p o s e - a s did the
 proposals in the G r ee n Paper on interm ittent custody. But the p ow ei^ un dj-
 section 134 o f the 1980 A c t involves the use of unsuitable accom m odation
  indeed in som e areas there are n o police cells certified for d e te n n o n under the
  nower— and inappropriate personnel, the police being properly used to pre­
  vent and investigate crim e, not as an agency f o r carrying out c o u r t s e m e n c e .
  The G o vern m en t accordingly p rop oses to repeal section 134 o f the 1980 A ct.

     14 The G ov e rn m e n t is also considering w hether the courts should be given
  additional p ow ers in relation to reparation b etw een offenders and victim
  Experience in the U n ite d States, and so m e limited experience here, su ge t
  that with the clear initial con sent of the victim and with careful handling
  reparation can be effective in giving greater satisfaction to the victim and
  bringing the offen d er to face up to the con sequ en ces of the cnme^ i h e
  G overn m ent is funding several experim ental schem es (operating under tlle
  existing limited p ow ers) in order to exam ine the potential
  and to shed lisht on s o m e o f the practical issues which a r is e T h e .r e le : ai
   are set out in m ore detail in a consultative d ocu m ent published recently.

      15     The G o vern m en t recognises that there is c o n c e r n to im prove courts
   powers to deprive con victed offenders of the p r o c e e d s o f their c n m e s^ T h a
   concern arises with special force and urgency in drug trafficking cases, an
   G overn m ent has accordingly placed b efore Parliament proposa s for dealing
   with that m atter in this Session's D r u g Trafficking O ffences Bill. T h ese pro­
   posals include a requirem ent upon the Crown Court to m ake a confiscation
   order to the value of the p roceed s which the offender has derivedI from drug
   trafficking; p ow er for the High Court to m ake orders freezing the assets of
   persons suspected o f drug trafficking and o f third parties to whom
    have been passed; provision for the enforcem en t of confiscation orders by
    proceedings in the High Court to realise any of the offend er s assets wUhout
    waiting to see w heth er he defaults in paym ent; and an increase in the m aximum
    terms of custodv which a court may order to be served in the event of wilful
    default in p avm ent. In order to take account of the Part'cular^
    trafficking cases o f establishing exactly what proceeds the offend er has derived

                                                8
from his crimes, the proposals include p ow er for the Court in appropriate cases
to assume that all his assets represent the p roceed s of drug trafficking excep t in
so far as the judge is satisfied to the contrary.


   16      T h e G ove rn m e n t accepts that som e o f the'proposals listed in the pre­
vious paragraph may not be appropriate to many crim es, though similar
considerations d o applv to, for exam p le, what is term ed •‘organised crime or
verv se-ious fraud. It intends to m ove further down this path, and w ould
w elcom e anv com m en ts on the extent to which som e or all o f the .pecia,
arrangements which it p roposes for drug trafficking cases might be applicu to
o th e r crimes. It will announce its conclusions in due course.


^ 1 7 The G overn m ent also p roposes to strengthen courts' powers to order
• f o r f e i t u r e o f property used in con n ection with crime. T h e present general
^ w e r s (in section 43 of the P ow ers of Criminal Courts A ct 1973) only apply to
 offences punishable with tw o years' im prisonm ent or m ore, to good s in the
 offender's p ossession or control at the time of arrest, and to goods used, or
  intended for u se, in com m itting an offe n c e. A n y w i d e r power has to be
  specifically provided, on an ad hoc basis, in legislation dealing with particular
  offences. The G overn m en t's proposal is to extend the general pow er to all
  offences to property lawfully seized at any time and to good s ot whicn
  possession is itself an o ffence. This wider provision will ensure that the power
  to order forfeiture will be available as a sentencing option w henever it might be
 needed.


  Young Offenders
     18. Part I o f the Criminal Justice A ct 1982 introduced a strengthened and
  simplified structure o f senten cin g p owers for dealing with offenders aged under
  "’1 The new structure has b een in place for little m ore than two years and the
  G overn m ent has no plans for radical change. T here is, h ow ever o n e important
  adjustment in the provisions for custodial senten ces which the G overn m ent
  b elieves w ould b e desirable, in the light o f exp erience so far. Broadly speaking,
  the A ct provides that if a custodial senten ce passed on a m ale young offender
   aeed 15 or over is b etw e en three w ee k s and four months it is to be served in a
   deten tion centre; if m ore than four m onths in a youth custody centre. T h e A ct
   also provides that w here a young offend er has b een rem anded in custody
   before sentence th e time spent on rem and should count towards s e ntence *s it
   d oes for adults. T h e W hite Paper on Y o u n g Offenders (Cm nd 8045. 1980)
   recognised that this would call for som e flexibility in allocating young offenders
   withm the prison svstem . It noted that there w ould be cases w here the time
   spent in custodv after sen ten ce fell b elow the m inimum for the type o f sentence
   im posed because tim e spent in custody on remand had b een taken into
   account, and w ent on to p rop ose that in such cases the Secretary o f State should
    have discretion to place you ng offenders in whatever kind o f young offender
    accom m odation se e m e d m ost appropriate. T h e 1982 A ct gave only partial
    effect to this, and p rovid ed no m eans by which young offenders with short
    “effective” vouth custody terms to serve could be held other than in youth
    custody centres or prisons. E xp erien ce has shown that these arrangements do
    not enable the best use to be m ade o f the existing resources. There are

                                              9
