E.R.                                        t« u l m ± a u /
                                                        rr. iw*.
       HILLSBOROUGH : LORD JUSTICE STUART-
       SMITH

       Paul Pugh has provided advice on the “public
       evidence” point that Brian Butler picked^Mr Pugh and
       Mr Butler met with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith today.

        The judge was concerned about making public
       transcripts o f meetings which he may hold - he would
       expect to provide a summary of relevant oral evidence
       in his report. Officials think his concern is reasonable
       and feel a distinction can be made between transcripts
       of private meetings and documentary evidence.
       Ultimately it is your decision as to what should be
       disclosed after the judge submits his report and the
       evidence he has considered. He has agreed to flag up
       any material which he thinks should not be published
       together with his reasoning.

       The judge has agreed to do a photocall on Monday and
       he has agreed the attached statement with Mr Butler.
       He will not be giving a press briefing or broadcast


                  Dr officials to provide a draft letter to Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith as outlined at Flag 1.

       fContent with the draft statement at flag 2.

       Clare 11/7
From: Paul Pugh                                          cc:    Mr Howarth
      Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit                  Mr Boys Smith
      Room 529                                                  Mr Butler
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                         Mr Bone
      0171 273 3141                                             Mr Granatt
                                                                Mr Edmundson
        11 July 1997                                            Mr Owen



Home Secretary



HILLSBOROUGH: LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH


Issue

Disclosure of evidence submitted to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith during the
course of his scrutiny on Hillsborough.


Timing and Recommendation

2.     If you agree with what I propose, I recommend you write to the judge
during the course of next week to confirm your views.


Consideration

3.      You were concerned about comments made by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to Brian Butler, Communications Directorate, that in his view
submissions made to him will not be public and that all he will submit to you
will be his report. That might be seen as variance with your comments in the
House.

4.     When you made your statement on 30 June your comments were as
follows:

        “.... the right hon Gentleman (Brian Mawhinney) asked whether in
        addition to our publishing the advice that I receive from Lord Justice
        Stuart-Smith, I will publish all the evidence that is considered by him.
        My answer to the right hon Gentleman is provisional. I shall do my
        best to ensure that that is the case, but there may be good reasons -
        for example, in respect of criminal or disciplinary proceedings - why
        such evidence cannot be published at the same time as the advice is




F:\OPPU\HOU\LONGSUB\PP0278MA.DOC
        published. However, if evidence is to be unpublished, I shall make that
        clear at the time.”

5.     Much of the material which the judge will consider is already in the
public domain: the Taylor Inquiry papers are held at the Public Record Office,
the Coroner’s proceedings were a matter of public record, and most of the
alleged new evidence is in the form of public statements or video material.
The issue therefore, only arises in relation to particular representations which
interested parties make to the judge and records of any meetings with them
which he holds (and which he has asked to be recorded verbatim).

6.      The decision about whether material gathered during the course of the
inquiry should be disclosed, is ultimately a question for you: Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith has been appointed by you and on completion of his scrutiny,
the papers will be the property of the Home Office. It is therefore, open to
you to disclose or not as you think fit. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is, however,
right to the extent that it is his task to submit his report to you, and it is not for
him to put into the public domain submissions which are made to him.

7.      I discussed this issue with him this afternoon. His particular concern
relates to the transcripts of any meetings he may hold. As those meetings will
bethel d in private, with no crois~examThat[on~of witnesses, he does not
consider that the transcripts should be published. He would expect to include
a summary of relevant oral evidence in his report. The transcripts of
particular meetings will be given to those present - and some witnesses may
themselves want to disclose them to third parties - but he feels that transcripts
of private meetings should not be generally disclosed.

8.      I think his concern is reasonable, and that a clear distinction can be
drawn between Trariicripts of private m eetinc^nTT(?ocQ m ^
On thelatter he foresees no difficulty with the disclosure of the great majority
of any relevant material. There may be material which it would not be proper
to disclose because it would have a bearing on any subsequent proceedings;
or because it is of a personal nature about individuals and not relevant to the
public interest; or because it would cause unnecessary distress. If Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith considers that material should not be disclosed, he will /
indicate that, with his reasons, when he reports.

9.    It would be helpful to put these matters on the record with the judge. If
you agree, I suggest you should write to him along the following lines:

               You want interested parties to be reassured that no material
               evidence will be concealed from them! The oiitcomeoftTfe
               scrutiny, and the reasons for whatever conclusions are arrived
               at, should be open.

               For that reason, you wouldJike documentary evidence
               submitted to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith (where it is not already in


F:\OPPU\HOU\LONGSUB\PPQ278MA.DOC
                  the public domain) to be disclosed, unless there are good
                  reasons otherwise.

           iii.   You recognise that transcripts of private meetings should not be
                  published.

           iv.    When he reports to you, you intend as far as possible to
                  disclose the evidence which has been considered during the
                  scrutiny (probably by placing a copy in the Library of the
                  House).

           v.     Therefore if there is any evidence which, in the view of Lord
                  Justice Stuart-Smith, should not be disclosed either because
                  of potential impact on any proceedings which might follow or
                  for other public interest reasons, you would like Lord Justice
       ^          Stuart-Smith to identify such material and his reasons for
                  recommending that it should not be disclosed when he submits
       \          his report.

 10.       If you agree with this approach, I will provide a draft letter next week.


Handling

11.   Once the matter has been settled with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith then it
can be explained publicly in response to any inquiries.


12.    He will be giving a brief photo-call on Monday morning or issuing a
statement: a copy is attached. He will not be giving interviews or fielding
questions.




                                               PAUL PUGH




F:\OPPU\HOU\LONGSUB\PP0278MA.DOC
SCRUTINY ON THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER



STATEMENT BY LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH



"I have today started work on the scrutiny of possible new evidence
relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. My objective is to establish
whether there is any significant evidence which was not previously
available to Lord Taylor's Inquiry, to the inquests, or to the prosecuting or
disciplinary authorities.


"If there is significant evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have
affected the outcome of any of the various proceedings.      I will then advise
the Home Secretary whether in my opinion there should be a further public
inquiry, and the prosecuting and disciplinary authorities and the Attorney
General whether the fresh evidence is such that they should reconsider the
decisions they have already taken.


"I w ill shortly be inviting written representations from those interested and
w ill then decide whom I wish to see in person. But I can confirm that after
the summer I will go to Liverpool to meet the relatives of those killed and
their legal representatives.


"The meetings I have will be private and I w ill not be making any public
comments on the evidence or representations which are made to me during
the course of the scrutiny. I hope to report my findings to the Home
Secretary towards the end of the year.


"Anyone who considers that they are able to submit material to me should
contact my secretary via Room 528, Home Office, 50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London SW1H 9AT."
