                                IN CONFIDENCE

                                                     cc: Mr Boys Smith

Mr Goddard


POLICE DEPARTMENT EVIDENCE TO TAYLOR

           *»


Now that there has been time to prepare a first draft covering
most of our evidence it would be prudent to reflect on the points .
of attack which might arise when the Taylor inquiry begins to
yield conclusions.       There are I think several which could relate
to involve F8 to a significant extent:


     (i) hooliganism outside, including pressure by drunken
     and/or ticketless fans, which could yet be found to be a
     significant contributory factor;


     (ii)       police handling of crowds outside;


     (iii)       police intervention to open the crucial gate - more
     generally, integration of control between the police and the
     stadium management inside grounds;


     (iv)       police supervision and training of new commanders at
     major football events (Ch Supt Duckenfield had been promoted
     to Divisional Commander only 3 weeks before Hillsborough);


     (v)        perimeter fences: their design and structural safety
     are for G1 but I am told F8 were the driving force in the
     Home Office for their recognition as an important anti-
     hooliganism measure.


Hooliganism outside grounds


After the scale of attempted forced entry to Wembley by
Merseyside supporters, and persistent suggestions I hear from
police specialists on football that entry without tickets is a
familiar pattern for that group, it must be possible that
evidence of irresponsibility - or deliberate crushing - at
                            IN CONFIDENCE

Hillsborough will emerge.    (At the Wembley de-briefI also heard
of an outstandingly dangerous incident at Scratchwood Services,
Ml, when returning Merseyside supporters on 20 May damaged petrol
pumps and hosed large quantities of neat petrol about the place.)


This, I suppose would tend to favour a firm means of excluding
troublemakers, such as the national football membership scheme.


Police handling of crowds outside stadia


It became clear at the Wembley de-brief on 26 May that at the Cup
final on 15 May a substantial (but not - quite - dangerous) crush
had developed at turnstiles H, J and K.     Many unpleasant features
were present - sharp increase in crowd pressure at a pinch point
where the approach to the turnstiles narrowed; spectators stuck,
unable to turn away or reach their proper turnstile because of
intervening congestion; the lack of any natural feature outside
to restrict the flow towards that point; the presence of many
ticketless fans; a blunder by the stadium operators that left the
turnstiles opening late and a shutter gate next to one group of
turnstiles jammed open for a while; yet more pressure introduced
as police horses, necessary to prevent further surges, moved into
the crowd; and painful emotions for some from Hillsborough - so
much so that one upset spectator presented DAC Wells with an
unused ticket saying it was all the police's fault and he had
been so put off he no longer wished to enter the ground.


Speaking strictly in terms of general principles Strathclyde
police were adamant that everything should be done to prevent
such crushes from being able to build up, at all costs: the
Scarman report into the disorder in Red Lion Square was referred
to, which recommended no crowd should be pushed (perhaps in that
context by police, here by fellow spectators including the
potential for irresponsible latecomers)     into somewhere with no
possible escape.   I think too the force may have had in mind the
TV pictures of the expanse of people (and the police horse)
pinned together in a stationery mass outside the Leppings Lane
end at Hillsborough.
                            IN CONFIDENCE


Strathclyde's solution in general terms was to filter spectators
by whatever means were necessary (a line of police, vehicles, a
barrier, even concrete blocks placed by crane) where the
possibility of crowd pressure was far less.    It was important too
to let spectators know what was happening by loud hailfer, but the
idea was floated of a fixed public address system or matrix
indicator boards in the streets outside, if that would help.


More rigorous control of crowds approaching bottlenecks would I
suppose strengthen the acceptability of checking membership cards
at the turnstiles - were it to be considered that that could
delay admission - and would reduce vulnerability to charges by
ticketless latecomers.


Integration of control inside the stadium


I left Wembley on 2 0 May with some concerns about the separation
of control arrangements; these crystalised reading accounts of
Ch Supt Duckenfield's evidence to the Taylor inquiry on 24 May;
and I observed with interest on 27 May the solution at Hampden,
Glasgow, at the Scotland v England match.


Wembley has three separate control rooms set in a line and
separated by glass partitions with interconnecting doors: Stadium
control manned by Wembley Stadium Ltd (WSL) to monitor the ground
through a large bank of CCTV monitors and to direct by radio the
stewarding; traffic control manned by the police to control
traffic going to and from the match - also with fixed TV links;
and the main police control also with (fewer) CCTV monitors
showing parts of the stadium, used to direct the policing inside
and around the stadium.    It is the partial separation and
duplication of control inside the stadium about which I have
reservations, despite the ability of the police and stadium
controllers to leave their position and converse, after walking
through traffic control.   It seems to me there is some ambiguity
about who is in charge under such an arrangement.   Stewards and
police work autonomously guided by a general overall plan, local
                           IN CONFIDENCE

co-operation on the ground, and two sets of radio controllers who
are not in close contact and therefore ntot routinely informed of
each others' thinking and actions.     The police are in charge of
crowd control outside and WSL inside, except that in extremis the
police may request or even direct certain action to be taken.
From'what I understand of Ch Supt Duckenfield's evidence that
went much further at Hillsborough and the police took action of
major significance without consulting the stadium operator.        It
was understood at Wembley that if important issues arose which
affected police and stewards jointly, the two controllers would
confer.


I contrast the dual control rooms at Wembley with the 1Central
London Football Reserve1 which operates on football Saturdays at
the main Information Room in New Scotland Yard.     Four officers
sit at one desk: two from the Met and two from British Transport
Police.    Each is part of his own force's radio network and can
telephone various local control rooms in his force; in addition
the Met element is the radio control point for 60 or more mobile
officers patrolling central London in fast response minibuses -
with primary interest in football rowdies.     The vital ingredient
is that the 4 officers are in constant communication with each
other and are fully aware of the others' policing problems and
responses.   As I have witnessed, good oversight is maintained as
various large groups progress eg from main line stations by foot,
perhaps via several pubs, and/or by tube, to various football
grounds across London.


At Hampden the radio controls were located together, in a purpose
built control room at the front of the main stand, next to the
pitch.    But most importantly, there was by mutual agreement a
single person in overall charge inside and outside the stadium
(Mr Dickson, ACC (Operations)).     No major action was taken by
stewards without police approval.     The chief steward was entirely
clear that such an arrangement strengthened the operator's
ability to fulfil his obligation for safe management of the
ground, even though he had surrendered some of his autonomy to
the police.
                           IN CONFIDENCE


Training and experience


It must be likely that Taylor will recommend that only
sufficiently experienced staff command the policing and operation
of major football matches: the potential threat to public safety
is now tragically a matter of public record, and the relevance
not only of seniority and ability but also of sufficient
practical experience begins to look compelling.    For example,
many potentially dangerous situations have to be anticipated, not
responded to, and long experience must be necessary to
distinguish safe but heavy crowd pressure from dangerous pressure
in large crowds.


Perimeter fences


A complete absence of fences can make a ground very vulnerable to
pitch invasion; on the other hand safety with heavily fortified
fences at best depends completely on sufficiently good crowd
control to prevent dangerous crowd pressure building up.      I
suppose Taylor might therefore look towards a maximum
specification of fence which would retain some potential for
escape by climbing while significantly reducing the ease of a
mass pitch invasion.


Ticket touts


I just mention that at the Wembley de-brief on 2 6 May I came
under fire, as the Home Office representative,    for Government
Ministers' disinterest in providing a touting offence and in
condoning market forces leading to touts offering tickets at
grossly inflated selling prices.   I replied that touting had not
been in evidence at Wembley but forced entry by ticketless fans
had; that if fans had sought non-existent touts then it was
questionable whether that demand would have been much different
had a touting offence existed; and that the 'market forces' point
did not condone the undesirable effect of touts operating at 'all
ticket' grounds.   I invited senior officers to look at the
                           IN CONFIDENCE

drafting of the proposed evidence to Taylor, which I had given to
Mr Wells.   Nevertheless there is a deep-seated difference here
which may surface when ACPO draft their evidence.




                                                    F J SMITH
                                                    F8 Division
