                                                                                      ©


                                                QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT




The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP                           Our Ref: PW /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /2 8
1 Parliament Street                                         PO 2 2 6 4 /9 7
LONDON                                            Your Ref: A C /2 7 0 1 9 7
SW 1A 2NE

                                                              .10 MAR 133?




Thank you for your letter of 27 January, enclosing copies of correspondence
with Granada Television and South Yorkshire Police.

Following the Hillsborough" programme, I received representations about the
tragedy both from the bereaved families and others. I can confirm that I shall take
into consideration the points raised in the correspondence which you enclose from
Granada Television when deciding whether a further inquiry is appropriate.

I will reach my decision as soon as I have been able to consider all the issues.




                               MICHAEL HOWARD
                                                                                    'u&f-jen
                               HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                                    L O N D O N S W1 A OAA                      ^   2   - ^   S

                                                                                    O   i
 Rt Hon M ichael Howard QC MP
 Home Office                                                                            -LA
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 London SW1H 9AT

 27 January 1997
 Ref: AC\270197
                                         s o
                                               st,n • -1                |
                                                                            \

Dear Michael                          ??S       *   . ..-e .a c I*'7-




H ILLSB O R O U G H

In the adjournment debate on 17 December last you said you would consider
representations about a reopening o f the public enquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.

In view o f this I thought that you might find it useful to have the attached copies o f
correspondence w ith the m aker o f the Granada television programme and w ith the C hief
Constable o f South Yorkshire police.

You will see that this correspondence discloses a significant discrepancy about the alleged
missing tapes. Ian M cBride claims that footage from “police surveillance cameras''' had
disappeared. M r W ells says that the only tapes to go m issing were two in the possession o f
Sheffield W ednesday FC. He implies that in any event the tapes would not have been o f
any probative value because they were not trained on the terraces.

In any assessment you make following the representations you have received, I think it very
important that this discrepancy is either cleared up satisfactorily - or if not it m ust surely
become one o f the factors tending to reopen the enquiry.

Best wishes.

Yours sincerely,




JA C K STRA W M P
              S o u t h Y or k s h i r e

              POLICE
             JUSTICE          with   COURAGE                        Richard Wells q pm . M A tO m x c m a
                                                                    Chitf Contlablt




 Jack Straw MP
                                                                 19 December 1996
 Shadow Home Secretary
 House of Commons                      q 0 HFC 1996             Your ref:        AC/121296
 London SW1A0AA                                                 Our ref:         D&C/JML/SW
                                                                                 CSF 246/96




The first time the South Yorkshire Police had an opportunity to view the programme was
when the drama documentary about the Hillsborough disaster was broadcast by Granada
Television on Thursday 5 December. That evening a group o f senior officers, m yself included
watched the programme and our first impressions were that there was no new evidence
contained in the drama. There does, however, seem to be some confusion in people's minds
including the programme makers', about a missing video tape, but at this early stage I can
inform you that all video tapes in possession o f the South Yorkshire Police at the time o f the
disaster were made available to Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry and to the coroner's inquest.
These include the tapes being recorded by the camera attended to by M r Houldsworth.

Two tapes in the possession o f the Sheffield W ednesday Football Club did go missing and a
criminal investigation was unable to throw any light on their whereabouts. These tapes relate
to two cameras, one o f which had been trained on a blank wall, the other on distant turnstiles.
Neither would have given a view o f the terraces.

Since the screening o f the programme, officers within South Yorkshire have been looking
more closely at the contents, with a view to establishing if, on further detailed scrutiny there is
any new evidence. Their early emerging findings are that there is nothing new, but I do expect
a definitive response within the next few days.




Richard Wells




           Police H eadquarters
           Snig Hill
           Sheffield S3 8LY
           Tel: 0114 276 8522 Fax: 0114 252 3243
                      G R A N A D A                                  T E L E V I S                        I O N


Jack Straw MP
House of Commons
London SW1 OAA

December 15 1996
BY FAX: SIX PAGES
your ref: A O 121296

Dear Jack

Thank you for your letter of December 12: it was pleasing to hear that with colleagues
you have been considering calls for further inquiry following our Hillsborough drama-
documentary. I have also been contacted by Peter Kilfoyle's office and told that there
is to be an adjournment debate on Tuesday and that the need for detailed information is
urgent. I am therefore faxing a copy o f this letter to Mr. Kilfoyle and to Trevor Hicks,
who chairs the Hillsborough Family Support Group. Trevor is obviously very well
placed to amplify any area and may be able to update you or your colleagues on the
situation following the group's seeking legal advice: his telephone number is 01729
840840.

The short answer to your questions:

• our programme included evidence from a civilian video technician, Roger
  Houldsworth, which conflicts with that o f the police on important issues and which
  was not produced either before the inquest or the Taylor inquiry'. The principal
  areas o f his evidence, and an explanation o f its significance, are summarised in the
  enclosed copy text o f a Granada press release. Mr. Houldsworth has sworn an
  affidavit for the Hillsborough Family Support Group.
• video footage from police surveillance cameras o f the terraces at a critical time
  disappeared and was therefore not among the police tapes shown to the inquiry or
  the inquest jury.

When you have been able to read the summary of Houldsworth’s evidence, can I ask
you to consider the following observations on the South Yorkshire Police position?



  G   R   A   N   A   D   A         T   E      L    E    V   I   S   I    O       N       L   I   M   I   T   E   D
  R E G I S T E R E D         OFFICE:   QUAY            STREET.          MANCHESTER           M60     9E A
  T ELEPHONE.             01 6 1 8 3 2 721 1       F A X: 0 1 6 1 8 2 7 2 0 3 4       T E L E X : 668859
  R E G I S T E R E D NO. .   840590 ENGLAND
     The police have taken two contradictory lines on Houldsworth’s evidence:

     •    there is no new evidence in the film

    This is an absurd and disingenuous argument - “new to whom?” is the question The
    poliw say they knew about Houldsworth’s evidence and it was available to both the
    I aylor inquiry and the inquest.

    The plain fact is that it was never produced at either. Critically, the inquest juiv had
    only the police account of what could be seen from the police control box on that day
    and the capabilities o f the video system (they were also taken to the ground and the
    system was demonstrated). The '‘faulty camera” was never challenged.

 Because they were not provided with the fiill file o f witness statements, the family ’s
 lawyers were never aware of Houldsworth’s evidence or potential as a witness.

 Most o f the notable modem miscarriages o f justice have involved non-disclosure of
 evidence to the defence. But when the evidence has later emerged, no-one has tried to
 say: It s not new - the police knew about it at the time, or the Crown knew about it,
 so it doesn t count.’ \ et that is what is being said in this argument.

This evidence is new to any court, to the jury, to the public, to the families and their
lawyers. It cannot be dismissed because a handful o f people in positions o f authority
may have known about it.

South Yorkshire Police, the coroner, and West Midlands Police (who conducted the
police investigation into the disaster) all declined to co-operate with us in the making
of our programme. We have therefore not been able to establish how much of
Houldsworth s evidence was known; to whom: or how and bv whom it was decided
not to call him.

•        Houldsworth is saying something different now to what he said at the time

This has been reported as a police view, at least in the Yorkshire Post shortly after
transmission of the program m e

This directly contradicts the “nothing new” argument. If he is saying something
beyond his contemporaneous statements, then it surely has to be reviewed as new
evidence. The police cannot have it both ways.

It is quite likely that Houldsworth in some areas o f his account will be saying things
different to and beyond his contemporaneous statements because:

a)         we asked him different questions and went into a lot o f detail on particular
            points
b)         anyone who has ever made a police witness statement knows that it is not a full
            first-hand account of events but is a rehearsal, usually in police language, o f
            one’s answers to specific questions
to other areas he will certainly be going beyond his contemporaneous statements: usinp
the inquest transcripts we addressed him to some o f the police evidence about the video
cameras and recordings and he disputes it. Until we showed it to him he had no idea
some assertions had been made: he would hardly have been pre-empting those
assertions in 1989..

This claim is therefore a reason for taking seriously what he now says, not Higmigcjng


I am in London on Monday and Tuesday but my assistant Nicky Higginbotham (0161
832 7211 ext 2820) will be able to find me if you need to discuss further.

Best wishes.

Yours sincerely




Ian McBride
 Text of Granada press release summarising new evidence

 (released at press preview November 2" 1996)


 Startling new evidence about the critical police decision which led to the Hillsborough
 football disaster is revealed in a drama-documentary charting the tragedv and its
 aftermath.                                                               '

            LlverP°o1 supporters died after being crushed in pens on the terraces at
 Sheffield Wednesday’s Hillsborough ground, where Liverpool met Notts Forest in a
 FA Cup semi-final in April 1989.

Granada Television's drama-documentary Hillsborough (ITV 9 pm December 5)
highlights the disappearance o f video recordings o f closed circuit television coverage
shot inside the ground minutes before the disaster.

And a new witness produces information which conflicts with police accounts o f what
they could see o f the situation in the Leppings Lane terraces when the critical decision
was taken to allow an influx o f 2000 fans into the ground.

Most streamed into pens which were already foil. The new evidence calls into
question how police could have failed to foresee the consequences.

The new witness, Mr. Roger Houldsworth, was the civilian video technician who
installed and maintained both police surveillance cameras and a separate system of
closed circuit TV’ cameras used by the football club in other parts of the ground.

On the day of the disaster, he was working in the Sheffield W'ednesday control room -
entirely separate to the police control - monitoring and recording from the club’s
cameras. .Among his bank of TV monitors was one linked to the police cameras inside
the ground.

"It showed me views which ought to have been available to officers in the police
control box,” he said.

"It was obvious to me that the pens were already full when they decided to let another
2000 people in. I cant understand why the police couldn’t see fee same thing."

The police officer in overall command at the ground, Chief Supt. David Duckenfield,
ordered a large exit gate to be opened to relieve a dangerous crush o f Liverpool
supporters which had built up outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles before kick-off.
Duckenfield was responding to repeated requests from police outside the ground, who
feared fans would otherwise be killed or injured in the mounting crush outside.
 Police officers testified at the inquest that they were unaware of how crowded the pens
 were at the time the gate was opened. They were preoccupied with the situation
 outside the ground and the opening o f the gate, which they monitored with another
 camera.

 At the time the order was given to open the exit gate and allow in the 2000 crowd, Mr.
 Houldsworth says he could see on his monitor the views from one o f the alJ-important
 police cameras, which he says was trained on the Leppings Lane terraces

 When the 2000 fans poured through the opened gate, no action was taken to direct
 them once inside the ground. .Almost all followed "standing" signs and walked down a
 slope through a tunnel into the two pens behind the goal - pens which were already
 full.

 Lnless the tunnel was closed o££ it was obvious to me that disaster was inevitable."

Houldsworth (48), o f Sheffield, says he alerted a colleague to raise the alarm but the
colleague was unable to get through to the police control room.

South \ orkshire Police were held largely to blame in a judicial inquiry into the worst
disaster in English sport. After Britain's longest-ever inquest die jury returned verdicts
o f "accidental death".

Had the police closed off the tunnel with a simple cordon - as they had in the same
fixture the previous year - the fans would have walked instead into the safety o f near-
empty side pens. The failure to close the tunnel was described by Lord Justice Taylor
in his findings from the judicial inquiry as "a blunder o f the first magnitude".

The film shows how police failed in their assessment o f how crowded the pens were
when the gate was opened to allow in the crowd from outside.

The ground was equipped with a closed circuit television system which was
sophisticated by the standards o f that time. From the police control box, officers could
use five cameras which could pan around and zoom in to pick out areas o f the crowd.

At least one camera with a powerful zooms lens could be trained on pens three and
four, where the tragedy happened.

One o f the cameras which could be zoomed into the critical pens had been faulty that
day and therefore was used less than normal, police said.

Many of the pictures captured by the closed circuit cameras were recorded in the
police control box. But some video evidence disappeared after the disaster, and no
recording could be produced of what could be seen o f the pens through the cameras
when the crowd was allowed in..

The disappearance o f the video evidence was disclosed by the coroner, almost at the
end o f the 80-day inquest. The disclosure attracted little attention and was not pursued
    On the morning of the match, Mr. Houldsworth said he had checked all the cameras
    and repaired the fault on one of the cameras trained on the Leppings Lane end.

    "Everything was working perfectly that morning," he said. "It had to be before a maior
    semi-final."                                                                       J

    Despite the apparent conflict in a crucial area of the evidence - described by the
    coroner as "maybe the single most important factor in fee whole inquest” -
    Houldsworth was not called as a witness at either the inquest or the judicial inquiry.

                                                          ends




c
