Colin Walters Esq
Private Secretary to the
 Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT
                                             January 1990
 b-gfiyJ   CoU-'Va,
TAYLOR R E P O R T : HOME SECRETARY'S STATEMENT

Thank you for copying to John   Gieve   your  letter  of  25 January
enclosing  a drat   of  the   statement ' which  the  Home Secretary
proposes to make on Monday.   The Chief   Secretary  has  also  seen
Mr MoynlhaRk letter of 26 January to the Home Secretary.

2   The   Chief  Secretary    is   generally   content, with the draft
statement but he would not want the Home Secretary to mention            tax
issues.    Such  a reference would     be unnecessary since the report
makes no recommendation on     tax   issues , and   might   well    provoke
questions    to   which   Ministers    would   not   be   able   to    reply
substantively in Budget purdah.      In the   first   paragraph     of   the
third   page  ot  the   draft    statement,   he   would   like the words
"including a change ..." to the end of the sentence deleted,

3     The Chief Secretary has noted Lord Justice Taylor's proposals
to create     three   new specific offences.         He is content with what
the Home Secretary proposes to say about this, but              has   commented
that ^enforcing     such  offences,        particularly    that regarding the
chanting   of   obscene   or   racialist       abuse,     could     have     very
substantial    resource   implications        for   the police and' the legal
departments.    It will be    important       for   these   to   be    pr o perly
assessed   and the implications considered before any decisions are
taken.     On   this   point,   the      Chief    Secretary    would   find    it
difficult to accept Mr M o y n i h a n ’s proposed redraft, which suggests
that the Government will      look      at   how   the  measures     should    be
implemented rather than whether they should be.

4    I     am coping      this letter  to Alan    Ring  (Department   of
Envir on e mn t ) Tim Sutton (Lord President's Office), Richard   Gozmey
(FCO),    Jim Gallagher (Scottish Office), Juliet Wheldon (Attorney
General's Office), Gillian Kirston       (Lord  Privy  Seal's   Office),
Murdo Maclean        (Chief Whip's Office) and Sonia Phippard (Cabinet
Office).




                               MISS C EVANS
                            Private Secretary
