                                                                                                                    *6 W# isjfl
                                                                  Vfc.
                                                                              DEPARTM ENT OF THE EN V IRO N M EN T
                                                                              2 M A R S H A M S T R E E T L O N D O N SWlP 3EB
                                                                                                01-276 3000
                                                                             My ref
                                      ,rA **S
                    : f C ft£ T A ^    ®
                                                                             Your ref
                                                                                                       26 January 1990

                                                                                            tV\f l o
                   PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                        I                  ^          No lO
                   The Rt. Hon David Waddington MP
                   Home Secretary                                                                                             io
                   Home Office
                   50 Queen Anne's Gate                                                                           j -\Ce_ p ,V\ WVOU^
                   London SW1H 9AT                                                            CsaJIXLcv             , ^Q-je_/Vvo^J^
                                                                                  *voT               ^ki                         .
                                                                     c-c ^-Vsv^Ve, ^ e c r e V w v e je                ...V-u

                                                 L La,
                                                    VV>/
                                                                         ^ HcxW
                                                                    ^ci^Luot
                                                                   tw r (A\x»w^y
                                                                                        ,
                                                                                         YVV C^o^jHpe-c,
                                                                         *V\f fV\osrrcssrVw
                                                                    V^W/ <Val.V^v \
                                                                   i1 ,r iT«~ii-i)^ rrsd'
                        Your Private Secretary invited comments on the further draft
                   of your statement which you circulated last night. I indicated
                   to you when we discussed this yesterday afternoon that I did not
                   believe that my Secretary of State would find a draft on these
                   lines acceptable, and I have since confirmed with him, by
                   telephone, that this is so.

                        The central difficulty is that the Government has argued
                   cogently during many hours of debate in both Houses that a
                   National Membership Scheme will prove a powerful weapon against
                   football hooliganism.    in doing so, we have firmly rebutted
                   every one of the contrary arguments put forward by Lord Justice
                   Taylor except his scepticism about whether satisfactory
                   technology is available (which can only be established on the
                   basis of a proper technical appraisal of the tenders now
                   submitted).   If we do not now proceed with Part I of the
                   Football Spectators Act, our position in relation to football
                   hooliganism will therefore be indefensible unless we put forward
                   a credible alternative.

                        Taylor, of course, provides us with such an alternative in
                   the form of his package of measures against hooliganism
                   including new criminal offences, an extension of attendance
                   orders, and electronic tagging.     it is therefore perfectly
                   defensible for us not to proceed with Part 1 of the Act

                                                provided we act on Taylor's proposals, and
                                                provided we continue to develop the Football Membership
                                                Scheme technology so that, if regrettably it should
                                                prove necessary to do so, a scheme can be introduced
                                                quickly.

                        These two key issues are correctly recorded in the minutes
                   of the No. 10 meeting on 23 January, and were reflected in the
                   draft paragraphs Chris Patten sent over to you on Wednesday
     i OOH




Re c ycled Paper
indicating how he thought this part of the Statement might read.
Chris understood from his discussions with you immediately
before his departure for Nairobi that you were able to accept
the bulk of his suggestions and that these issues would
therefore be fully reflected in your Statement.     I am afraid,
however, that the latest draft does not achieve that.          I
recognise, of course, that you do not wish to commit yourself to
implementing the Taylor recommendations in precisely the form
which he proposed, but the present reference to looking "...
carefully and sympathetically at the case for making these
changes" gives the impression that they might not be implemented
at all.    There is no reference to further development of
Football Membership Scheme technology, merely the negative
statement that "Part I of the Act will remain on the Statute
Book". If the impression conveyed by this draft were true, we
would be defenceless, if there were to be another Heysel
incident, against the charge that we had neither followed
Taylor's recommendations nor developed our own alternative.

     In discussion with Robin Ferrers after our meeting yesterday
afternoon I had in fact accepted a draft of the relevant parts
of the statement which is attached to this letter.       It would
stand in place of the last sentence on page 5, and the two
paragraphs on page 6 of the draft circulated last night.      The
draft attached deals much more satisfactorily with the two key
issues of implementation of Taylor and testing of the
technology, and I hope that it, or something very like it, can
be substituted for the version which you have now circulated.
     I am sending copies of this letter to the Prime Minister,
the Lord President, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Foreign
Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland, the Attorney
General, the Lord Privy Seal, the Chief Whip, and to Sir Robin
Butler.




                                         COLIN MOYNIHAN
                         CONFIDENTIAL


DRAFT


... I shall look expeditiously at how best these measures can
be implemented against the background of recent changes in the
criminal law.



     I now come to the proposed Football Membership Scheme. Lord
Justice Taylor examined the Invitation to Tender for a scheme
which was issued by the consultants employed by the football
authorities. He came to the conclusion that he could not support
a scheme of that kind because he did not believe the technology
would work well enough to avoid the danger of congestion and
disorder.   Instead he proposes the measures to which I have
referred.



     The Government have decided in the light of his advice not
to proceed with the establishment of a Football Membership
Authority.    Instead we propose to follow his strategy of
combining certain measures aimed directly at hooligans together
with progress towards all-seating, improved accommodation, better
facilities, improved arrangements for crowd control and better
training of police and stewards, which Lord Justice Taylor
believes give the best chance of eliminating or minimising
football hooliganism.



     In the meantime Part I of the Football Spectators Act will
remain on the statute book and the practical concerns expressed
by Lord Justice Taylor about the type of scheme envisaged in the
Invitation to Tender will be fully explored in the light of the
available advice, including that from the specialist companies
who responded to the Invitation to Tender.




                        CONFIDENTIAL
                        CONFIDENTIAL




     If hooliganism is not defeated by the alternative strategy
proposed in the Report and if at some future time a workable
membership scheme can be produced, we will then be in a position
to come back to the House and seek the approval of the House for
the scheme.



     The right course now is to implement Part II of the Act and
to give effect to Lord Justice Taylor's proposals in the way I
have indicated. Mr. Speaker, we are giving the industry and the
clubs a final opportunity to put themselves in order. The public
will not forgive them if they do not now act.




                        CONFIDENTIAL
