^ T o : Mr R Whalley                               cc Mr P Craven
                                                      Mr P Rose
  From: R A Sutherwood
                                 W    k,   TV         Mr J Sweet
        Press Office
        Rm 141
        x4610                                            27 April 1989




                PRESS ARRANGEMENTS FOR PUBLIC HEARINGS

  Attached is a copy of the operational guidance note for news
  editors covering the press arrangements for the preliminary
  hearing on 28 April.

  We are hoping to arrange a photo-call on Lord Justice Taylor's
  arrival at Sheffield Town Hall, where, we understand, he is
  being met by the Mayor of Sheffield. This should help to avoid a
  disorganised gathering at the station.

  When   Lord Justice Taylor has met the Mayor we understand that he
  will   be passing the Sheffield Book of Remembrance. If he would
  like   to be photographed either signing or looking at the Book
  that   can be arranged.

  Just before proceedings begin at 11.00am we hope to offer a
  facility to film and photograph the assembled Inquiry in the
  Council Chamber, after which the Chamber will be cleared of
  cameras.

  Will Lord Justice Taylor want to say a few words on arrival in
  brief 'news conference' style before the hearing begins? It
  might well be useful to do so. Could some consideration also be
  given to the question of one-to-one television and radio
  interviews?

  The advantage is clearly that of free television time to say
  what is happening to a wide audience with greater impact than a
  short less personal clip filmed at a news conference. It is
  another opportunity to stengthen and maintain public confidence
  in the Inquiry and make any further public appeals that may be
  necessary.

  The disadvantage is that if there are a large number of
  broadcast news organisations seeking interviews it will be a
  time-consuming and repetitive experience for Lord Justice
  Taylor. We could seek to limit the facility to alleviate this
  problem. If Lord Justice Taylor does want to take the
  opportunity then we will need to be very clear about the ground
  rules for the interviews and what exactly he is prepared to talk
  about.
Would you like us to take this forward by sounding out what
flevel of demand there is for interviews locally, take a decision
on the day or make it clear in advance that Lord Justice Taylor
will not be available for interviews? If we take the latter
course of action the desirability of a short on the record news
conference tomorrow morning significantly increases.

 We also need to address the rules and guidance for the media
 once the oral hearings begin. We have looked at what has been
 done at previous public inquiries and bring forward the
 following points for your consideration and decision:

 1. Accreditation
    Peter Craven has elected not to run an accreditation system
 for the 28 April hearing. If this poses problems, at future
 sessions we can either limit the number of representatives of
 each news organisation or set up a full accreditation system.

 2.   Order of proceedings
      It has been usual at past inquiries to place in the press
  room notices of the order of proceedings together with a list
  of witnesses giving evidence that day (name, job-title etc.).
C m some cases a brief indication of the nature of the evidence
  to be given is also made known.j

 3. Approach to witnesses
    At the Zeebrugge and Cleveland Inquiries no interviews were
 allowed until a witness had completed their evidence and
 released by the Inquiry. Thereafter witnesses were permitted to
 be interviewed if they were agreeable but the media were advised
 to seek their own legal advice and the permission of the
 solicitior of anyone legally represented before going ahead.

 The media are in all cases usually asked to respect the wishes
 of those who do not want to be filmed, photographed or
 interviewed - ". ... if such sentiments are expressed, we would
 ask you to repect their wishes to avoid distress."

 It may also be advisable to allocate an area outside the Town
 Hall where stills photographers and film/TV crews can be
 organised. It should be somewhere they can use at any time and
 from which witnesses can be seen easily as they arrive. Pfe—is-
 obviously essential that SVo filming or photography of witnesses   v.
    permitted anywhere inside the Town Hall.

 4.Statements
   It has been usual for copies of witnesses' statements for use
 on a 'check against delivery' basis to be made available in the
 press room every morning. If the problems of any disparities
 between speech and text can be overcome this seems a helpful
 and sensible idea.
^*5. Transcripts
       As there is going to be a full transcript of the proceedings,
    ideally available by mid-afternoon for the mornings proceedings
    and early evening for the afternoon's proceedings it would be
   useful to make it available. To minimise cost and effort to the
 I Secretariat it seems best to arrange for those wanting
 j transcripts to be able to purchase them from the shorthand
 j writers. In exceptional circumstances we may want to provide at
  ( shorter notice short extracts of crucial evidence given by key
 ^ witnesses.

    6. Models,plans diagrams etc.
       It will be expected and helpful if any models, drawings or
    diagrams referred to in the Inquiry could be displayed somewhere
    convenient outside the chamber.

    7. Glossary of technical terms
       If there are a number of technical terms to be used in the
k   Inquiry we should consider compiling a glossary and making it
"   available to the media representatives covering the hearings.


    Once we have established how we are going to proceed in these
    matters we can issue a further operational guidance note to news
    editors and Lord Justice Taylor can formally announce his rules
    at the beginning of the oral hearings.

    Are you content with the arrangements for tomorrow and could you
    get an early decision on the outstanding questions to enable us
    to take things further forward at the earliest opportunity?




    R A Sutherwood
 A JQ U IR Y INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
 S t a d iu m d is a s t e r



  25 April 1989                Press Contacts: Leeds 0532 438232
                                                           x2415
                                               London 01 273 4610

  OPERATIONAL GUIDANCE NOTE FOR NEWS EDITORS:

                   HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER INQUIRY


  On 28 April, Lord Justice Taylor will hold a preliminary
  hearing in the Council chamber of Sheffield Town Hall at
  11.00am.

^^The purpose of this will be to hear applications on
  behalf of those who wish to be represented at the oral hearings
  and to give directions as to the procedure to be followed.

  He also hopes to announce the date on which the oral hearings at
  Sheffield Town Hall will commence. Anyone who has information
  bearing on the events on 15 April has been invited to contact
  the West Midlands Police or the Secretary of the Inquiry.

  Representatives of the press and broadcast media who wish to
  attend to cover the preliminary hearings on Friday should be at
  Sheffield Town Hall at 10.15 for 10.30am. It is hoped to be able
  to provide an initial facility for filming and photography
  before the hearing begins at 11.00am, when cameras will have to
  be cleared from the chamber.

  What is normally the public gallery of the chamber has been made
  available exclusively for the use of reporters. This
  accommodation offers between 40 and 50 places with benches for
  reporters covering the hearing.

  Filming, photograj^Lng or tape recording the Inquiry proceedings
  is strictly forbidden.

  In addition to the gallery,  a press room in the Town Hall
  building with full telephone facilities and a sound feed will be
  provided.

  Further enquiries about the press arrangements should be made to
  either Peter Craven of COI Leeds on 0532 438232 x 2415 or Roy
  Sutherwood, Home Office Press Office in London on 01 273 4610.
