                                                    H ec        R tLx   o /r -   (g )
                                                           Mr   S^Ltrt-on




                                        cc   Mr Boys Smith
                                             Mr -Grant
                                             Miss Saunders, CPS
                                             Mr Zimmerman, LCD

Mr Goddard
F8 Division


PART IV OF THE PUBLIC ORDER ACT 1986:   EXCLUSION ORDERS
                                               *■
I think it falls to C1 to comment on the sentencing aspects of the
circular proposed in your note of 26 June.

2.     I am afraid magistrates would not respond positively to
paragraph 4 of the draft circular; they would regard this as Home
Office interference in sentencing.  The most we can do is remind
them of their powers.  I think the last seven lines of the
paragraph should be deleted and replaced by:

     "In determining the duration of the order, courts may wish to
     bear in mind the football "closed season" (generally late May
     to late August), when making orders of a short duration would
     have little practical effect."

3.     However, the circular would provide a useful opportunity to
remind the courts of their powers to make attendance centre
orders, in areas where we have junior or senior attendance
centres, for offences which are punishable by imprisonment.
Attendance centre orders could be used either on their own or in
addition to an exclusion order.   If it would be helpful to extend
the circular in this, way, we could let you have a draft paragraph.

4.     In paragraph 2 of the draft, I think it would be helpful to
add a reference to the Football Spectators Act Part II in
describing the restriction order.




                                              MISS J M GOOSE

                                              4 July 1990

C1 Division



sjs560
                                                  hca   M r   ' .SLLtrtsjn




                                             cc   Miss P Edwards
                                                  Mr Addison
                                                  Mr Bolton
                                                  Miss A Edwards
                                                  Mr Cogbill
                                                  Mr Fulton
                                                  Mr Grant

Mr Goddard
F8 Division


TAYLOR REPORT.

I am sorry I have not replied before to your notes of 22 June,
about the draft submission, and 26 June about Lord Ferrers'
meeting with ACPO.
        *

2.     I attach a C1 contribution to the draft submission on
attendance centres.   This tries to explain why we think the
proposal to use them more widely, and for offenders over 21, is
unrealistic.

3.     In his note of 28 June, Mr Grant offered a contribution on
electronic monitoring, subject to C 1 's views.  I have only one
amendment to suggest.   Under the White Paper proposals, any
restriction on liberty such as a curfew order would have to be
justified by the seriousness of the offence.    The timing of the
curfew, rather than the decision to impose it, might be influenced
by a wish to keep the offender away from football matches.    I
suggest the last sentence of Mr Grant's draft is amended to read:

     "It will then be for the courts to decide whether the
     imposition of a curfew order as a penalty for a football
     related offence would be justified by the seriousness of the
     offence.  If it is, the times of the curfew could be fixed to
     keep the offender away from football matches."

4.     We doubt whether any further briefing on attendance
centres, other than the material in the submission, is necessary
for the meeting with ACPO.   It seems unlikely that the use of
attendance centres will figure largely in the discussion, but
Mr Sutton will be ready to attend any oral briefing with Lord
Ferrers.




                                             MISS J M GOOSE

                                             4 July 1990

C1 Division
TAYLOR REPORT

C1 CONTRIBUTION TO SUBMISSION


iii)    USE OF ATTENDANCE CENTRES


The Taylor report recommends extending the scQpe of attendance
centre orders as a means of enforcing exclusion orders made under
the Public Order Act 1986 for those convicted of football-related
offences.      Attendance centre orders may not be imposed on
offenders aged 21 or over.         The report suggests removing the upper
age limit, and increasing the maximum length of orders from 36 to
          %

72 hours for football-related offences.         ACPO support the
recommendation, but have'reservations about the resource
implications.      The CPS see value in a power for courts to order
football offenders to attend at a particular place when football
matches are taking place and which could be combined with an
exclusion order.          However, they see practical difficulties in
using attendance centre orders, and would prefer a requirement for
offenders to report to a police station.
                      i




We do not recommend extending the scope of attendance centre
orders.       Attendance centres offer more than a temporary
restriction of liberty.          They try to provide constructive
activities designed to help young people make better use of their
time.     As they operate at present, they offer most to offenders in
their teens and are unsuitable for older, more difficult
offenders, who might have a disruptive effect.          Many new centres
would be needed, at considerable cost, simply to provide the
nationwide service that Taylor envisages on Saturdays (when most
centres now open). "There would be even greater practical problems
and costs to make provision for mid-week matches.


For offenders aged under 21, convicted of imprisonable offences,
attendance centre orders may already be combined with exclusion
orders.       We suggest that the best way forward is to concentrate on
those under 21 and to issue a circular reminding courts of the
powers they already have and to encourage them to consider linking
*    ft




    attendance centre orders with exclusion orders for suitable
    offenders.
