V
                                                                   O'




    INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM INQUIRY


    Initial response by the Government to the recommendations in the
    final report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the
    Hillsborough stadium diaster.


    In his statement on 29 January, the Home Secretary indicated that
    he would place in the Library a schedule setting out the
    Government's initial response to the recommendations of Lord
    Justice Taylor's final report.   The schedule is annexed.




    29 January 1990
Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in the Taylor report.


ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (Recommendation 1-4)

1.   General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
     designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

2.   To apply to all UEFA "high risk” matches from Autumn 1993.

3.   To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
^         Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
P         Scottish football league, premier Division
          National stadia.

4.   To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 1999 to all
     other matches played at designated grounds.

The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches, the
4 Divisions of the football league, and the national stadia as
recommended.


The application of the recommendation to Scotland and to other
sports cannot be achieved under the Football Spectators Act 1989
but the Government will in any case wish to discuss it with the
sporting authorities concerned. Designated sports grounds under
the 1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league
grounds which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not
be practicable to deal with in this way.



advisory   DESIGN COUNCIL (Recommendation 5)

The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
that the football league and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.




NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)

     (a)   The Football Licensing Authority should be created to
           review the discharge of functions by local authorities.

     (b)   The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
           sports and other sports venues.

The  Government   supports   the   recommendation  that   safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewed
and proposes to bring into force relevant provisions of Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
Licensing Authority to carry out these responsibilities in
England and Wales in relation to grounds used by football league
clubs and the international football grounds. Consideration will
be given to introduction of legislation extending the role of the
new authority to Scotland and in relation to other sports grounds
and sporting venues after consultation with the representative
sporting organisations, the local authority associations and
other interested bodies.    Consideration will also be given to
extending the Authority's responsibilities in the meantime on a
voluntary basis.

MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR TERRACES (Recommendations 7-10)

7.    Safety certificates to specify maximum number of spectators
      in pens or areas (interim recommendation 1).

8.    Calculations of crowd density:    revised figures   (interim
      recommendation 2, revised).

9.    Arrangements to prevent   further access to pens    (interim
      recommendation 3).

10.   Turnstile flow rates.

The Government supports these recommendations. Local authorities
with responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act) have already been urged to review and amend safety
certificates to reflect reductions       in terrace capacities
recommended in the Interim Report.      The adjusted figures in
recommendations 8 and 10 will be drawn to local authorities'
attention.   The next edition of the 'Green Guide' will reflect
the new figures.

FILLING AND MONITORING OF TERRACES (Recommendations 11-12)

11.   Statements of intent (interim recommendation 4, revised.

12.   Stewarding or policing of pens (interim recommendation 5).

The Government have already urged police and clubs to enter into
non-contractual statements of intent with the aim of ensuring
that no doubt exists as to the respective responsibilities of
each; and to provide monitoring of terraces accordingly.      The
relaxation in recommendation 12(b) will be drawn to the attention
of local authorities and clubs.

GANGWAYS (Recommendation 13)

Local authorities will be urged to include in safety certificates
terms and conditions to give effect to this recommendation.

FENCES AND GATES (Recommendations 14-21)

14.   Removal of spikes.

15.   Reduction in height.
 16.   Training of stewards (interim recommendation 6).

 17.   Emergency gates in perimeter fences.

 18.   Marking of emergency gates (interim recommendation 7).

 19.   Gates normally to be kept open         during matches    (interim
       recommendation 8, revised).

 20.   Manning    of    emergency      gates      (replaces     interim
       recommendation 9).

 21.   Cutting equipment (interim recommendation 10).

 The Government supports the recommendations on perimeter fencing,
jiocal authorities will be urged to amend safety certificates to
^Piclude requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15,
 17 and to note       recommendation   19 which varies     interim
 recommendation 8. The revised recommendations on closure and
 manning of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
 drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.

 CRUSH BARRIERS (Recommendations 22/ 23)

 22.   Inspection (interim recommendation 11).

 23.   Review of layout (interim recommendation 12).

 These are repeated from the Interim Report.        They have already
 been commended to local authorities.

 SAFETY CERTIFICATES (Recommendations 24-31)

 24.   Mandatory conditions in safety certificates.

 25.   Variation from terms of safety certificates.

 26.   Terms of safety certificates.

 27.   Review of safety certificates (interim recommendation 13).

 28.Issue of certificates     to    grounds    without   them   (interim
 recommendation 14).

 29.   Annual   review  of   certificates;  annual         renewal    of
       certificates (interim recommendation 15).

 30.   Review of arrangements for issuing certificates          (interim
       recommendation 16).

 31.   Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
       revised).

 The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
 An order under S.15A of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
 recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
 within the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.

Local authorities will be urged to ensure the terms/conditions
in safety certificates are clear and unequivocal: they will be
reminded of the need to have an effective review system, the
desirability of a properly constituted team approach to
certification and the desirability of consulting club and
supporters association representatives.

Annual review of safety certificates already exists in effect
because annual inspections of designated grounds in connection
with safety certificates is already required by law.       The
Government will consider whether any change in the law should
be made to make annual renewal of certificates compulsory.

R   jties   OF FOOTBALL'CLUBS (Recommendations 32-43)

32.     Measurement of turnstile flow (interim recommendation 18).

33.     Correlation of turnstile       flow   and    capacity   (interim
        recommendation 19).

34.    Closure of turnstiles (interim recommendation 20).

35.    Closed circuit     television   (interim     recommendation   21,
       extended).

36.    Signposting (interim recommendation 22, extended).

37.    Information on tickets (interim recommendation 23).

38.    Co-ordination with the police (interim recommendation 24).

39.    Computer records of ticket sales.

40.    Restriction of all ticket matches to capacity attendances.

41.    Pre match entertainment (interim recommendation 25).

42.    Recruitment of stewards.

43.    Police control rooms.

These recommendations are aimed primarily at football clubs and
are supported by the Government.       Where appropriate, local
authorities will be asked to amend safety certificates to enforce
these recommendations.

POLICE PLANNING (Recommendations 44-53)

44.    Nomination of a Chief        Officer   for     liaison   (interim
       recommendation 26).

45.    Pre match briefing (interim recommendation       27).

46.    Operational orders (interim recommendation       28).
 47.    Police action on ticketless fans.

 48.    Review of arrest procedures.

 49.    Postponement of kick-offs (interim recommendation 29).

 50.    Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.

 51.    Control room facilities.

 52.    Training of senior officers.

 53.    Charges for police services.

 These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
^fcnterim Report are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
^Pnd police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
  senior   officer  training   and   the   objective    to  improve
  effectiveness of policing at football matches.     The Government
  agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
  full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
  authorities after consultation with relevant representative
  associations, to ensure consistency of practice.

 COMMUNICATIONS (Recommendations 54-58)

 54.    Radio communications (interim recommendation 31, amended).

 55.    Provision of a command channel.

 56.    Land lines (interim recommendation 32).

 57.    Public address (interim recommendation 33).

 58.    Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34:   advice
        on hand signals withdrawn).

 These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the
 Government has already urged clubs, local authorities and police
 to implement. Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
 additional, discrete channel of communications for police match
 commanders.

 CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (Recommendations 59-63)

 59.    co-ordination (interim recommendation 35).

 60.    Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 36).

 61.    Communication with emergency services.

  62.   Arrival of emergency vehicles (interim recommendation 37).

  63.   Briefing of police officers (interim recommendation 38).

 These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
 and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
 those covered in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed. The Government will urge all those concerned
to comply with the further recommendation devised to ensure
immediate summons of emergency services.

FIRST AID/ MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES
(Recommendations   €4-69)

64.   First aiders (interim recommendation 39).

65.   First aid rooms (interim recommendation 40).

      Medical practitioners (interim recommendation 41/ revised).
VO
VO
 •




67.   Ambulances (interim recommendation 42/ revised).

      Ambulances/ larger matches (interim recommendation 43).

69.   Major incident vehicles.

The Government will draw attention to variations from the
relevant Interim Report recommendations and will discuss the
provision of major incident vehicles with the authorities
concerned.

OFFENCES AND PENALTIES (Recommendations 70-73)

70.   Selling tickets.

71.   Other specific offences.

72.   Attendance centres.

73.   Electronic tagging.

The Government will      look carefully   and quickly at   all these
suggestions.

GREEN GUIDE (Recommendations 74-76)

74.   Revision of the Green Guide.

75.   Crush barrier tests.

76.   Inspections for corrosion.

The Government accepts these recommendations and will act on them
with urgency.
                             PART V - FIN A L R E C O M M E N D A T IO N S

All-Seated Accommodation
  1. The Secretary of State should ensure that spectators are admitted only to seated accommodation at
matches played at sports grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in accordance with
the timing set out in Recommendations 2 to 4 below.

  2. Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of the 1993/4 season at high-risk matches as
defined under the UEFA Regulations set out in paragraph 82 above.

   3. Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 above should apply with effect from the start of
the 1994/5 season to all matches at grounds in the first and second divisions of the Football League, the
Premier Division of the Scottish Football League, and at national stadia, subject to a reasonable extension of
time in the case of a club promoted to the second division of the Football League or the Premier Division of the
Scottish Football League. Standing accommodation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 20% of the
present standing capacity' (such present standing capacity to be calculated according to Recommendation 8
b ^ p p , the first 20% deduction being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1994.

  4. Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of the
1999/2000 season to all matches at all other grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
Standing accommodation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 10% of the present standing capacity
(such present standing capacity to be calculated according to Recommendation 8 below), the first 10%
deduction being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1999.

Advisory D esign Council
  5. The Football Association and the Football League should establish an Advisory Design Council whose
functions should be:

    (a) to conduct and marshal research into the improvement and design of football stadia;

    (b) to disseminate regularly such information and expertise as they acquire in this field to members of the
        Football League and, on request, to other football and sports clubs in England, Wales and Scotland.

National Inspectorate and Review Body
  6. (a) If Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989 is implemented, section 13 should be brought into force
giving the Football Licensing Authority the functions and powers therein specified (power to review the
discharge of functions by local authorities). If Part I of the Act is not implemented or is substantially delayed,
other arrangements should be made for the discharge of the functions and powers in section 13 of the Act by the
appointment of a body to exercise them.

      (b) In either event, the body exercising those functions and powers in relation to association football
should also be entrusted with similar functions and powers regarding the discharge by local authorities of their
certifying and licensing functions in relation to other sports grounds and sports entertainments pursuant to the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and Parts III and IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
1987.

M axim um Capacities for Terraces
  7. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

  8. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide
("the Green Guide figure”) subject to the follow ing qualifications:-

    (a) the maximum density permitted under paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide (when the terrace
        or view ing slope is in good condition) should be 47 not 54;
    (b) the minimum figure specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 (when the terrace or viewing slope materially
        deviates from the recommended guidelines, so as to constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely
        packed) should be 0 not 27;

    (c) in arriving at "the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
        which should reduce the permissible density including those specified in paragraphs 220 to 224
        inclusive of the Green Guide.

  9. Arrangements should be made:-

    (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
        figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherw ise, and

    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.

    10. The maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass through a turnstile should be 660 persons per
houijMtt 750 per hour as stated in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide. The maximum rate for any particular
t u r n P V must take full account of all circumstances including those given as examples in paragraph 47.


Filling and M onitoring Terraces
   11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the police, setting out their
respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or
other standing area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
variation of the document in respect of an indiv idual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

   12. (a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other standing
area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are
monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress
throughout the period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any
other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a police officer who can authorise access
through gates to the pitch under Recommendation 20 below.

      (b)       This Recommendation need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do not exceed one third of the area’s
maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000, whichever is the lower.


Gangways
  13. Gangway s should be kept clear, in accordance with paragraphs 97 to 99 of the Green Guide. Gangways
should be painted in a conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not. The Safety Certificate should require
that no standing is allowed in gangway s and that they be painted.


Fences and Gates
   14. All spikes or similar constructions on perimeter or radial fences, and any sections overhanging or
returning inwards towards spectators, should be removed.

  15. Perimeter fencing should be no higher than 2.2 metres, measured from the top of the fence to the lowest
point at w hich spectators may stand, and including any wall or other foundations forming part of the perimeter
boundary.

   16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and especially those with
duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different
crowd densities.

  17. There must be prov ided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained area sufficient gates of a
minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for
an emergency ev acuation of that pen or area.


                                                         77
   18. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit".

   19. Where there is a perimeter fence in front of a pen or enclosure, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully
open during the period when spectators are in the pen or enclosure, wherever those in command feel that this
can safely be done. Whether they be fully open, partially open or closed, they should be kept unlocked
throughout the period when the pen or enclosure is occupied.

   20. Each gate in a perimeter fence affording access to the pitch from a pen or enclosure should be manned by
a steward or by a police officer when the pen or enclosure is occupied. Whether such manning should be by a
police officer or by a steward should be decided by the Police Commander. In either event, the Police
Commander should appoint one or more police officers with power to authorise access through gates to the
pitch immediately in the event of an emergency.

  21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there are
perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
neees^ry. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade
or s ^ H r d s . Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
nomiffited senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
   22. All crush barriers should be visually inspected each year for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be
affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

   23. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately (if this has not
already been done following the Interim Report) to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen or
terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 8 above, should reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
   24. The Secretary of State should exercise his powers under either section 6(2) or section 15(A) of the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975 so as to make mandatory in Safety Certificates those conditions specified in the
original section 2(2) of the 1975 Act. So far as the original section 2(2)(b) is concerned “shall” should be
substituted for "may”.

  25. In assessing these mandatory requirements in the Certificate for a particular ground, the local authority
should follow the Green Guide criteria. Once that is done, the resultant figures and terms for that ground
should be specified in the Safety Certificate and no variation from them should be permitted other than by
formal revision.

  26. Where a local authority incorporates any provision of the Green Guide into the Safety Certificate, other
than one within the scope of Recommendation 25 above, it should make clear whether that provision is to be
complied with absolutely or with discretionary flexibility.

   27. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate (if this has not already been done
following the Interim Report) by the responsible local authority, which should consult the club in respect of
which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the ambulance service and the building authority.
Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its object should be to ensure that the operative
conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or substitute any condition show n to be necessary as a
matter of urgency follow ing the findings and Recommendations in this Report.

  28. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports ground designated under the 1975 Act for
which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthw ith to remedy the situation.

  29. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
Certificate should require to be renewed annually.

  30. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
amending and renewing Safety Certificates (if this has not already been done following the Interim


                                                        78
    Report). Such review should require that there exists or is provided an accountable administrative structure


•
    whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and effectively supervised by senior officers and
    elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance with the local authority's rules.

       31. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group (if this has not
    already been done) consisting of appropriate members of its ow n staff, representatives of the police, of the fire
    and ambulance sen ices and of the building authority . The Advisory Group should consult representatives of the
    club and of a recognised supporters' organisation on a regular basis. The Advisory Group’s terms of reference
    should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
    attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority, and an effective
    procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular written reports for
    consideration by the local authority.


    Duties of Each Football Club
       32. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured (if this has not already been
    d o n ^ ^ lo w ing the Interim Report). Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile
    r e d | H capable of admitting spectators at the rate anticipated.

       33. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such as
    to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the turnstiles
    within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that view ing area should be reduced accordingly. Since
    this Recommendation includes terms and conditions within the scope of the original section 2(2)(c)(i) of the
    Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 it should be given effect in the Safety Certificate (see Recommendation 24
    above).

      34. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be reached
    and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile operators for this
    purpose.

      35. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
    concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before, throughout and at the end of a
    match.

       36. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively reviewed (if
    this has not already been done follow ing the Interim Report). It should, in relation to the arrangements for each
    match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of
    spectators to their appropriate view ing areas. Any redundant signs should be removed.

      37. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with the
    information prov ided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs should
    contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

      38. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed (if
    this has not already been done following the Interim Report) by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure
    that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.

      39. Clubs should consider maintaining a record on computer of ticket sales before the day of the match, for
    season tickets and tickets for all-ticket matches for seated areas, containing the names and addresses of those
    purchasing tickets.

      40. All-ticket matches should be confined to those at which a capacity or near capacity crowd is expected.
    When a match has been designated all-ticket, clubs should not sell tickets at the match and should take steps to
    adv ise the spectators of both clubs accordingly.

      41. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters' club as to the provision of pre-match
    entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.

       42. Clubs should recruit and retain sufficient competent stewards. They should be fit, active and robust, and
    preferably between the ages of 18 and 55. Clubs should ensure that stewards are fully trained, aware of their
    duties under Annex B of the Green Guide and under the statement of intent (see Recommendation 11) and able
    to perform them.

                                                             79
  43. The club should provide a police control room which is:—

    (a) well placed, so as to command a good view of the whole pitch and of the spectator area surrounding it;

    (b) of sufficient size for the commander, his deputy and enough officers to operate the radios, telephones
        and CCTV screens. There should be space for others who may need from time to time to visit the room
        eg other senior officers, club management or a member of the emergency services;

    (c) well equipped with CCTV, radio and telephone facilities and, where necessary, sound-proofed against
        excessive crowd.noise.

  It should be the duty of the club to provide a room and equipment to the satisfaction of the chief officer
nominated under Recommendation 44 below.


Police Planning
      The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated sports ground or more
s l m nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

  45. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground, and the pre-match briefing of all
officers on duty there, should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is
detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

  46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should enable the police to cope
with any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

  47. Police planning should provide that ticketless fans should not be allowed to enter a designated sports
ground except in an emergency.

  48. Arrest procedures inside and outside designated sports grounds should be reviewed so as to keep to the
minimum the period during which an arresting officer is away from his post.

  49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

  50. Consideration in consultation with the club should be given, especially for high-risk matches, to the
possibility of an early kick-off or a Sunday fixture.

  51. There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television monitoring
outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers at turnstiles
or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled in the
interpretation and use of these data.

   52. Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific training course for senior officers presently
acting as Police Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course should include training in the basic
strategy of policing football matches.

  53. Police authorities should review the charges they make to clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so
as to ensure that realistic charges are made. The Home Office should take steps to ensure consistency of
practice, subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to local circumstances.


Communications
  54.     There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be used,
where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.


                                                       80
  55. There should always be a command channel reserved solely for the Police Commander to communicate
with his senior officers round the ground.

   56. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines with
telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

  57. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual areas
outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important announcements should
be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crow d despite a high level of noise in the ground. This
arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.

  58. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.


Co-ordination of Emergency S e n ices
    59. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
l i ^ u n concerning crowd safety at each designated sports ground.

  60. Before each match at a designated sports ground the police should ensure that the fire service and
ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of spectators
expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning the
control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control rooms of each of the
emergency services.

  61. Lines of communication, whether by telephone or by radio, from the police control room to the local
headquarters of all emergency services should be maintained at all times so that emergency calls can be made
instantly.

  62. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated sports ground of emergency vehicles from all three
services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility within
the ground itself.

  63. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for the
arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why they are
required.


First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances
  64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.
The club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

  65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms
and the equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking
professional medical advice and should be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

   66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000, the club should employ a
medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be
trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts should be known to those in
the police control room and he should be immediately contactable.

       (b)        At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000, the club should make
arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned immediately to deal with any medical exigency
at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be
known to those in the police control room.

  67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate ambulance authority should
be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

   68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should be
specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a requirement
of the Safety Certificate.
  69.    A "major incident equipment vehicle", designed and equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be
deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.


Offences and Penalties
 70. Consideration should be given to creating an offence of selling tickets for and on the day of a football
match without authority from the home club to do so.

  71. Each of the follow ing activities at a designated sports ground should be made a specific offence:-

    i.    throw ing a missile;

    ii.   chanting obscene or racialist abuse;

    iii. going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.

   ^ ^ C o n s id e ra tio n should be given to extending the courts' powers to make attendance centre orders for
f o ^ p l related offences on occasions of designated football matches. The provision should be capable of
imposition on an offender aged 21 or over and subject to a maximum of 72 hours in the case of an offender aged
17 or over.

  73.     Consideration should be given to the use of electronic monitoring (tagging) in the sentencing of offenders
convicted of football related offences.


Green Guide
  74. As a matter of urgency, the Home Office should set up a body to revise the Green Guide in accordance
with this Report, these Recommendations and the Report of the Technical Working Party (Appendix 3).

  75. In any revision of the Green Guide, the values to be achieved by wav of percentage recovery after the
required loading tests on crush barriers should be specified. Acceptable values for various materials should be
specified.

  76. When the Green Guide is revised, the need to inspect crush barriers for possible corrosion should be
specifically mentioned and emphasised.
     MEMORANDUM

From                                                  Telephone



%                C<^ r&om              3   ^ 2,
    To                                            &
                                                      Date    f ^ / ^ Y c ?
       I________________________________________ I_________________________


         C^TWCA                        fe w           e*v~ H'u"- 'I'WJ lJ2^}
                -^n~ A sL ^    <^7>n

           !A




                   L. ct<i K     ~ J w^oA ^ ol        y~[~oJ^C{T^~^    is
                js^yyjZoi      C^yuy^h
