I ALAN GEORGE SMITH of ___________
South Yorkshire WILL SAY AS FOLLOWS


    was born on the                           am a chartered
physiotherapist employed by Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
This is a full time job and I have been employed in this
capacity since 1983.

I have been a physiotherapist for all my professional career
spanning   18   years. All 18 years have been spent       in
professional football.

I am currently the under 21 England team physiotherapist and
have been physiotherapist for the full England team on five
occasions.

Pnor   to joining Sheffield Wednesday I was at Blackpool
Football Club during the period 1977 to 1983. Prior to that I
was at Rotherham United during the period 1972 to 1977.

I qualified as a physiotherapist by taking the Football
Association Certificate in the treatment and rehabilitation of
injured players which is a three year part-time course. During
that three year period I was working in Industry in the North
East.   Upon completion of the course I took the job at
Rotherham United and became a member of the Society of Remedial
Gymnastics.   In 1985 this society and the Society of Chartered
Physiotherapists amalgamated to become the Society of Chartered
Physiotherapists.

My   duties   as a physiotherapist are to treat and   rehabilitate
injured players employed by Sheffield Wednesday. I attended
every home game for the first yteam and reserves and if time
allows, the juniors or youth..teams. I travel with the first
                              -   2   -




team and reserves to every away match and at times the junior
or youth teams. The job does require dedication as normally I
am working almost every day of the week.

The medical    facilities available at  the ground consist ofthe
treatment room which is located in      the South st to treatand
rehabilitate injured players employed by Sheffield Wednesday.
I attended every home game for the first team and reserves and
if time allows, the juniors or youth teams. .I travel with the
first team and reserves to every away match and at times the
junior or youth teams. The job does require dedication as
normally I am working almost every day of the week.

The medical facilities available at the ground consist of the
treatment room which is located in the South stnd annexed to
the changing rooms. It is a fully equiped physiothergency
call out. The Club Doctor is Dr Purcell.

Dr Purcell    attends every game at     Hillsborough as wellas
holding a clinic for those players suffering from any illness
or injury.     These consultations take place in the treatment
room at Hillsborough.

There is another medical room within the ground. This is used
by the St Johns Ambulance Brigade. It is located in the North
stand.   I have nothing to do with the St Johns Ambulance
Brigade.  Their responsibility is to render medical assistance
to anyone injured in the crowd. I do understand that they have
first aid equipment, but have no idea as to the exact nature of
the equipment available.

I  now turn to the circumstances of my involvement in the match
between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest on 15th April 1989. As
Sheffield Wednesday.were not playing, I was able to attend the
match as a spectator with my family and we had seats near the
Directors box in the South stand.
                                    -          3   -




    I had attended a junior team match at the training ground in
    Middlewood Road that morning. I left at about 1.15 pm and got.
    to Hillsborough between 1.45 and 2.00 pm. My wife and son were
    late in arriving. I was due to meet them at 2.00 pm in the D
    lounge in the main reception area. As they had not arrived by
    2.30 pm, I took my seat in the crowd and was then later joined
    by my wife and son.       I remember that I was enjoying the
    atmospher but I was completely unaware of any problem developing
    at the West terrace area.

    At 3.06 pm the referee stopped the game.

    It was only at that point .that I noticed that there was a
%
    problem in the West terrace area. I saw people climbing over
    the safety fence and people being laid down on the perimeter of
    the pitch.   I also saw numbers of Police going towards that
    end. I decided to go down and try to help.

    On my    way down to the pitch I met witn two casualties who I
    helped   take into the treatment room. One was suffering from a
    fractured sternum, one                  and another lady was
    suffering from a broken arm. I helped them onto the two beds
    in .the treatment room. I then phoned for an ambulance. Kenny
    Dalglish walked in at that moment. I made the two casualties
    as comfortable as possible and then left to go back onto the
    pitch.                 was attended to by her boyfriend,



    I went over to the West terrace end. I was in the area behind
    the goal trying to put people into the recovery position and
    applying   cardiac' massage.   I was also helping to       make
    casualties more comfortable. I was successful in the treatment
    of one female casualty who required resuscitation and cardiac
    massage.   I carried another : girl from the pitch on an
    advertising board to an awaiting ambulance behind the North
    stand.   I tried resuscitation but it was no use, she^was dead.
    I   believe   there were three St John Ambulances   available   and
                                        ’ ’’ L a
                                   ; V\
                                  - 4       -




    these were driven onto the pitch to pick up the casualties.

    I went to the main casualty station just outside the gym area
    behind the North stand. I put one broken leg into a splint and
    also helped carrying casualties on stretchers onto awaiting
    ambulances.   In addition, I placed a male casualty into the
    recovery position and told his friend to keep a constant check
    on his pulse while I attended to another casualty five yards
    away.   I returned to this man to ensure his recovery while
    treating periodically other casualties.

    There was one stretcher available at the ground.      This was
    always left in the corridor just outside the treatment room.
%
    Its purpose was to help carry injured players from the field.

    The emergency ambulances that arrived came in from Penistone
    Road and entered through the new entrance to the gym and then
    turned round to face the old exit to drive back onto Penistone
    .Road. The casualties were taken to the Northern--General
    Hospital or the Royal Hallamshire Hospital. I stayed at the
     gym area until all the casualties had been dealt with which
    was about 4.45 pm.

    The emotion shown by everyone that day was incredible. I was
    so busy trying to help people that I was not aware of the
    emotional effect upon myself. I remember on several occasions,
    reassuring Policemen and St Johns Ambulance men that they had
    done a couragous job in assisting the dying and injured.

    I was not entirely aware of.what was happening around me.
    Obviously, my concern was to help as best I could and not to
    worry about what other people were doing.

    At about 4.45 to 5.00 pm I walked back across the pitch and I
    saw my wife and son in the stand. I walked over to Mr McGhee
    the Chairman, who was in the Directors box. He was ./ extremely
    upset. I told him that we had suffered a terrible tragedy. He
                                    -jt.-
    was very   emotional.   Jimmy Armfield an old friend        was   also
    present.

    I decided to look for             who was at the ground so that
    she could comfort her husband. I spoke t      q   i    n    the
    Ladies room to request that she find                I then took
    my family to Lounge D. I went back through the home team
    dressing room and into the treatment room.                  was
    still there on one of the couches. There was also another
    casualty, a young boy called ______        _     who had been
    impaled on the fencing. A Police Officer was with
    asked the second Police Officer present if he would arrange for

%   an ambulance .by using his walkie talkie. Sometime later an
    ambulance   arrived.   I helped put the two casualties on
    stretchers and helped to carry them from the treatment room to
    the awaiting ambulance outside the players entrance. As soon
    as the last casualty was away, I gathered the apprentices
    together to clear up the treatment room and changing rooms.
                                 •*




    I washed and tidied myself up and then went off to collect my
    family from Lounge D. I sat down and had a cup of tea and
    rested for about half an hour and then we drove home.

    I did not witness any violent behaviour on that day. I have
    never known any problems before with spectators being crushed.
    I also attended last years semi-final and was seated in the
    West stand area with the Liverpool fans who were well behaved.




                                                           ■t
                                                                /
    This statement is true to the best of my knowledge and belief.
                                 &

              0\ (ryr £~-m v.vv\ . S-
    SIGNED ..... -V}.M ......... ;....

                 rAvc^   rm
    DATE......

    WITNESSED




*
 15/743968/RLS


          ADDENDUM TO THE STATEMENT OP AIjAN GEORGE SMITH


I have been shown a copy of a letter from South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service ("SYMAS") dated 6th August,
1986 and addressed to Mr.       |and I have been asked what
1   know generally about the arrangements with SYMAS in
relation to Season Tickets. I do have a recollection of
meeting   representatives   from SYMAS in about 1986 and of   the
suggestion made in the course of that meeting that if 2 Season
Tickets could be made available on a complimentary basis, then
2 representatives of the Ambulance Service would be present in
the Stand during our home matches and would be able more
quickly to summon an ambulance in the event of injury to a
player, because they would be in radio contract with the
nearest   Ambulance Station which is about ^ mile away from the
Ground.   I felt that would be a very good arrangement because
whereas the St. Johns Ambulance Brigade were always in
attendance to render first aid to any member of the public who
was taken ill, they did not have any dealings with injuries to
players, and in the unfortunate event of a serious injury to a
player on the field we would be able to get attention for him
more promptly. As a result complimentary Season Tickets were
made available for 2 members of the Ambulance Service for the
Season 1986/87 and indeed since then. I believe that the
2 members of the Ambulance Service who usually attend are keen
football supporters and I know one of them by his first name



Over the 3 seasons that they have been attending the Ground it
has only been necessary to call for their assistance on very
      occasions indeed. I recall for example an incident in
February 1987 when one of our players, Ian Knight, had his leg
fractured very severely and was carried off the fie^i on a
                                                 -   2   -




stretcher.    On that occasion I was able to signal to the
2 Ambulance men     who summoned an ambulanceon their radio and
the effect is that the ambulance is at the Ground, to take
the player to hospital, perhaps a few minutes earlier than
would otherwise be the case by using a 999 call. On another
occasion a player dislocated his shoulder and the system
worked effectively, in the same way,


I am told          it is suggested that on the occasion when this
arrangement         first came into being, I was asked whether the
Club would    payfor the facility of having an ambulance and
crew   available at all matches, to deal with emergency
situations, and that I am said to have indicated that the Club
would not be prepared to make any such payment.          I can
categorically deny that I ever said such a thing - if    I were
asked whether the Club would pay for a facility of this or any
other     nature    I    would         not consider myself                as    being        in     a
position to answer one way or the other - quite simply any
matters relating to finances would be dealt with by the Club
Secretary and I would refer them to him.


The     complimentary        Season        Tickets           are   available          only        for
Sheffield Wednesday's Home Fixtures and would not of course be
available     for a game such as the F.A. Cup semi-final.                                   I can
confirm     that    I    was      not      asked by                  or    by        any     other
representative   of   the   Ambulance   Service   to   provide
complimentary tickets for the Cup semi-final, either the one
which took place in 1989 or the ones earlier in 1988 and 1987.
Had such a request been made of me, however, I would have been
unable to grant it because, to my knowledge, the Club do not
have any allocation               of     complimentary             seats       for    the     Cup
semi-finals.


Signed                                                   Witness

Dated                   . ' . I t; . , ' f } ^
