                                                             Parly No. J 00850




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FOR WRITTEN ANSWER ON MONDAY
1 FEBRUARY 1999



Mrs Claire Curtis Thomas (Crosby): To ask the Secretary of State for the
Home Department, if he will place those documents held by his
Department relating to the Hillsborough disaster in Liverpool City
Library.




DRAFT REPLY


As much of the evidence as possible considered by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster has already been placed in the
Library of the House and it is open to Members to arrange for their
constituents to view it there. We have no plans to place copies of the material
in Liverpool City Library and I am sorry that my reply to the Rt. Hon Member
for Birkenhead [Official Report, 26 October 1998, Vol 318, Col 3] gave that
impression. I subsequently wrote to the Rt Hon Member on 7 December
setting out the position and placed a copy of that letter in the Library of the
House.




:odma\meridio\edrm#90209#l
BACKGROUND NOTE


Claire Curtis-Thomas’ Question refers to the material considered by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster. In response to a
request from Frank Field in the House on 26 October last year that the
material be placed in Liverpool Central Library, the Home Secretary indicated
that he believed this already to be the case. He later wrote to Mr Field to
explain that he had been mistaken and that, although the material had been
placed in the House Library and copies of the police statements provided to
the Family Support Group, the material was not being sent to Liverpool
Central Library. A copy of the letter was placed in the Library of the House.

2.     The Home Secretary wrote to Mr Field again on 12 January this year
confirming the position after he asked the Home Secretary to consider why it
was not possible to comply with his request. Copies of the relevant papers
are attached behind.

3.     Claire Curtis-Thomas has written to the Home Secretary (copy
attached) asking him to confirm whether the material is being placed in
Liverpool Central Library. Her letter was on behalf of her constituents, Mr and
Mrs Church, whose son died in the disaster and who have chosen not to be
members of the Family Support Group.




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90209# 1
