HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - CALLS FOR A FRESH INQUIRY

Accusation

There should be a fresh public inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster after new
revelations that police statements made following the disaster were altered to remove
criticisms of the police operation.

Facts

The Sunday Telegraph (28/2/99) carried a report alleging that it had uncovered new
evidence of the extent to which statements made by police officers following the
Hillsborough disaster were altered to remove criticisms of the control of the police
operation on the day. The tenth anniversary of the disaster in which 96 people died will
be marked on 15 April this year. The article claims that the scale and importance of the
alteration of statements was underestimated by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith when he
conducted a scrutiny at the Home Secretary’s request to determine whether there was
significant new evidence about the disaster which was not available to the earlier inquiry.

Shortly after the disaster, the police officers who had been present at Hillsborough were
required to record their recollections of the day. The officers’ statements were
subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they were in a suitable
form for submission to the judicial inquiry led by Lord Justice Taylor. In the majority of
cases, no recommendations were made on the officers’ statements. In some, though,
advice was given to remove comment, hearsay or inappropriate language. The South
Yorkshire Police’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of
a similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, published in February 1998, indicates that he
investigated this matter thoroughly after it was brought to his attention by the South
Yorkshire Police. He did not criticise the procedure followed, but there were several
statements where he believed it would have been preferable for the amendments not to
have been made, because what was removed was either factual or comment where factual
matters were implicit. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that the Taylor Inquiry were aware
that the statements had been vetted in this way and he was satisfied that it did not
materially affect the outcome of the Inquiry or other proceedings.

Line to take

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith investigated the alteration of police statements in detail in the
course of his scrutiny of the Hillsborough disaster which reported in February last year.
His findings were set out at length in Chapter Four of his report.

Although Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that there were some alterations which it would
have been preferable not to have made, he was satisfied that the procedure followed by
South Yorkshire Police had had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
the coroner’s inquest or the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions.

The Home Secretary accepted Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusion that there were no
grounds for a further inquiry into the tragic events at Hillsborough.




F:\Oppu\COMPLNTS\BRIEF\mp-0876.doc
