INTERVIEWS TN THE BOARDROOM

Background note on Mrs Anne Williams

(Monday 6 October. 1430 - 1500)


Mrs Williams lost her son Kevin, aged 15.

Kevin’s death figured prominently in the ‘Cook Report’, and the
Jimmy McGovern TV film featured allegations that the truth about it
has been deliberately distorted. PC Bruder and WPC Debra Martin
play an important part in the story.

Kevin died of asphyxiation. But he had four small fractures to his
voicebox, which had produced swelling. Mrs Williams and others
contend that he died because this swelling closed his airway and, in
his unconscious state, gradually choked him. If this is true then

       a)     he could well have been alive and still breathing when PC
              Bruder is said to have tended to him on the pitch (at
              about 3.35 to judge from the ambulance timings);

       b)     he could also have survived until Debra Martin was with
              him at just after 4, and her story that he died then could be
              true

       c)     he would not have died of traumatic or crush
              asphyxiation, and it would not be true that he died within
              minutes in the pens.

The significance is that

       a)     Kevin’s story casts doubt on the Coroner’s (supposed)


G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES .034
             ruling that all the victims were dead by 3.15;

      b)     it points up the inadequacy of the emergency medical
             intervention on the day;

      c)     there are allegations that West Midlands police tried to get
             Bruder and Martin to change their stories, in order
             presumably to fit Kevin in with the theory that everybody
             was dead by 3.15.

Mrs Williams petitioned the Attorney-General for permission to
approach the High Court to apply for a new Inquest, and was refused
(1992 and 1997). She was one of the parties to the Judicial Review
in 1993.

You have had a submission from her solicitor. I attach copies of the
covering note to that and of a letter which Mrs Williams wrote you in
September.

The main points which I suggest we might get her to cover in talking
to us are

      a)     what discussions she has had with Mr Bruder and Miss
             Martin;

      b)    the medical evidence about her son’s death; and

      c)    her concerns about the Coroners Certificate on Kevin -
             which seems to be confused about whether he died of an
             injury to the chest (i.e. crush asphxiation) or the neck
             (which could point to slow asphyxiation by choking).




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Derek Bruder

(Monday 6 October. 1515 - 1545)


Mr Bruder is the Liverpool policeman who is said to have helped
Kevin Williams as he lay on the pitch at about 3.35. He was at the
game as a spectator (and is now retired from the police).

I attach a copy of the letter you have had from him.

In discussion with him I suggest we get him to focus on

             what he did to help Kevin and what state the boy was in
             at the time;

             the differences between his two statements;

             the visit he had from a West Midlands Detective Inspector.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mrs Travnnr

(Monday 6 October. 1600 - 1630


Mrs Traynor lost her two sons Kevin, 16 and Christopher, 26.

She has sent you a very short letter (copy attached) - we have
nothing else about her sons.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Glover

(Tuesday 7 October. 0930 - 1000)


Mr and Mrs Glover lost their son Ian, aged 20.

They had two other sons at the match, who survived - one of them,
Joseph, was also caught in the crush and tried to revive Ian on the
pitch.

Joseph and Ian’s story featured in the Jimmy McGovern TV film.
That made some play of Joseph’s ordeal giving evidence to the
Coroner.

Mr Glover’s letter to you is attached.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Hicks

(Tuesday 7 October. 1015 - 1045


Mr and Mrs Hicks lost their two daughters, Sarah (19) and Victoria
( 15).


The family featured heavily in the Jimmy McGovern TV film. You
met Trevor Hicks last Tuesday - he is the Chairman of the Family
Support Group. He and his wife (Jenni) are separated.

Mr Hicks has not written to us, though he is well up with the
allegations about missing video evidence and other police chicanery
and lack of medical attention. We have a letter from Mrs Hicks
(attached) which makes the same kinds of point.

I suggest we let the Hicks’s make the running in our discussion with
them.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Church


(Tuesdav 7 October. 1115- 1145)


Mr and Mrs Church lost their son Gary, aged 19.

We have had a large amount of material from them (attached). They
have been through several solicitors, and fallen out with the
Hillsborough Steering Group (formed soon after the disaster by the
Liverpool solicitors acting for the different families) and possibly the
Family Support Group also.

They may well have their MP (Joe Benton) with them.

The Churches have been mired in litigation of various sorts - they
have even consulted (officials at) the European Court of Human
Rights. But their main concern seems to be the conduct of the inquest
and that they still do not know what happened to Gary.

We may have to point out that we cannot involve ourselves in the
problems they have had with lawyers. Our concern is simply to see if
they have - or can point us to - any new evidence about what
happened on the day or about how the police handled things
afterwards.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES .034
Background note on Mr & Mrs Jones


(Tuesday 7 October. 1200 - 1230)




Mr and Mrs Jones lost their son Richard, aged 25.

They are no relation to the other Jones family who are seeing you
tomorrow at 1200.

Their letter is attached. Their concern is with the Inquest on their
son and its verdict - they believe that evidence has been suppressed.

Their letter mentions the complaints against Hillsborough officers,
some of which Mr Jones made himself. It says that some of these
were upheld, but this is so only in the sense that the PCA
recommended that the officers be disciplined.

As we know no officer was disciplined - Duckenfield of course retired
sick.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Roberts


(Tuesday 7 October. 1400-1430)


Mr and Mrs Roberts lost their son Graham, aged 24.

Copies of their letters are attached.

Their main concerns are that they do not know what happened to
Graham on the day, that the information they have about him is
inadequate and confusing, and that this shown the defects of the
Inquests not just on Graham but on others as well.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Hammond


(Tuesday 7 October. 1445-1515)


Mr and Mrs Hammond lost their son Philip, age 14.

You met Mr and Mrs Hammond on Tuesday. Mr Hammond is also
called Philip - he is vice-chairman of the Family Support Group.

Like Mr and Mrs Hicks they are well informed about the various
allegations of police chicanery and incompetence and the defects of
the Inquests.

Mrs Hammond has written you a letter (attached).




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Aspinall and Mr & Mrs Steele

(Tuesday 7 October. 1545-1615)


Mr and Mrs Aspinall lost their son James, aged 18.

Mr and Mrs Steele lost their son Philip, aged 15.

They have sent you a joint letter - attached - with the Joynes family
(who have asked for a separate meeting with you, fixed for 1400
tomorrow). Also attached are copies of letters which the Aspinalls
and Steeles have sent you on their own account.

The concerns are the inquest verdict and the fact that no police were
prosecuted.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Robinson

(Tuesday 7 October. 1630-1700)




Mr and Mrs Robinson lost their son Steven, aged 17.

Mrs Robinson’s letter to you is attached (she may be accompanied not
by her husband but by her other son       ). Her concerns are with the
video evidence, police cover-ups, the 3.15 cut-off, and the failure to
implement the major disaster plan.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mrs Stringer

(Wednesday 8 October. 0930-1000)


Mrs Stringer lost her son Paul Carlile, aged 19.

Her letter to you is attached. Concerns are policemen lying, inability
to get documents from the police, and that there was ‘vital evidence’
about her son not put before the jury.

I suggest we try to concentrate on what this evidence was.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mrs Sinclair


(Wednesday 8 October. 1015-1045)


Mrs Sinclair lost her brother Michael Kelly.

Her letter is attached (with her daughter’s). Concerns are the medical
evidence and the missing videos.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mrs Sefton


(Wednesday 8 October. 1115-1145)


Mrs Sefton lost her son Andrew, aged 23

Andrew is one of the people who are thought to have died after 3.15.
Mrs Sefton believes that there are aspects of his death which have
never been properly cleared up.

Her letter to you is attached.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES .034
Background note on Mr & Mrs .Tones


(Wednesday 8 October. 1200- / 230)


Mr and Mrs Jones lost their son Gary, aged 18.

No relation to the Jones’s you saw yesterday.

Their letter is attached. They believe that Gary’s death was not an
accident, and feel cheated by the inquest and the legal system. They
criticise the Coroner and the 3.15 cut-off.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES.O34
Background note on Mr & Mrs Jaynes


(Wednesday 8 October. 1400-1430


Mr and Mrs Joynes lost their son Nicholas, aged 27.

They sent you a joint letter - attached - with the Aspinall and Steele
families (whom you met yesterday). They have also written on their
own account.

As with the Aspinalls and Steeles the concerns are the inquest verdict
and the fact that no police were prosecuted.




G:\HILLSBOR\MEETINGS\NOTES .034
