                                The City of Liverpool
                                P e r s o n n e l & A d m in is tra tio n D ire c to r a te
                               Peter Rhodes, Head o f Law & Committee Services
                               Solicitor to the Council
                               PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                               Tel: 0151 -225 2404 Fax: 0151 -225 2427




                                              ^ fe fw y u ii^ e s t o : C o l i n M o n e y p e n n y
                                          /     D i r’g c fe,. 'W n e : 0151
                                                Y q u r Refjj%.
                                                Our*'-£e f'TWS&y Q
                                                      % / '     S'* .-w V '
                                                        V .


R t . Hon Jack Straw MP                                   ^ /,         v *y
Home Secretary
Home Office
5 0 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                           \                                                  Nove


Dear Mr. Straw

Hillsborough Scrutiny

You will be aware from ~ir Ifcrtrr                  when I
expressed the welcome of Liverpool City Council to your decision
to appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake a Scrutiny of
evidence related to the Hillsborough Disaster, that the City
Council, through its Hillsborough Disaster Working Party, has
continuously and unanimously supported the Hillsborough families
throughout their eight year quest for justice.

I have now been requested by a recent meeting of the Working Party
to write to you again to express the full support of this Council
for the comments contained in the letter to you, dated 9th
November, 1997, from Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Hillsborough
Family Support Group. The Council considers that in particular you
should give serious consideration to responding positively to the
requests made in that letter for you to extend the timescale of
the Scrutiny to ensure that all the concerns of the families are
properly and fully investigated and for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
to be allowed to take possession and control of all the
documentation and evidence to ensure their integrity and their
disclosure to all parties.

In endorsing the above requests, the City Council feels that for
you to act upon them would be entirely consistent with the
comments made by you on 3 0th June stating that you were determined
to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked -and that
you did not reach a conclusion without a full and independent
examination of the evidence. The Council, as I have said, did
support the announcement of the Scrutiny and was particularly re­
assured by your comments, even though its own position at that
time, was that sufficient reasons and sufficient cause for concern
had already been demonstrated to justify the establishment of a
new Inquiry into the Disaster.




                     Director o f Personnel & Administration: Ian Jones
                   Administration & Commercial Services; Human Resource Service;
         Information Technology Services; Law & Committee Services; Legal Services Agency;
                               Public Relations & Information Service.
You should be aware that Liverpool City Council has now expressed
extreme dissatisfaction with the entire Scrutiny process. There is
a specific concern, I understand being expressed to you by the
Family Support Group, which is again shared by this Council, that
its terms of reference are so narrow that they prevent the
assessment of all the evidence which the families believe, in the
interests of justice, need to be assessed.

Furthermore I have been requested also to place on record the
extreme concern of this Council that the appalling remarks made by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith - a reference to Liverpool fans arriving
late for which he subsequently apologised - prior to his meeting
with families on October 6th, do appear to indicate a severe lack
not only of judgement but more importantly of the impartiality
which should be the most crucial attribute necessary for ensuring
the independence of the judicial assessment he was appointed to
make.

While the City Council will await the outcome of the investigation
with great interest, there is no doubt there is a widespread
feeling, certainly amongst the Members of the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party but also throughout the wider Merseyside
community, that the offensive comments made by Mr. Stuart-Smith at
the Albert Dock, indicating at least some pre-judgement of the
issues, may well have demonstrated that, in addition to the other
difficulties discussed above, he personally is not able to provide
the balanced and fully independent assessment of the evidence to
which the Hillsborough families after all these years are surely
entitled.

I would be most grateful if you would be able to take on board all
of the above comments in considering your response to the letter
from Mr. Hicks and in determining the future progress of the
Scrutiny.


Yours sincerely



Colin Moneypenny
Committee Clerk to the Hillsborough
Disaster Working Party.
