                                            ANNEX B

                                                (V'O




ADJOURNMENT DEBATE FRIDAY 24 JANUARY:   IMPLEMENTATION
THE TAYLOR REPORT


                   BACKGROUND NOTES
BACKGROUND NOTES:   INDEX

Page 1   GEORGE HOWARTH MP

page 2   SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND

         The Safety Of Sports Grounds Act 1975
         Grounds Designated Under The Safety Of Sports Grounds
         Act 1975
         The Football Spectators Act 1989

Page 3   The Fire Safety And Safety Of Places Of Sport Act 1987

         Should The Home Office Guide To         Safety At     Sports
         Grounds Be Mandatory?

Page 4   OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

Page 5   STEWARDING


Page 6   WHO IS GOING TO PAY FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF TAYLOR?

         FA Premier League

Page 7   Reduction In   Pools   Betting   Duty   To   Assist   Ground
          Improvement
         Will The Premier League Clubs Continue To Have Access
         To This Money?
         Grants For The Rest Of This Season And The Forthcoming
         Close Season
Page 8   When Will The Government Announce Its Decision On
         Whether To Extend The Pools Betting Duty Concession
         For A Further 5 Years?

         What Will Be The Fee For Licences Issued By The FLA?

         Why Should Football Clubs Which Attract Small Crowds
         Go To The Expense Of Installing Seats When The Cannot
         Currently Fill Their Grounds?


Page 9   WHY THE ALL-SEATER PRINCIPLE HAS NOT BEEN EXTENDED TO
         OTHER SPORTS - if pressed
REASONS FOR NOT IMPLEMENTING TAYLOR'S RECOMMENDATION
No 24
What Is Recommendation No 24?
The Government's Initial Reaction
Why The Government Reconsidered
A Better Alternative
Right Of Appeal Against The Provisions Contained In A
Safety Certificate


POLICE RESPONSIBILITY AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES

Draft Speaking Notes on Police Responsibility       and
Disciplinary Procedures - if required
  GEORGE HQWARTH MP



  Lab: Knowsley North

  Co-sponsored Lawrence Cunliffe's Bill to extend compensation for
  injury and bereavement (Dec 1988)

  Insisted that a more effective emergency telephone system should
  have been set up for anxious relatives after Hillsborough (Apr
  1989)

  Wrote to the Secretary of State on 5 November 1991 on why the
  police officers involved (and in particular Chief Superintendant
  Dukenfield , the Ground Commander on the day of the disaster)
^^were not prosecuted, and why there was not a 'detailed
   investigation' into the policing of the event. Lord Ferrers sent
  Mr Howarth a full reply on 26 November 1991 - see note on Police
  Responsibility and Disciplinary Procedures below.
SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND



The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

This Act applies to all sports grounds with accommodation for
spectators.   Safety controls are imposed primarily by safety
certificates issued by local authorities for grounds designated
under the Act by the Secretary of State. Any sports ground which
has accomodation for over 10,000 spectators and at which
football, rugby union/ rugby league or cricket are played may
require designation.

The terms and conditions of a safety certificate are for the
local authority to determine although they are expected to comply
with the guidelines set out in the Home Office Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide).



Grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 197.5


There are over 160 Designated sports grounds in England and
Wales. Of these 91 are Football League grounds. (There is one
non—designated ground in the Football League: Torquay's/ with
accommodation for fewer than 10,000 spectators.



The Football Spectators Act 1989

This Act created the Football Licensing Authority (FLA), a non-
departmental public body which was set up to ensure the
implementation of certain key recommendations in Lord Justice
Taylor's Final Report into the Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Stadium disaster; in particular recommendation nos 1-4 (on the
introduction of all-seated accommodation) and 6(a), relating to
a national inspectorate and review body.
The main instruments ensuring compliance with the Taylor
recommendations will be licences issued by the FLA for grounds
used for matches designated under the 1989 Act.

A designated match under the 1989 Act is one which involves a
team which represents a Football League club, a country, or club
from outside England and Wales - provided that the match takes
place at a around which is designated under the 1975 Act.

Section 9 of the 1989 Act, which creates the offence of admitting
spectators to unlicensed premises, will be brought into force in
time for the first licences to be issued in the summer of 1992.



The Fire Safety and Safety of Places Of Sport Act 1987
I
Part III of the Act brought into effect a system of safety
certification and subsequent inspection of stands able to
accommodate under cover at least 500 spectators ('regulated
stands') at sports grounds not designated as requiring a safety
certificate under the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975. As with
the 1975 Act, the terms and conditions of a safety certificate
are for the local authority to determine.

The Football Licensing Authority has no jurisdiction over safety
certificates for regulated stands.



Should the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the
'Green Guide1 be mandatory ?


We see the Green Guide as simply that - Guidance. There must be
discretion to allow for the variation which exists even across
the 90 or so Football League grounds; not to mention those in the
other leagues, Scotland etc. Remember also that the Green Guide
does not apply only to football but to all sports grounds,
regardless of size or of the sport played.


                                3
  OFFENCES AND PENALTIES


  The   Government   broadly   accepted   Lord   Justice   Taylor's
  recommendations that four new offences should be created
  specifically in relation to football matches. Three of these -
  throwing missiles; indecent or racialist chanting; and going on
  to the playing area - were created by the Football (Offences) Act
  1991. This was a Private Member's Bill introduced by Sir John
  Wheeler following the inquiry of the Home Affairs Committee into
  Policing Football Hooliganism.     The Bill was supported and
  substantially redrafted by the Government and was welcomed on all
  sides of the House.    Mr Lloyd will recall that he took the
  measure through the House.


    We attempted, during the passage of the Bill, to extend it to
^ c r e a t e also the fourth offence recommended by Taylor, that of
    selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
    authority.       Thiswas intended to act against ticket touts.
    Unfortunately, Sir John Wheeler had drafted his original Bill in
    such a way as to have amendments to include ticket touting ruled
  outside its scope by the House authorities.       A     commitment to
  legislate remains but, in view of the very crowded Parliamentary
  timetable, this is not a priority.

  Taylor also recommended the extension of attendance centre orders
  to adults.     Thishas been rejected as beyond the scope and
  capability of attendance centres. Consideration of electronic
  tagging for football offenders is current as part of the
  discussions about implementation of the Criminal Justice Act
  1991.
  STEWARDING

  Taylor was very critical of the calibre of stewards employed by
  football clubs.   Often, they were too young or too old or too
  decrepid to preform their duties effectively.      He therefore
  recommended that clubs should recruit more appropriate persons
  to act in this capacity. To attract the right kind of applicant,
  remuneration would have to be increased to a realistic level
  rather of merely offering free entrance to the game as was common
  practice. This encouraged stewards to watch the game rather than
  concentrating on their functions.

  Taylor argued that improving the quality of stewarding would
  enable police numbers to be reduced. This is correct, although
  there will always need to be some police presence giving their
^^peculiar powers under the law. Clubs have been slow to recognise
  that it is in their interest to employ effective stewards and
  thus reduce their police presence - and police bill. The move
  towards full economic charging for police services should
  certainly bring this home and there is some evidence that clubs
  are starting to move in the right direction.

  The Football League Limited have put together, with help of ACPO,
  a training package which clubs can adapt to their own particular
  circumstances. This is not at all a bad attempt. Officials met
  the League and the police during the preparation of this package
  and are due to meet again soon to review progress on the
  recruitment and training of stewards.   On recruitment, the League
  has also attempted some central action: we are not yet sure as
  to how successful this has been.
  WHO IS GOING TO PAY FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF TAYLOR?

  Football Association Premier League


  The FA's "Blueprint for the Future of Football" was published in
  June 1991 and contained proposals for a Premier League, which
  would break away from the Football League. The majority of clubs
  in Division 1 of the Football League later voted to accept the
  FA's plans and leave the Football League at the end of this
  season.

  The original proposals put forward by the FA were that the
  Premier League would consist only of 18 clubs and there would
  therefore be fewer matches per season for the players in the
  country's top teams.   This, it was argued, would benefit the
^players, improve the quality of matches and improve the England
  team. Clubs in the Premier League would be expected to have an
  all-seated ground with a capacity of at least 20,000.

  It was originally envisaged that there would be greater
  commercial opportunities for the clubs in the Premier League and
  that the revenue would be divided between fewer clubs than at
  present.

  However, the FA have yet to prove from where this extra revenue
  will be obtained. In addition, the prospective member clubs have
  since voted for the Premier League to consist initially of 22
  teams with a reduction to 20 in the near future.

  Whilst it is expected that the Premier League will commence in
  August this year there appears to be a long way to go before this
  happens. There is also an underlying threat that the prospective
  Premier League members may even break away from the FA and set
  up their own league.




                                 £
Reduction in Pools Betting Duty to assist ground improvements


In his budget of 1990 the Chancellor made available £100 million
to the football industry over a five year period.              This was in
recognition of the expense of the work that needs to be carried
out at many grounds.         The Football Trust was    selected by the
Government to be the vehicle for channeling this grant aid to all
Football League c lu b s .


Will Premier League clubs continue tb have access to this money?


There is some question as to whether the Premier League clubs
will continue to have access to the monies made available by the
Government.    We are concerned that any new money arising from the
Football     Association's     initiatives,   as    outlined     in   their
Blueprint, should not just benefit those clubs at the top of the
game.


I know that discussions have been held involving the FA and the
prospective Premier League members to decide on how any income
from these initiatives should be split.            I am also aware that
until the relevant commercial contracts have been signed it will
be difficult to agree on the final split of these funds.


However, before the Government is able to consider the case for
the Premier League clubs having access .to these monies, it will
need to have a clearer picture from the Football Association of
the likely allocation of these funds.



Grants   for the rest of this      season and the     forthcoming close
season


We take the view that the Football Trust should continue to judge
each grant application on its merits, having regard to needs and
resources,    under the terms of the Trust's resolution of April
1990.    We would therefore support a Trust decision to pay grant
to   any   club    in   the    present   first    Division      for     works   to    be
completed or substantially under way by the end of this close
season.



When will       the Government announce          its decision on whether              to
extend the Pool Betting Duty concession for a further 5 years?


Such   a decision       is    a matter   for    the Treasury.           However,     the
Government      have     already   indicated          that   football    must      first
demonstrate       its   own   commitment   to making he necessary               ground
improvements.



What will be the fee for licences issued by the FLA?


The level of licence fees is currently the subject of discussions
between the Home Office and the Treasury.                    An announcement will
be made as soon as agreement has been reached.


Why Should Football Clubs Which Attract Small Crowds Go To The
Expense Of Installing Seats When They Cannot Currently Fill Their
Grounds?


There is no need for Football League clubs with small attendances
to provide more seats than the number of spectators which they
expect     or   hope    to accommodate,        even    after   the    1994   and    1999
deadlines.       However, once the deadline has been passed they will
not be permitted to admit any standing spectators when designated
football matches are played.
  WHY THE ALL-SEATER PRINCIPLE HAS NOT BEEN EXTENDED TO OTHER
  SPORTS - if pressed

  The Government1s interim response to the Taylor Report on 29
  January 1990 indicated that 'designated sports grounds under the
  1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league grounds
  which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not be
  practicable to deal with in this way'.


  The Football Spectators Act does not apply to sports grounds
  other than those used for football.    All seated accommodation
  could not be achieved at rugby grounds without primary
  legislation and a significant input of money from Central
  Government sources (there being no parallel to the Pools Betting
  industry which provides some of the support for ground
^improvement at association football matches).


  As Taylor ackowledged in the introduction to his Final Report
  'crowd problems are directly related to the nature of the event
  and the numbers attending it...the numbers and the atmosphere at
  a football match have created special problems such as
  overcrowding and misbehaviour not, so far, to be found to a like
  degree elsewhere'


  In paragraph 85 of his Final Report, Taylor said 'wherever a line
  is drawn complaint may be made that it is illogical, but two
  possibilities seem more logical than most; either to confine
  recommendations to the 92 clubs in the Football League or to
  apply them to grounds designated under the 1975 Act as amended.'
  In the aftermath of Hillsborough, Taylor opted for the latter.
  Following consultation with those concerned, the Government has
  decided on the former.




                                 1
  REASONS FOR WOT IMPLEMENTING TAYLOR'S RECOMMENDATION No 24.



  What is recommendation 24?

  Taylor's 24th recommendation was that         the Secretary of State
  should exercise his powers under either       Section 6(2) or Section
  15(A) of the Safety of Sports Grounds         Act 1975 so as to make
  mandatory in safety certificates those        conditions specified in
  the original Section 2(2) of the 1975 Act.



  The   Government's initial reaction

    The Government accepted this recommendation in principle, and in
^ a n s w e r to a Parliamentary question on 10 May 1991 announced that
    an order under Section 15A of the 1975 Act would be made to
    implement recommendation 24, and that consideration would also
    be given to including within the scope of such an order provision
    which would require terms and conditions addressing other aspects
  of safety to be included in safety certificates.



  Whv the Government reconsidered

  However, having considered the matter further, it was considered
  that making such an order would be inappropriate. This was for
   the following reasons:

  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, as originally enacted,
  spelled out in Section 2(2) the minimum detail to be specified
   in   safety   certificates   which    were   to   be   issued   by   local
  authorities for designated stadia.

  The original Section 2(2) was removed from the 1975 Act by the
  Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.    Amongst



                                    10
  other things, this extended the requirements      for designated
  stadia to cover designated sports grounds.

  In making this change a new Section 15(A) was introduced into the
  1975 Act which, together with the new Section 2(2), empowered the
  Secretary of State by order to modify or to specify the terms and
  conditions which should be provided for the safety certificates.


  The 1987 Act in fact removed the original Section 2(2) from the
  1975 Act because it was felt that Section 2(2) narrowed the
  concept of safety. The thinking behind this was that, whilst the
  provision might have been useful in 1975 in directing local
  authorities to the relevant issues in a new area of law, that
  usefulness had become outlived.

^ T h e tragic events at Hillsborough 2 years later raised doubts
    about this line of reasoning, but the 1987 legislation received
  the approval of Parliament. The Government feels that it would
  be inappropriate to make subordinate legislation now, by means
  of an Order under Section 15(A), which would restore a provision
  which Parliament had, in fact repealed. Whilst the Government
  still accepts the principle of the recommendation which was made
  by the Taylor Report,      there would be       difficulties in
  implementing recommendation 24 in exactly the manner in which
  Lord Justice Taylor proposed.



  A better alternative


  However, Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 came into
  force on 3 June 1991.      This Section empowers the Football
  Licensing Authority to keep under review the discharge by local
  authorities of their function under the Safety of Sports Grounds
  Act 1975 in relation to sports grounds at which designated
  football matches are played.
  It also empowers the Authority to require a local authority to
  include in a safety certificate issued to a ground designated
  under the 1975 Act any such terms and conditions as the FLA see
  fit.  The FLA intend to regard these as reserve powers, to be
  used only after consultation with the local authority, the chief
  officer of police and the fire authority (where the local
  authority is in Greater London).



  Right of Appeal Against The Provisions Contained In A Safety
  Certificate

  Section 5 of the 1975 Act provides for a right of appeal against
  the inclusion of anything in, or the omission of anything from,
  a safety certificate.     However, there is no right of appeal
^^against the inclusion    in a safety certificate of anything
  required to be included in it by the FLA under Section 13(2) of
  the 1989 Act.

  We feel that using Section 13 of the 1989 Act serves to carry out
  Lord Justice Taylor's intentions, but in a more flexible manner
  and one in which we would avoid making an order under Section
  15(A) of the 1975 Act.




                                 11
BACKGROUND NOTE: fo li^ U W O & m X J               ^ £ sM k S


1    On 15 April 1989, 95 fans of the Liverpool Football Club
were crushed to death at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.
In conducting the subsequent inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor asked
the West Midlands Constabulary to make investigations on his
behalf.  Subsequently, further inquiries had to be made and a
number of statements taken (many under caution) to determine
whether criminal or disciplinary proceedings should be brought
against a police officer, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
Sheffield City Council or their advisers.


2    The Police Complaints Authority decided, when considering
the result of these investigations, that two officers of the
South Yorkshire Constabulary should answer to disciplinary
charges.       The senior of these officers,   Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield subsequently resigned on grounds of ill health, and
the PCA announced earlier this week that the remaining officer,
Superintendent Murray, should not be required to answer charges
in the absence of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.


3       None of these matters for Home Office Ministers but are the
responsibility of the Police Complaints Authority,         South
Yorkshire Constabulary and the South Yorkshire Police Authority.




GIM-M811.000
            foucfc <tsfo**sv&u\y W "bfttypmwy
  DRAFT SPWf'H FOR ADJOURNMENT DEBATE - FRIDAY 24 JANUARY 1992


  History


  1      As Mr Howarth       is aware the West Midlands Police Force

  undertook       two   major     investigations      into    the    events   at

  Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.


  2      The first of these investigations was, of course, the formal

  enquiry by the Lord Justice Taylor which was commissioned by the

  Home Secretary on the second day after the disaster.


4)3      The     investigation,     which was     inaugurated by the Taylor
  inquiry, involved some 440 officers from the West Midlands police

  force.         They took   some    3,776    statements    as well as    taking

  advantage of video films from 3 separate sources which provided,

  in all, some 71 hours of further evidence.


  4      This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted,                 and I

  think that it is fair to say that the interim report of Lord

  Justice Taylor on the disaster gives a very clear picture of

  police activity on the day.



  Criminal Proceedings


  5      In a second inquiry, which followed up their work for Lord

  Justice Taylor,        the West Midlands         Police    Force   conducted a

  further major investigation with a view to discovering whether

  the disaster resulted           from,   or was made worse by,          criminal

  GIM-M811.000



                                             If
activity on the part of any individual.                 The Director of Public
Prosecutions concluded that the results did not indicate that any

one should be made the subject of criminal proceedings.                      Perhaps
I could add a comment on this.              The conclusions at which the

Director of Public Prosecutions arrived mean that,                      so far as

anyone can discover - and the evidence which has been amassed has

been considerable - this terrible disaster was not the result of

criminal       activity.     .< The   result       is     that     neither     Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield nor Superintendent Murray - nor, for

that matter, any other person - has been charged with any crime.



Disciplinary Proceedings


6       For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end

of the matter.          For police officers, though, there remains the

question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,

they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as

police officers.


7       Another investigation of the event, of the day, therefore

covered        complaints   which     had   been        made     regarding    police

behaviour.       This investigation involved the taking of a further

5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of all the material

which had previously been examined.            It was supervised throughout

by the Police Complaints Authority.


8       The    Police    Complaints    Authority        subsequently     expressed

themselves as satisfied that it had been properly and thoroughly


GIM-M811.000
conducted.          The privacy of people               who complain against the
police         is   protected     by   the     courts.         The    results      of     this

investigation cannot therefore be published.


9      In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police

Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are required

to consider whether there are ways in which the officer may have
failed in his duty.             If so, they are required to arrange for a

formal hearing of the charges against him.


10     This was done.           After receiving the report of the complaint

investigation,            the   PCA    decided       that      Chief     Superintendent

Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary

charges.


11     A police disciplinary hearing is held in private.                                It is

concerned only with whether or not the officer concerned may have

failed to conform to police discipline.                      The hearing would not,

therefore,          in any way contribute to public knowledge of what

happened on the day,              nor would it do more than receive and

consider        the      evidence,     which    is   already         known,   as     to    the

propriety of Mr Duckenfield's conduct.


12      There       is    one    important      issue     in    relation        to      police

discipline which             is often     ignored.          There     are a number          of

punishments which can be imposed for bad discipline.                               The most

serious punishment, though, which a disciplinary tribunal can

impose, is that of dismissal or of requirement to resign.


GIM-M811.000
13      This is the heaviest punishment which it is possible to
award an officer for the very worst offence which he could have

committed.          In other words, his conduct must have been so bad

that it would be inappropriate for him to remain as a police

officer.


14      By retiring, in advance of whether or not he had been found

guilty,       Mr    Duckenfield    has,    in   fact,   done   what   the   worst

disciplinary judgement could have imposed upon him to do.                   He has

resigned.          He is no longer a police officer.             A disciplinary

hearing can no longer be undertaken against a person who is not

a police officer.



15      I am sure that you will understand that it would not be

proper for me to comment on the detail of Mr Duckenfield's case

other than to say that it needs to be remembered that it is by

no means certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found

Mr Duckenfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred

against him.



16      Whilst our sympathies are all very much with those who were

caught        up    in   this     terrible      tragedy,   the    position      of

Mr Duckenfield needs equally careful and just handling.



17      If Mr Duckenfield is a sick man, as seems to be the case,

it would not have been right to refuse him retirement on medical

grounds in order that charges could be heard against him, which

might or might not be proved, but whose most serious result could


GIM-M8U.000



                                      17
only be that he would leave the service which he was already
ready to leave voluntarily.


18      Finally, I should inform the House that on 13 January 1992

the Police      Complaints Authority     announced that disciplinary

proceedings against Superintendent Murray would be withdrawn.

When explaining their decision the Authority stated that the

retirement of the Chief Superintendent on medical grounds meant
that what is, in effect, a joint allegation of neglect of duty

could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more senior
officer.



19       The Government continues to deplore the terrible events at

Hillsborough but they were the product of a number of causes

coming together and little comfort is likely to be provided to

the     relatives   nor   anything   learnt   for   the   future   by   the

continuation of attempts to pin the blame on one or another

person.




GIM-M811.000
