                                        kJL /                         A —
                                                                    vxOJUL   2*-S-
                                         VvftJi             <- f~ J? C ^ iJA , ^ oyiM l^w v^
                                                  ( 'V'o;     o-A    11   ^ Y w y w sl'' >
                                                                                                cc Mr. Yates
                                                                                                  Mr. Chilcot
                                                                                                        HMCIC
                                                                                               Mr. Boys Smith
                                                                                               Mr. Malone-Lee
                                                                                                   Mr. Nagler
                                                                                                Mr. Sandiford
                                                                                                  Mr. Whalley
                                                                                                   Mr. Archer
                                                                                                   Mr. Durbin
                                                                                                 Ms. Ransford
 Mr. Adda.son
 FI Division


                       HILLS BOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY - P O L IC IN G C O S T S


      I refer to your note of 26th July concerning the options
 which will be available to us in the event of South Yorkshire
 Police Authority rejecting the offer made to them of a
 contribution in respect of the costs incurred by West Midlands
 Police in relation to the investigation arising from the
 Hillsborough Stadium tragedy.

     Sofar as     the setting up of the original investigation is
concerned, it      seems to be accepted by South Yorkshire thatthe
West Midlands      Police were commissioned by them and not by the Home
Office and that it is the subsequent widening of the ambit of that
investigation which has led to the dispute about responsibility
for meeting the costs. To that extent, our situation is better
 ■      w a s .ln relation to the further investigation in connection
with the Guildford and Woolwich bombing cases.

     We are, however, presented with other difficulties. We have
conceded that the investigation being carried out by the West
Midlands force does go beyond an inquiry related solely to the
policing of South Yorkshire, into an area of more general public
concern.  For this reason we have agreed that a contribution from
central government funds is appropriate and that South Yorkshire
are not legally liable to meet the whole bill. The issue between
the Home Office and South Yorkshire is therefore whether South
Yorkshire should pay anything towards the costs incurred by the
West Midlands force, and if something, how much.

      We have given a guarantee to West Midlands that the costs
they are incurring will not be borne by that police authority.
This is somewhat akin to the situation in the Guildford and
Woolwich case. Given that we apparently accept that South
Yorkshire are not liable to pay the entire costs, this can be
construed as an undertaking by us to reimburse wpst Minian^e »+■
o.=«ol.        uieir costs. Tne problem revolves around the extent
of our contribution and the machinery for paying it.

       Turning to the various options canvassed in your note, I
                       iaLand ib)
                         Prese?t no obvious legal difficulties, but
    e simply matters for negotiation with the Treasury and South
j- u i   n.snj.L e .



                                                                                                           1
              I do not think that it is really for us to advise West
         Midlands, either to sue or to take any other form of action.
         Nevertheless, it seems to me that to the extent that West Midlands
         are acting at the behest of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
         they have a good claim to recover the costs referable thereto.
         Which part of thei,r activities arises directly from that original
         request and what part constitutes an enlarged and separate inquiry
         for the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor is a question of fact which
         it might be far from easy to resolve.   It might wellbe
         embarrassing if it had to be resolved in public in the course of
         court proceedings.   Furthermore, as I have already mentioned, West
         Midlands might seek to argue that our guarantee that they will not
         have to meet the costs renders us liable in full if South
         Yorkshire cannot be persuaded to pay their share.

                  I agree with you that it is likely that if West Midlands

    ♦        decide to sue, the defendant might well be the Home Office either
             instead of or together with South Yorkshire. As I have indicated
             above, I think that any proceedings would be likely to result in
             an apportionment by the court between South Yorkshire and the Home
             Office; the court would not necessarily accept the basis of
             apportionment we have suggested.  It seems to me that the South
             Yorkshire police would be unlikely to be held liable to meet the
             full costs of the further investigation.    As to your suggestion
             that West Midlands might sue for the additional costs remaining
             after we have made to them the special payment we have offered to
             South Yorkshire, this seems to suggest leaving West Midlands out
             of pocket for a fair time. As we have offered to pay the costs
             beyond a particular sum, we could presumably make payment to West
           <■Midlands only when the costs of the investigation had already
    V.>SiS reached £975,000 (or has that happened already?),
       v*                                                       if we were to
       v-
       V-   be sued alone, I think it likely that we would decide to join
             fouth Yorkshire as a defendant.  I hope that if matters get that
.           f ' all concerned will regard it as preferable to negotiate a
          - settlement rather than submitting the matter to trial.

         - 4. ,
         4            Y°ur view that °Ption (d ) would be an unwise course
    ^    to take.  I think that our chances of reclaiming the money from
         South Yorkshire would be negligible.

              I am afraid that I am not much attracted either to option
         (e).  I do not think that Article 1(2)(b) of the Police Grant
             ~ 1966 would serve our purposes. As you suggest in paragraph
        12 of your note, if South Yorkshire refused to pay at all, there
        is nothing to form part of their gross expenditure.   In addition
        any payment they do make ought presumably to be recognized for the
        purposes of the payment of police grant. There may be some
        argument for using Article 2 in the way you suggest, but I am not
        convinced that this situation was really in the contemplation of
        that article.   I would want to give the matter further thought
        before recommending that we might take such a course, and I think
        that we could do so only after giving South Yorkshire warning that
        WJ           to withhold the grant in that way. A challenge by way
        of judicial review might well follow any withholding of grant in
        this way, and I would be uneasy about our prospects of success.

             I think that the Treasury's suggested option (f) seems a
        curious and unsatisfactory way of dealing with what we hope is a

                                                                             2
                                                             A




one-off situation.  In any case, there is certainly no power under
section 31 of the Police Act 1964 to make different provision for
different cases, by contrast with the power in section 33(5). We
do of course make a distinction in the case of the Metropolitan
police, but when I recently amended the Police Grant Order I did
have doubts about the vires but I went ahead because there was a
precedent for such differentiation. Making different provision
for different 1964 Act forces would, however, be a different
matter again and it doesn't seem to me that the enabling power is
adequate to do what has been proposed.

     I am of course very ready to discuss this further either now
or as the matter develops.




                                              P. A. EDWARDS (Miss)

LEGAL ADVISER'S BRANCH


7th August, 1989.




                                                                 3
