                                     (AJc^Jj       ( A   s * /?       6*-cA-
 (Aj          / ]   -   ^   tv,ow)
                                                   A a C cA a *W
From: N A Nagler                          jj t*r 2?^'
                                             or   ^'                   cc    Mr Malone-Lee
      Finance Division
                    Ion 2                                                   c/Mr Addison
      12 June 1989
      Ext 3472
                                               J                  £
                                                                  Q          Mr Whalley

                                                                                  ytUwi


Mr Storr

HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

Mr Whalley, the secretary to the Taylor inquiry, has offered some
comments on the draft letter to the Chief Secretary attached to
my submission of 8 June. Mr Whalley1s comments relate to the
content of the enquiries being undertaken by the West Midlands
Police, and suggest that it would be helpful to amend the draft
letter in order to strengthen our arguments with the Treasury.

I therefore suggest that paragraphs 5-6 of the draft letter be
amended as attached (new passages sidelined).




                                        N A NAGLER
5.   South Yorkshire have not yet accepted this point. They have
argued that the investigations are being dictated primarily by
the needs of the Taylor Inquiry and have ceased to be directed
towards the needs of their force. There is some validity in this
argument, although I do not accept South Yorkshire's conclusion.
It is clear that as a result of the decision to make the results
of the police investigations directly available to the Taylor
enquiry,^which was obviously a sensible arrangement, there is an
element in the investigation which is, for the sake of
convenience, being conducted for the benefit of that enquiry.
For example, statements were taken from those from whom the
selection of witnesses for the inquiry was subsequently made;
substantial video evidence has been analysed by the police for
the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor; and the police are urgently
following up at his request specific points arising on the
evidence as the inquiry progresses.

6. ^ The additional costs of the investigation were initially
estimated to be running at £1.7 million per month.   This covered
both the direct overtime worked by the 350 or so officers
involved and the^consequential overtime worked in West Midlands
to cover for their absence.   It also includes accommodation
costs, trarfport, subsistence and the like. There may be further
costs^associated with the investigation, such as use of computer
facilities and helplines, which may add to the costs. The scale
of the police commitment is being regularly reviewed by the
police and secretariat together.   The investigation is now being
scaled down substantially; even so West Midlands Police
Authority's tentative estimate of the total additional costs is
around £4-5 million.
                                                                                                                                                                                    /       X
                                             WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY                                                                    /Hw,
                                                                                                                                                                                    \
                                                                              A        A                                                           tA S       t/J
                                                                                                                                                          c/v v’n
                                                                                                                                                              C* x M   evvW I*.
    L.T BARNFIELD. LL.B                                                                                                 L egal S. V a lu a tio n
    Solicitor to the Authority                                                                                          Services ^ p a n t n n e n t                                    ^


    My Reference                LS/ G1 78/ LTB/ AB                                                                    Great C to ie s Street                            '           #

                                                                                                                        Birmingr
    Your Reference




    Thank you for your letter of 1st Jur                                                                                         ived on my return from
    leave.




    status of Mr. Dear's involvement from which all other difficulties arise.

    You will know that I take the view that Mr. Dear is involved either under
                                                                            under
                 iquiry provisions of the Home Office.

    If Mr. Dear's involvement stems from Section 14, then he is necessarily under
    the direction and control of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. If his
    involvement is under the public inquiry provisions, then he is under the
    direction and control of Lord Justice Taylor.

    Mr Dear has made the point throughout that he would not have agreed to become
        ■i         4 f   4- 1 ^ 4 M         r . m n     4-»-x   k/s    tt-I                i-ip                4-11 r\ 1   «-*     -f   T v\   K   4 «    4- f t l




    agreeing to take part in this matter, he went to some trouble to ensure that he
    Would be acting under the direction and control of Lord Justice Taylor and he
    has confirmed this with Lord Justice Taylor on a number of occasions. He has

;


        aid", and the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority h a s spoken to
        officers         * -u   ' '      r>„i
        meeting __ „_       ___    „          ___
        to the South Yorkshire Police Authority of 7th June all of which indicate that
        that Authority               Mr*          T\xrr\l
                                      f'3 r v o C 3   r-vr^f-  m-vtll'Jncr
                                                                T T 1 di.?        cr* n n o
                                                                                  ~i         u D t n n n - h      n a                   w i    t h i n     f h o


        of "mutual




                                                                                                                                                                            -




                                                                                                                                                                                .




    .
8th June, 1989                         -   2   -




You yourself acknowledged at the meeting on the 25th May (and I understand in
your meeting with South Yorkshire on 18th May) that the provisions of Section
14 do not apply. You stated that the involvement of the West Midlands Police
Force was "something akin to mutual aid" but, as I said to you, I know of no
provision which embraces that particular phrase.

You will be aware that Section 4 of the 1964 Act imposes a duty on Police
Authorities to secure an adequate and efficient Police Force for their areas.
That provision does not empower the West Midlands Police Authority to incur
expenditure for the provision of services for the benefit of either the South
Yorkshire Police Authority or the Home Office public inquiry.

I set this out at some length because it leaves the Chief Constable of the West
Midlands with considerable practical problems.

The South Yorkshire Police Authority does not accept that Section 14 or any
other "mutual aid" provisions apply (whatever they might be) and declines to
pay any bills in respect of the involvement of the West Midlands Force: The
West Midlands Police Authority has no power to pay such bills: The Home Office
denies any responsibility for such bills and suggests that the West Midlands
Police Authority pays them (albeit that such action would be ultra vires) and
then asks South Yorkshire for reimbursement.

Perhaps the point can best be illustrated by taking a particular example - the
lease of the office block which Mr. Dear has had to occupy in Sheffield in
order to conduct his enquiries and to be seen to be independent of the South
Yorkshire Police Force.

For the reasons set out above, the South Yorkshire Police Authority, the West
Midlands Police Authority, and the Home Office are all declining to enter into
the lease. Mr. Dear has necessarily incurred the cost and I agree that the
Police Force cannot now deny liability for the costs incurred - albeit that
such liability arises out of the request of the Home Office.

To that extent, the advice given by your Legal Adviser's Branch is correct, but
it does not address the question of how Mr. Dear gets reimbursed when none of
the other parties involved accepts liability.

If the Home Office continues to maintain its position in this matter, then it
seems that the only way forward is to ask for a writ to be served so that all
parties can be joined in and the courts can decide upon this issue. I find
that solution unpalatable in all the circumstances and one which I believe can
and should be avoided if Mr. Dear's account of the discussions with the Home
Office and Lord Justice Taylor are correct.  (I, of course, believe that they
are and no one has yet to deny that what he stated took place is true).



                                                   Cont/.
8th June, 1989                         -   3   -




In light of the above, I feel that I must ask you to place this letter before
your Legal Adviser's Branch and see whether they disagree with any of the
submissions I make. If they do not, then I look forward to hearing from you to
the effect that anycosts incurred will be reimbursed in full by the Home
Office and that you     will make arrangements for the processing ofthe accounts
with the Treasurer to the West Midlands Police Authority. If your Legal
Adviser's Branch disagree in any respect with the above, perhaps the individual
concerned could telephone me so that we can discuss the matter and, hopefully,
resolve it over the telephone to ensure that those who have been asked for and
provided services to the West Midlands Police in all good faith in connection
with this inquiry are reimbursed in full at the earliest possible date.

I am sending copies of this letter to the Clerk to the West Midlands Police
Authority , the Clerk to the South Yorkshire Police Authority and to Mr. Dear.




                           Solicitor to the Authority




M J Ad dison
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
Lond on  SW1H 9AT
