                                                                   Q >



                                        cc   Mr Johnson
                                             Professor Maunder
                                             Mr Sweet

Sir Peter


"SUNDAY TIMES" REPORT ABOUT CONSERVATIVE PARTY CONFERENCE


You may remember asking about the Sunday Times report of 15
October about the Conservative Party Conference. After
consultation with the Home Secretary's Political Adviser, I have
spoken to a lady at Conservative Central Office.

Her general point was that the computer based system for pass
issues worked relatively well. The press article was in fact
referring to a number of people who found their passes had not
been sent to them in advance. This was due to late applications
rather than problems with the system.

In more detail, Central Office had nearly 10,000 applications for
passes for the Conference. They set out clear closing dates for
applications, but some 1,300 people left their applications too
late. Central Office sent out passes where they could (by
recorded delivery) but many people were out when the packages
arrived in the post, and did not then go to the Post Office to
pick them up. Others would clearly not have reached their
destination in time, and some 2,500 were taken by hand to
Blackpool to be distributed there. Some 60% of these were passes
for the media, because of rules about distributing media passes
only in person upon proof of validated identity.

Central Office maintained two systems to record the details of
those to whom passes were issued: a card system, to which is
clipped one of the two photographs sent in: and a computer
system, which contains the personal details of all those to whom
passes are issued. Thus the computer can be called up if someone
claims to have lost his pass. The pass contains one of the
photographs sent in. There is a system, used by the Welsh
Conservative Office for their conferences, by which the
photograph can be incorporated in to the pass. It is a Kodak
system, which is very expensive.  (We might pursue with Ernst and
Young whether they have a system of this kind in mind).

The problems at Blackpool arose essentially from the need to
process large numbers of people in a confined space. There was
much congestion outside the Conference Centre, and the police
were anxious that it should not spill onto the road or otherwise
hinder the routes for emergency vehicles in the event of an
incident.


                                                 RMyJ
13 November 1989                             R M WHALLEY
                                         cc:   Mr Yates




Hr R M Whallev


            HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

                   "SUNDAY TIMES" REPORT ABOUT
                  CONSERVATIVE PARTY CONFERENCE


I have spoken to Gaynor Ramsey at Conservative Central Office
about this report.

2.   She tells me the computer-based system for pass issues
     worked relatively well. What the article seems to refer
     to is a number of people who found their passes had not
     been sent to them in advance. This was due to late
     applications rather than problems with the system.
3.   She is very willing to talk to you directly to answer any
     further questions.




                          JOHN GODFREY

8 November 1989
E.R.

                                               cc   Mr Yates


       Mr Lidinaton



       HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY
       SUNDAY TIMES REPORT ABOUT CONSERVATIVE PARTY CONFERENCE


       You will have seen the report in the Sunday Times for 15 October
       about the alleged computer malfunction at the Conservative Party
       Conference.   For convenience, I attach a copy of the article.

       2.   Lord Justice Taylor is, as you know, now looking at the
       Government's detailed proposals for a national membership scheme
       for football supporters. He is looking particularly at how large
       numbers of people can be processed according to computer based
       systems. With that in mind, the article I refer to caught his
       eye (the markings on the copy attached are his).

       3.   I wonder if you would be able to help me find out some of
       the detail behind this alleged incident. I have, of course,
       asked Mr Brian Johnson, one of Lord Justice Taylor's assessors,
       but he tells me that the system which failed was one operated by
       the Conservative Party themselves and not by the police. I
       should be grateful for your advice, either in the form of some
       detailed information, or with a contact who could supply that for
       me.




                                              R M WHALLEY
                                         Secretary to the Inquiry
       3 November 1989
Lin c o l n     H annah    L im it e d   M e d ia S c a n                                          SUNDAY 15th October 1989
■91 W o n hip Street. London EC2A 2IE Tel: >77 1742 / 247              SHI   F u : 177 t t o i




                SIXDAV TOXGRAPI!

                  Auschwitz revisited m
                 O THOSE applauding the
                              *" fcefc*»ioBr of
                England soccer fans in Poland
                                                                     Tickets plea 3
                g**1*!."?* *>*e witnessed one                                         fbotteHine
                •■edifying sight.                                                a n to be n rn d
                       group was spotted giv-                        ^ 9°“?. MoyBihan. the
                                                                     g « 1 * Minister, to agree a
                 M furled Union Jack while
                 *<*ng photographed by one of
              ' ~ *,r w jrt* r tor (he ‘family’
                         This was not in Katowi-                     c*«eddedsion to make tick­
                           r           bnt in the                    ets unobtainable on match
                middle of the nearby Ausch­                          4 ^ is needed to deter hoo­
                witz concentration camp.                             ligans from travelling.
                        charitable interpreta-
                Ito n is that these young men
                           appreciate exactly
                iV V th e y were doing. The
               alW native is too chilling to
               contemplate.


                               SUNDAY IB ffiS                                LAST WORD
                                                                             by Edward Pearce
         Fate waits for
         Moynihan at p?
         the turnstiles
       A MILL of delegates aroand                  The point made hero earlier
                                                 ahoat the *aiet lapse of the
       the Winter Gardens, Black-                JhlglMrapper eatry-gates at
       W li an the opening day of the            Underground stations will he
      conference, and the admission              paralleled after the first throe
     Jh a t compnter error had at one            computer-triggered mass ex-
    Httage lost l,400 delegates in              dusions at league grounds.
      (god standing, is not ' al-               The idea was ofcourse entirely
      to |w u r amusing, but Jim                Margaret Thatcher’s, carried
      Lester, MP lor Broxtowe,                  against the despairing better
      Nottinghamshire, is falling               judgment of senior colleagues.
      quietly about                             But as with the falling pound
         It was be who poured most              she will of coarse find some-
      acorn apon the government’s               hady to blame. Pity abeatj
      favourite banch of legislative            Cebu Moynihan.
      bananas, the scheme to en­
      force electronic card-holding
    . membership of football dabs.
     The Winter Gardens are at
      bast not chadded by elec­
     tronic turnstiles. The idea of
     the White Hart Lane com­
      puter performing with similar
     efficiency and going down at
     2-50 on the afternoon of a
     match attended by persons
     father In s submissive to the
     order of things than Conser­
     vative party delegates, struck
     the liberal-minded Lester as
     M oa a stick and all the
     Olostratioa of the broad ab­
     surdity of governmental fool­
     ishness he could have asked
     for.


                                                                                                                              Z.5
