Tog,         IN fO tf.A 'lrtTto/si ;

 H g iU £     secctk<xAj
H f HiCMoJii
n r o * fi/.e a
k O / ' d U 'i U x i a - M . $
f i r O H C kJvd                                          H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
Hf    8ouS       Sm     v'tn                                  LONDONSW1AOAA
H f P jl Cj K


tif   /gcctutr
Nr /                               COMMENT BY GEORGE HOWARTH MP ON LORD JUSTICE STUART-
m C liffo rd                                  SMITH’S REPORT ON HILLSBOROUGH
nr W arner

                                 “ I have every sympathy with those who lost family and friends in the appalling
                                 tragedy at Hillsborough. As a Merseyside MP and someone who was born
                                 and bred here, I share the deep sense of frustration that nobody has been
                                 held to account for what happened.

                                 That’s why I supported the Home Secretary’s decision to ask Lord Justice
                                 Stuart-Smith to undertake a scrutiny of the evidence to examine whether
                                 there should be a further judicial inquiry or new action taken against any
                                 individual or organisation.

                                 I have read through Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report very carefully, and I
                                 find it impossible not to accept the Home Secretary’s view that, together with
                                 the Taylor Report, it deals fully with what happened on that fateful day.

                                 But that is not to say that nothing can be done. The Home Secretary has
                                 given assurances that the police disciplinary procedures are to be altered and
                                 new coroners procedures are to be introduced for such tragic occurrences in
                                 the future.

                                 Much of the anger and frustration has been directed towards me personally,
                                 and I understand that. But I know in my own heart that any evidence which
                                 needed looking at, whether old or new, has now been considered.

                                 Lord Justice Taylor in his original report was right to apportion blame to the
                                 police and others and the Lord Justice Stuart-Smith report confirms that. I
                                 cannot turn the clock back. But I can and will do everything in my power to
                                 ensure the systems are changed so that people will never be let down in this
                                 way again”.




                                 Contact number: 0151 546 9918
