                                m-ufrr^        g May
                                                 ]   1989

                                fY) i—    —J   .




          O w   J V v v S
    Thank you for your letter of 20 April about the provision of
first aid facilities at sports grounds.

    As Robin Ferrers explained in his letter of 21 February the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 does not empower us to issue
the sort of statutory guidelines that St John Ambulance were
seeking; but we were intending to update the Guide to Safety of
Sports Grounds and would include information on the provision of
first aid facilities.

    The system of safety certification by local authorities is
the way in which statutory requirements are brought to bear on
ground operators. The question of whether this is the best
system or whether changes need to be made are matters which the
Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor will no doubt look at.

    I think in the circumstances it might be better not to pre­
empt the Inquiry recommendations. I know that the St John
Ambulance intend to provide evidence to the Inquiry. However, if
you are still keen to discuss this issue now, Robin Ferrers, as
the Minister of State at the Home Office responsible for dealing
with emergencies, would be very happy to see you.




Neil Thorne, Esq, OBE, TD, MP
House of Commons
                      N E IL T H O R N E , O B E ., T D ., M .P .




                         H O U SE
                               L O N L „„
^9   ■yLi
                               20th April 1989

                                                                    fa//'       S §yvu/U

                                                                    jJ ir
            '   < k
                                                                    M r t f _           =V
                                                                    fA j- f\J\$AM *S'
                                                                    M / C*
     It is always easy to be wise after the event but I
     did write on 26th January to Robin Ferrers warning
     him on behalf of St John Ambulance of the danger
     in which the Home Office could find itself if it
     failed to take the initiative in layingdown a
     national code for public safety at spoxtsTgrounds.

     Would it be possible to have a meeting with you
     early in June,in order to let the dust settle after
     Hillsborough, so that we could discuss what really
     needs to be done to ensure that proper attention is
     paid to the necessity of providing adequate cover for
     spectators at sporting events?

     At present the decision to leave with the local
     authority the responsibility for deciding on the
     level of care seems to have been proved woefully
     inadequate.

     I enclose a cutting from The Times of 18th April 1989
     in case you have not already seen it.




     The Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP,
     Secretary of State,
     Home Office,
     50 Queen Anne's Gate,           t
     London SW1H 9AT.
                                 ST JOHN AMBULANCE

   Medical c?4fronthe cheap
       By Ronald Faux
 The St John Ambulance Bri-
 t? dV s,      I» id £35 by the
           Wednesday football
 club for providing medical
 cover at Hillsborough on Sat­
 urday. The volunteer oigani-
zation, which had two ambu­
lances and 30 officers at the s s y s ^ b f y s ? .
match, receives a flat-rate                                    . _ John has 63,000 mem-
donation of £5 for every 5,000     Usually 10 St John officers      wh,° P“» in about four
spectators —generous by the would be ready to give first rmlJ!on hours « year of unpaid
standards of some clubs.        aid. Because Saturday’s match serv,ce>

  Mr Derek Fenton, com-
inander of the London district
                                 wSssKsr fiwawas
                                 r “V"? f °™ hire ambulances for cover at matches.
                                 and their crews.            pool paid £J 500
                                                                                     L iv e r
 8     ra h
      CO

r    T
      c r.


ft   &o
