                IWm<V-               £k~ftar

S h effield T rades U n io n C o u n c il
                                               Established 1858


PRESIDENT: Blanche Flannery         TREASURER: Albert Bedford          SECRETARY: W.H. (Bill) Ronksley

                      N m.                                               Trades & Labour Club
Your Ref:                                                                Talbot Street
                                    a d c -+     { lo * .     J’b 11     Sheffield S2 2TG
Our Ref:                                                                 (0742) 750744 I 349747 (home)
                             •CVVcLvicta.
                                                                           10th Uovember, 1989,
       Ir. R.X. Vhallcy,                      ISj^l
       Secretary to the Inquiry,
       Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster,
       50, Queen Anne's Gate,
       London,
       SV1H 9AT.

       Dear Mr, Vhalley,
                              HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY.

       Vitb reference to your letter dated 22nd May, 1989, in which you stated
       that Lord Justice Taylor would find It convenient if the Sheffield
       Trades Onion Council could put it's detailed submission to hi® in
       writing.

        Following receipt of your letter the Trade Union Safety Committee of the
        Sheffield Trades Onion Council and, additionally, a number of Delegate
        Meetings of the Council have given serious consideration to the
        circumstances giving rise to the Disaster and to Lord Justice Taylor s
        Interim Report.

        The October Delegate Meeting of the Sheffield Trades Union Council
        unanimously approved the submission which is attached to this letter as
        an Appendix for consideration by Lord Justice Taylor.

           In the event of Lord Justice Taylor requiring further Information on
           this submission, or elaboration of points made therein, the Sheffield
           Trades Onion Council would be only too pleased assist.

                                 Yours sincerely,
                                  jurS S i n o c i TV *      y)   >1



                                  W.H. Ronksley,
                                  Secretary.
SUHKISSIOI.

Introduction.

1. Sheffield TUC wrote to Lord Justice Taylor on 17.5.89 asking that two
   specific issues be addressed by the Inquiry, namely:

    (i> the adequacy or otherwise of the emergency plans which were
        in place at the time of the Disaster:

   (ii> the need for football clubs to es t a bli sh consultative
        machinery via which the knowledge and experience of football
        spectators can influence arrangements at football grounds.

2. Sheffield TUC was subsequently asked to produce a written submission.

Emergency Plans.

3. Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report makes little direct reference
   to implementation of emergency plans. Paragraphs 96, 107, and 252
   refer to the Police activation of the Major Disaster Plan CMDP),
   which is presumably a "general" Disaster Plan, rather than an
   emergency plan tailored to the specific circumstances of a major
   football match at the Hillsborough Stadium. It would appear from
   the Report's recommendations 26 - 43 (which the STUC welcomes) that
   the MDP was assessed by the Inquiry and found to be lacking in
   relation to events at Hillsborough but this is not specifically
   stated in the body of the Report. If the Major Disaster Plan proved
   defective in relation to the Hillsborough Disaster, what confidence
   can the public place in it's effectiveness in the event of other
   disasters ?

4. Sheffield TUC believes that there are close parallels between the
   emergency planning requirements of major industrial hazard sites
   and those of major sporting arenas. The Control of Industrial Major
   Accident Hazard Regulations (CIIIAH) require in relation to designated
   "Major Hazard Sites" that (inter alia) the site operator draws up an
   on-site emergency plan and that the Fire and Civil Defence Authority/
   County Council draws up and keeps up--to-date a site-specific off-site
   emergency plan which should "dovetail" together, and whose key
   purpose should be to enable the emergency services and other relevant
   parties (viz. Health and Local Authorities) to respond in an
   appropriate and integrated way in the event of a serious problem at
   the site. The Health and Safety Executive is the enforcing authority
   for the ClMAH Regulations, and has the power to ensure that plans
   are adequate.

5. Sheffield TUC urges Lord Justice Taylor to examine the relevant
   Sections of the CIMAH Regulations, and to recommend that
   comparable statutory requirements are imposed in relation to
   Football Stadiums. The need for statutory requirements rather than
  alterations to the "Green Guide" is emphasised: if a major club
  like Sheffield Wednesday failed to comply with the "Green Guide" on
  capacity, access, etc.,there is little hope for the smaller club
  without adequately enforced statutory regulations.

6. In relation to the deployment of ambulances, the Sheffield TOC
   believes that there should be a statutory requirement for Health
   Authority Ambulances to be deployed at major sporting events and
   that Football Clubs should in general be prevented from relying
   on the voluntary sector for the provision of ambulances.

Stewarding Arrangements.

7. STTJC considers that there should be detailed requirements imposed on
   football clubs to adequately train Stewards in the handling of
   emergencies. Training standards should be specified in detail and
   subject to external scrutiny.

Consultative Machinery.

8. Sheffield TUC strongly welcomes Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
                    ,
   Recommendation 17 in particular the inclusion of representatives
   of a recognised supporters' club on each Advisory Group. It would
   help the establishment and operation of such Advisory Groups if the
   functions,membership, and terms of reference could be given statutory
   backing, and if the number of representatives from the recognised
   supporters' club is sufficient to give such representatives real
   influence. The Advisory Group should include Trade Onion appointed
   Safety Representatives where Onions are recognised by the Club
   concerned.

General.

^ . Many of therecommendations contained in the Interim Report will be
    implemented more effectively if there is an effective method of
    enforcement. Sheffield TUC believes that, with an adequate increase
    in the resourcing of the Health and Safety Executive, it would be
    appropriate for "Football Safety Legislation" to be enforced by the
    HSE, and for such legislation to be made as Regulations.Approved
    Codes of Practice, etc., under the Health and Safety at York Act.
    The existing powers of HSE Inspectors, especially the power to issue
    Improvement and Prohibition Notices, are well suited to the
    enforcement of measures such as those in the Interim Report.
