                       THE JUDICIAL SCRUTINY INTO
                   THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




                 WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE
                  HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP




      INTRODUCTION

1     The Hillsborough Family Support Group. These submissions are made on behalf o f
      the Hillsborough Family Support Group ( “the Group”), which consists o f most o f the
      families who lost relatives in the disaster.1 The Group was responsible for the
      submission o f the new evidence to the Home Secretary in March 1997 which resulted
      in the establishment o f this Judicial Scrutiny.

2     The aims o f the Group. The Group contends that the fresh evidence discovered
      justifies criminal proceedings for perverting the course o f justice at the inquests in
       1990-91. The culpability o f particular individuals needs to be discovered by further
      investigation. While some believe that proceedings for manslaughter should have
      been brought, others argue that an acceptance by police officers o f fault at the
      inquests would have assuaged grief and anger, and that the concealment o f the truth
      and misrepresentation o f events is more serious. All seek from this Scrutiny a further
      judicial inquiry into the disaster on the basis o f evidence not made available to the
      inquiry o f Lord Taylor in 1989, nor to the inquests in 1990-91. It is accepted, eight
      and a half years after the event, that it is impracticable, and may be undesirable, for
       fresh inquests to be convened. It is not argued that a judge should be appointed to
      re-examine all the issues considered by the Taylor Inquiry. It is submitted that the
       matter should be referred to the High Court for a determination whether the verdicts
      o f “accidental death” should be set aside by reason o f the fresh evidence. However,
      these submissions will demonstrate that there are issues o f fact which can only be
      resolved by the presentation o f oral evidence at such a proceeding. The most
      appropriate course would be

      (a)    an invitation by the scrutinising tribunal to the Attorney - General to issue his
             fia t for an application to the Divisional Court under section 13 o f the Coroners
              Act 1988, with a view to having the inquest verdicts quashed, combined with;

      (b)    the grant o f leave to move for Judicial Review o f the inquest verdicts, or a
              recommendation that leave be granted.



       'The submissions have been prepared by Alun Jones QC and Julian Knowles of
Counsel, 3 Raymond Buildings, Gray’s Inn, London WC1R 5BH, instructed by Ann
Adlington, solicitor to the Group.
Section 13 o f the Coroners Act provides:

        (1)    This section applies where, on an application by or under the authority
               of the Attorney - General, the High Court is satisfied as respects a
               coroner (“the coroner concerned”) either ...

        (b)   where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether by reason of
              fraud, rejection o f evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency
              o f inquiry, the discovery o f new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is
              necessary or desirable in the interests o f justice that another inquest
              should be held.

        (2)   The High Court may -

        (a)   order ... another inquest to be held into the death ... or

        (c)   ... where an inquest has been held, quash the inquisition on that
               inquest.

In Re Rapier [1988] 1 Q.B. 26 the Court stated (at p28C) that it was desirable for
applications under section 13 o f the Act to be combined with an application for
Judicial Review in order for the Court to have the broadest range o f remedies at its
disposal.

The advantages o f a Divisional Court hearing. Such a hearing would have a number
of advantages over a “first instance” type of enquiry.

(i)     the Divisional Court could inform itself of background and uncontroversial
        evidence by affidavit evidence;

(ii)    the Divisional Court could, at an inter partes hearing, decide how much
        evidence need be called live to determine whether verdicts should be quashed.

(iii)   the very flexible Judicial Review procedures available would obviate the need
        for expensive and cumbersome re - litigation.

The motives o f the Group. Most, but not all, of the members o f the Group are from
Liverpool. Otherwise they have little in common beyond the fact that all o f them lost
cherished relatives. They come from a variety o f backgrounds, circumstances and
occupations. The Group is not political, and has no interest except in promoting the
legitimate legal interests o f its members in relation to the disaster. It is understood
that a number o f relatives have written to Lord Justice Stuart - Smith expressing their
own reasons for wanting a fresh enquiry.

Common to all the members o f the group is a deep-seated conviction that the legal
system failed them, at a vulnerable time in their lives, when they most needed its
protections. Hostility is not directed towards the Taylor Inquiry. Many recognise
that the disaster lead, through Lord Taylor’s recommendations, to great and lasting
improvements in safety at football grounds. However, the G roup’s attitudes to the
inquests are very different. Repeatedly, members have told their lawyers, and wish
to express to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, that they attended the inquests full o f trust
in the police and coroner’s court, which subsequent events have proved to have been
misplaced. The feeling o f betrayal is profound and has led to deep bitterness and, in
some, a sense o f alienation from the courts and law enforcement authorities. Many
feel that they have failed their dead relatives by failing to assert themselves effectively
at the inquests.

The new evidence demonstrates that the inquest proceedings, culminating in verdicts
o f accidental death, were deeply flawed. The inquest verdicts were procured by the
presentation o f false and misleading evidence, and by the concealment and rejection
o f material evidence. Responsibility for this lies with the South Yorkshire Police,
and with the West Midlands Police, who investigated the disaster.

The inquest verdicts were the culmination o f the attempts o f the South Yorkshire
Police to shift the blame for the disaster from themselves to others, in particular to
the supporters. This evasion o f responsibility began as the disaster unfolded, when
the officer in charge lied to the Secretary o f the FA about what was happening, and
continued through to the inquests, despite Lord Taylor’s condemnation (see Appendix
 1, para. 285). The fact that the Taylor Inquiry is not criticised by most o f the Group
enhances rather than diminishes the need for a further Inquiry. The Taylor Report
was directed to other issues than the inquests, and was, from the point o f view o f the
families o f the deceased, impersonal and general. Each bereaved person looked to
the inquests to discover the individual circumstances o f his or her relative’s death;
instead o f this, it became apparent to them, eventually, that each inquest did not
direct itself to the questions o f the facts of each individual’s death, but was another
general inquiry into the overall circumstances o f the disaster, which succeeded in the
minds o f certain sections o f the public in undermining and even reversing the findings
o f Lord Taylor. It is submitted that a useful starting point in understanding the
background is to contrast the Interim Report o f Lord Taylor o f August 1989 with the
 summing-up of the Coroner to the jury.

In these Submissions the Group will:

(i)     Present and analyse the new evidence, none o f which was considered by Lord
        Taylor or the inquests;

(ii)    Analyse the false evidence which was given;

(iii)   Demonstrate how the new evidence might have affected the course o f the
        inquests.


             CHRONOLOGY AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY


The most important dates are as follows:
    1989

    April 15    2.52pm: Gate C opened

                3.06pm: Match stopped

                3.15pm: M r Duckenfield tells the Secretary o f the FA that
                Liverpool fans have burst in through the gates. Later, other
                officers tell the press that excessive drinking by Liverpool fans
                was the cause o f the disaster.

                Two video tapes go missing from the locked and alarmed club
                control room room at Hillsborough.

                Lord Taylor appointed
#   A pril 17

    April 18    Inquests opened and adjourned

    April 19    The Sun article "The Truth". False police allegations that
                drunken fans were to blame and that they had looted the bodies
                o f the dead presented as established fact.

    April 24    West Midlands Police begin their investigation

    May 15      Taylor Inquiry begins (174 witnesses give evidence)

    June 29     Taylor Inquiry finishes

    August 4    Interim Taylor Report published

    August 5    Chief Constable of South Yorkshire (Peter W right) offers to
                resign in the light of the Taylor Report. He expresses surprise
                at the extent o f his force’s failings.

    1990

    February    Decision taken to hold ’mini - inquests’ dealing with the
                statutory questions o f ’who, where and w hen’, but not with
                ’how’.

    April 18    ’Mini - inquests’ resume.    On average, 20 minutes spent on
                each case.


    Autumn      The DPP announces his decision that no police officers will be
                prosecuted because o f "insufficient evidence".


                                 4
November 19   Main inquests begin in Sheffield.

1991

March 28      The jury return verdicts o f accidental death by a majority o f 9 -
              2.

July 11       Police Complaints Authority (PCA) direct that charges of
              neglect of duty be preferred against M r Duckenfield and Mr
              Murray.

November 10   M r Duckenfield announces his retirement on medical grounds.

1992

January 13    The PCA drop the charges against M r M urray.

April         Memorial presented to the Attorney - General, for the purposes
              o f section 13 o f the Coroners Act 1988, asking for new
              inquests in the case o f six families on the basis o f evidence
              which has come to light since the original inquests.

May           Application for leave to move for judicial review adjourned by
              May J pending the Attorney - General’s decision

August 20     Attorney - General says that there is insufficient basis for the
              exercise o f his fiat

1993

April 6       Leave to move for judicial review granted (Macpherson of
              Cluny J)

November 5    Judicial review refused by the Divisional Court (M cCowan LJ
              and Turner J) (Appendix 2).

1996

December 5    Granada Television        broadcasts    drama    -   documentary
              ’Hillsborough’.

1997

March         Roger Houldsworth’s evidence, the footage from Cam era 5
              before 15.02 pm, which the Coroner at the inquests stated had
              gone missing,     and the evidence o f D r Edward W alker
              presented to the Home Secretary and the D PP.
#
         June 30                Home Secretary announces a judicial scrutiny o f the fresh
                                evidence.


         EVIDENCE NOT PRESENTED TO THE INQUESTS                            OR TO LORD
         TAYLOR’S INQUIRY; TWO GENERAL SUBJECTS

    11   There were two serious areas o f human failing at Hillsborough, applicable to all the
         deaths:

                 (i)    The failures of control in the police control box, highlighted in the
                        Taylor Report, caused the crushing in the pens.

                 (ii)   The slow and inadequate response to the developing disaster delayed
                         the arrival o f the emergency services, and prevented the injured from
    ^                   receiving medical attention. It is remarkable and shocking that only
    ^                   fourteen o f the deceased were taken to hospital. The rem ainder were
                         left for dead in the gymnasium at the football ground, or at various
                         locations at the back o f the Leppings Lane terraces.

         Evidence relevant to both o f these limbs o f failure was withheld from the inquest
         jury. To the first o f these, the evidence o f Roger Houldsworth is directly relevant.
         To the second, the evidence o f D r Edward W alker and the ambulanceman Tony
         Edwards is directly relevant. None o f this evidence was made available to the
         Coroner’s court nor to the Taylor Inquiry.

            The police control box: the importance of the video tape evidence.

    12   The recently-discovered evidence o f Roger Houldsworth is o f central im portance. In
         order to understand its significance, it is necessary to consider the very different
         evidence advanced between 1989 and 1991. Lord Taylor found that the prim ary
         cause o f the disaster was the failure o f control which occurred in the police control
         box at Hillsborough. He said that the decision to open gate C at 2.52pm should have
         been accompanied by measures to divert the fans away from the tunnel into pens 3
         and 4 which, he found, were overfull at 2.50pm (Para. 184). Although he accepted
         the police evidence that they were unable to see the terraces because o f a faulty
         camera, he found that it was foreseeable that opening the gate would cause injuries
         in the pens. He described the police’s failure to take these measures as "a blunder
         o f the first magnitude" (See paras. 229 -232). He singled out C hief Superintendent
         Duckenfield, the officer in charge, for particular criticism. "M r Duckenfield’s
         capacity to take decisions and give orders seemed to collapse ... He froze." (Paras.
          282 - 284). M r Duckenfield and his deputy, Superintendent M urray, were charged
          with neglect of duty by the Police Complaints Authority, although the cases were
          discontinued when M r Duckenfield retired on medical grounds.

    13   The false allocation o f blame to Liverpool supporters. The police, aided by ’The Sun’
          newspaper, had sought to blame the disaster on drunken Liverpool fans (see
          Chronology, supra.). The Taylor Report repudiated this completely. Lord Taylor

                                                6
                                    fanS tand. critidsed the.P°Kce, not just for their mistakes, but for
                r   f ,.         e using to face up to their responsibilities (para. 285) The Chief
                Constable o f South Yorkshire, Peter Wright, offered to resign after publication o f the
                 eport, expressing surprise at the extent to which his force had been criticised.
     14
                                                        in November 1990’ b e f o r e , it was clear that
            b e h a ^ u r of S             * * UP° n the aCti° nS ° f the Police rather than the
                                          aPPafent that a centraI question would be whether the
                                     S HCient gravity 80 as t0 V* ™ * the J'ury 10 return verdicts
            tn r r Ul          , !S       6 11 extremely important that all the evidence relevant
            f       SUe      P°llce s culpability was put before the inquest jury. The two police
            forces would have been aware that the more the jury heard that it was obvious that
              \ J S 6              n gate C was opened, the more likely it was that verdicts of
            unlawful killing would be returned.                                     vciuims or




 i         The basic legal issue at the inquests. At the inquests the Coroner left two verdicts
           to the jury, namely accidental death and unlawful killing. (See Appendix 3,
           Transcript, 25/3/91, p3 et seq.). In relation to unlawful killing, he directed the jury
           in accordance with Watkins LTs formulation in R. v. West London Coroner p. *
           Gray [1988] Q.B. 467, namely:                             ------------------------------

                              Was the failure to act for the benefit of the health and welfare of the
                             deceased reckless ? An act of recklessness means that he did or failed
                             to do something where there was an obvious and serious risk to the
                             health and welfare of the deceased, to which that person whose
                             conduct you are considering having regard to his duty was indifferent
                             or that recognising the risk to be present he deliberately chose to run
                             the risk by doing nothing about it.

16        M ues of Fact. There were two main general factual questions for the jury to consider
          in connection with the verdict of unlawful killing:

          (i)       Should the police be blamed for opening gate C, given the crush which had
                    developed outside the turnstiles and, if so, to what extent ought they to be
                    blamed?

          (ii)      Should the police be blamed for failing to take measures to divert fans away
                    from the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 when gate C was opened and, if so, to what
                    extent ought they to be blamed ?

17        In his summary of the evidence, the Coroner first considered the events outside the
          ground and the crush which developed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles prior to
           .52pm. (Appendix 3, 25/3/91, p7 et seq.). Having considered this evidence, the
          Coroner told the jury (p25):

                            All the evidence would seem - not all but virtually all the evidence
                            would seem to point to that direction, that the decision to open the gate
                            was reasonable in the circumstances.

                                                    7
      Therefore the Coroner effectively directed the jury that the answer to (i) was ’N o’.2

18    The Coroner then went on to consider the events in the police control box. On no
      fewer than four occasions he directed the jury that the most crucial issue in the case
      was the knowledge and actions of the officers in the control box. In particular, he
      directed the jury to consider very carefully what the officers knew about the
      overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 before 3.00pm, and whether they were aware that the
      pens were already full when the orders were given to open gate C, which led to the
      influx o f supporters and the fatal crushing on the terraces.

19    At pp54 - 55 the Coroner described the following question as one o f          the "root
      questions":

                     [A]t what point could - assuming somebody had looked at the terrace -
                      could anybody have realistically noted that there was serious
                     overcrowding with the terrace (sic) ...
§
20    Having directed the jury on M r Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C the Coroner
      said at ppl25 - 128:

                      Now, what about the assessment o f the terraces, because this is may
                      be the single most important factor which you have to weigh.

                      The sum total of the evidence from the Control Room, from M r
                      Duckenfield, M r Murray, M r Goddard and M r Bichard, was that none
                      o f them had noticed any problems with the pens until people came
                      over or the gates were opened. In other words, shall we say in round
                      terms, three o ’clock.

                      This was partly because their attention was focussed on what was
                      happening outside Leppings Lane, though I think M r Goddard certainly
                      said he did glance around and he had noticed nothing unusual ... [he]
                      also said that in fact the front of the pens is quite difficult to see
                      because o f the angles ...

                      So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have noted
                      at the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens were
                      so full or so over full that diversion was something which had to be
                      taken; and secondly, o f course, would the connection, would a
                      reasonably prudent, skilled police officer in the shoes, if you like, of



        2There are a number of members of the Group who believe that the decision to open
gate C was, by itself, an understandable reaction to what was happening outside the ground.
However a number of families believe that this decision cannot be looked at in isolation, and
that because the police were to blame for having allowed the crush at the turnstiles to have
built up, the decision to open the gate was of itself a culpable act for which they ought to be
held responsible; an alternative remedy was available, namely, to delay the kick-off.

                                               8
              M r Duckenfield or indeed M r Murray, have connected the need, the
              opening o f the gate, diversion o f the tunnel, and conditions on the pen?

The following day the Coroner returned to this question.         He directed the jury
(26/3/91, p22):

              [I]n the final analysis you may feel the real apex o f the problem is the
              issue o f whether or not there was such a failure in not diverting the
              fans from the tunnel that you can classify that as creating an obvious
              and serious risk o f injury.

At p24 he said:

              It all hinges, as I said to you yesterday, on whether or not; what the
              assessment, if any, o f the pens were because if the pens were either
              not observed or were observed and not noted to be abnormal then that
              might help you in deciding whether or not there was an obvious and
              serious risk to the people involved.

              One o f the big problems, o f course, is that whenever you think about
              this, and when everybody thinks about it, one has to ask the question,
              "Obvious and serious to who ?". You have heard the officers say, It
              wasn’t obvious to us" and if you believe them you might say that is the
              end o f the matter ...

The evidence o f the police about Camera 5 . The officers blamed their failure to see
the overcrowding on the terraces on what they said was a defective camera, Camera
5, pointing at pens 3 and 4. The issue for the jury was whether the police had
ignored an obvious and serious risk when they opened gate C without taking measures
to stop fans from entering the tunnel to pens 3 and 4. Because o f the evidence o f the
officers (which was unchallenged) the jury must have based their consideration o f this
question on a finding that the police, through no fault o f their own, did not know
about the overcrowded condition o f pens 3 and 4 until it was too late. It was
therefore almost inevitable that verdicts o f accidental death would be returned

The appropriateness o f the ju ry ’s verdicts therefore depends upon the reliability of
their findings about what the police knew about the terraces. The Group submits that
the new evidence goes directly to the obviousness and seriousness o f the risk that was
ignored by the police, and undermines the reliability o f this finding, and thus also
undermines the ju ry ’s verdicts. As the Coroner said, this question was the question
upon which the ju ry ’s verdict hinged.

The evidence o f the police officers is contained at Appendix 4. The following is a
summary o f the most pertinent parts.


 PC Trevor Bichard was in charge o f the video cameras in the police control room.
 These cameras had the ability to pan and tilt, and to zoom in and out. PC Bichard
     was forthright in his evidence to the tribunals that the picture from Cam era 5 had
     been distorted, and that was the reason that the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 had not
     been noticed by any o f the officers in the control box.

27   The video tape o f the pictures taken from camera 5 which was shown to the jury
     began at 3.02pm, and was a time lapse video o f poor quality. PC Bichard was asked
     by the Coroner why the video began at 3.02pm, and whether there should have been
     film o f events prior to 3.02pm. PC Bichard’s response was inconclusive. He replied
     that there should have been, but that (p80):

                   I have no idea at all where it could have gone to. It was part o f the
                   tape and the tapes were all sealed up at the end o f the day.

28   At p80 PC Bichard said:

                   My recollections are that the particular camera had been faulty and in
                   fact you saw some o f the problems that occurred. You were getting
                   what is called flare. It is reflection o f light coloured objects and you
                   lose the picture. The camera was not really being used as much as it
                   would normally be because o f the sub - standard picture. It was just
                   left in position. That is why the picture never really moved at all
                   because it was just left in position.

29   PC Bichard was then asked by the Coroner about when he had first noticed something
     wrong on the terraces (p82):

                   Q.       At what point, either visually or by monitor, anything that
                            warranted comment, if that is the right word ? - A. I saw some
                            people climbing over the fence and a situation similar to that,
                            people climbing to the stand, had occurred the year earlier ...

                   Q.       That is the first time your attention was drawn to that part o f
                            the ground in a significant sort o f way ? - A. Yes

                   Q.       Did you see it through a window or did you see it on a monitor
                            ? - A. It is very difficult to remember ... I am not sure.

     At p92 he was asked:

                   Q.       What do you say, officer, so far as the ability o f a camera,
                            trained from the South Stand, to give you an idea in your terms
                            o f overcrowding within that area ? - A. It would not give you
                            a view o f overcrowding.

                   Q.       Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgm ent to
                            make any decision about overcrowding from the m onitor that
                            you would have in front of you ? - A. I don’t think it would be
                            a sound judgment.

                                           10
                    Q.     In fact, part o f the problem is that the position and angle o f the
                           camera in the South Stand, instead o f ideally, if you like, being
                           on the centre o f the pitch gives you a difficulty because o f the
                           angle itself ? - A. That combined with the inadequacy o f the
                           camera, yes.

30    At p96 he was cross - examined by Counsel for the families on his evidence that it
      was not possible to pick out facial features:

                    Q.     ... Do you maintain the view that the zoom facility is such that
                           it is not possible to zoom in so that one can clearly identify a
                           given individual if one wishes to do so ? - A. I am quite happy
                           with that comment, yes ... when there is a group, a large
                           crowd there, to pick out an individual would be difficult.




•
                    Q.     But you can zoom in so that you can clearly see facial features,
                           can you not ? - A. I don’t think so, sir.3

      At p97 he said:

                    If I had seen [overcrowding] I would have done something about it.

31    In his evidence to Lord Taylor on June 12 1989, PC Bichard said:

                    The camera was not up the mark ... we were getting pictures, that is
                    the best way o f describing it.

32    Sergeant Goddard gave similar evidence. His evidence to Lord Taylor was as follows
      (June 11 1989, p87):

                     Q.    What did you see inside the ground that put you on notice that
                           something was wrong in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. People were
                           climbing over the fences.

                     Q.    When did you see that ? - A. About three o ’clock time.




        3This evidence should be compared with the evidence given to Lord Taylor on 25
May 1989 at pp 128 - 9 where the camera systems at Hillsborough were described as ’the
finest in the country’. The following extract from an article in ’Police Review’ by M r
Locke, the club’s head o f security, was read to Lord Taylor:

       Today at Hillsborough ... a senior officer can follow crowd movement outside the
       stadium by using the closed - circuit cameras as his eyes. He is able to anticipate
       problems, see incidents as they build and employ necessary resources to abate them.
       Inside the ground he can watch crowd behaviour and identify offenders through the
       zoom facility.

                                            11
                   Q.     W hat did you do about it ? - A. My first thought was, "We
                          have got a pitch invasion" and it was a matter o f deploying as
                          many men as possible down to the Leppings Lane end o f the
                          perimeter track.

33   At p94 he was cross - examined by M r Hytner QC on behalf o f the families:

                   Q.     ... W ere you aware that there was a special problem on the
                          Leppings Lane terraces or not ? - A. No, sir, I was not.

                   Q.     ... Did you at any stage before you saw people climbing over
                          the pens notice any overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. No,
                           sir.

                   Q.     Apart from noticing there was crowd trouble in that people


•
                          were climbing over did you ever say to yourself pens 3 and 4
                          are beginning to look overcrowded. They have reached
                          capacity ? - A. No, sir. 3 and 4 were getting full, were full.
                          From my vantage point they were not overcrowded.

                   Q.     Did no Officer in the control box, anybody, comment at any
                          stage that pens 3 and 4 looked full ? - A. No, sir. They did
                          look full but not overfull.

34   At p96 Sergeant Goddard was cross-examined by M r M uller QC (for the South
     Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority). He said that there was a ’blind spot’
     at the front o f the terraces, which meant that Camera 5 could not focus on what was
     happening on the bottom steps o f pens 3 and 4. He said

                   You would not be able to pick out [fans] individually. You could see
                   figures.

35   At the inquests his evidence was (14 March 1991, p92):

                   Q.     On this day ... at what point did you yourself first notice
                          anything unusual about the pens ? - A. The first point I
                          noticed, the unusual part, was when I saw people start climbing
                          over the fences onto the perimeter track and then I saw a gate
                          open ...

     Later he said (15 March 1991, p6):

                    Q.    Your evidence to the inquest is very simple; you never saw
                          anything unusual in that Leppings Lane terrace in the pens
                          there until you saw the people climbing over around three
                          o ’clock ? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

36   PC Ryan had worked in the control box at Hillsborough for five years.     H e gave

                                          12
evidence to Lord Taylor as follows (June 11 1989, p52):

               Q.     There was a problem with one o f [the cameras] is that correct
                      ? - A. That is correct, yes. There was an apparent fault with
                      on the camera to the West Stand, W est terraces ...

               Q.     Where is it mounted ? - A. I think that is the one that is
                      mounted on the electronic scoreboard.

               Q.     ... What was the problem with that cam era as you can recall ?
                       - A. The picture was very distorted.

               Q.     (Lord Taylor) Very what ? - A. Distorted, sir.

               Q.     Was the fault mended ? - A. I contacted the engineer myself.

               Q.     That is M r Houldsworth ? - A. Roger Houldsworth, yes. He
                      attended and came out and worked on that cam era for some
                      time. Quite how long he was there I do not know. H e was
                      certainly there working on it for some considerable time. The
                      picture was never satisfactory as far as I can recall that day
                      although that was not my specific duty to look at that.

               Q.     ... When you say the picture as far as you can see was not
                       satisfactory what was wrong with it ? - A. It was not as clear
                       as you would hope the picture to be.

               Q.     Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way
                      inoperative or less adequate than normal or ... - A. As far as
                      I can recall the zoom was operative. It was the quality o f the
                      picture that was the problem.

PC Ryan did not give evidence at the inquests.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield began his evidence to Lord Taylor on 24th May
1989. He did not refer to any faults with the camera system. On 25th May 1989 at
p l2 9 he said that he did not use the zoom facility at all, but mainly looked out o f the
window. On 26th May (p i5) he referred to the surveillance system as "an excellent
system".

Chief Inspector McRobbie gave evidence at the Taylor Inquiry; he was not called to
give evidence at the inquests. This is o f great significance, because his evidence to
the Taylor Inquiry flatly contradicted that o f his colleagues, especially PC Bichard.

M r M cRobbie gave evidence on 13th June 1989. At p20 he was asked, with reference
to the statement he made shortly after the disaster:

               Q.      At the bottom o f p5 you refer to an incident which drew the
                      attention o f the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) ... - A.
                      That is correct sir, yes.

              Q.     You say:

                             "Police Constable Bichard operated the cam era and I
                             watched him to be able to zoom onto him (sic) which I
                             thought was a super facility for spotting trouble makers
                             in the crowd."

                      A. That is correct, sir.

              Q.     No difficulty with the picture at all ? - A. Well when you say
                     "no difficulty" it certainly brought this person closer to us than
                     I think it would have been possible for a Police Officer to
                     select the correct person that Control were identifying without
                     any problem.

              Q.     That is the whole purpose o f it, isn’t it ? - A. I would think so
                     sir, yes.

At p22 he was cross - examined by M r Glasgow QC (for Sheffield W ednesday
Football Club):

              Q.     Chief Inspector, the camera zoom which impressed you was
                     that which was showing the scene on the terraces, was it ? - A.
                     It was able to pick out someone directly under the control box,
                     yes, but I do not know where the camera is sited. I am sorry.

              Q.     You are quite sure that was the camera that was being used, the
                     one that shows the scene on the terraces ? - A. I cannot speak
                     about a camera. All I can say is on the monitor a person was
                     able to be enlarged.

              Q.     You might be able to help us if you can remember by chance
                     whether it was black and white or colour. - A. It was black
                     and white.

This exchange shows that it was Camera 5 to which M r M cRobbie was referring.
The other camera trained on Leppings Lane, situated in the centre o f the South Stand,
was a colour camera.

At p26 he was again asked whether it was Camera 5 which had been zoomed in by
PC Bichard:

               A.    I would have thought so from the definition, but, as I say, I
                      would not ...
                    Q.      (Lord Taylor) When you say "the definition" was it good
                            definition ? - A. It was quite reasonable, sir, yes.

43   Despite M r M cRobbie’s evidence, Lord Taylor accepted the police’s evidence that
     they did not notice anything amiss until fans began to climb out o f the pens (para.
     78). Nonetheless, because o f the layout o f the ground, and the crushes which had
     developed at previous matches in 1981 and 1988, he said it was foreseeable that
     disaster would result from opening gate C if preventative measures were not taken.

44   The evidence o f Roger Houldsworth. Roger Houldsworth installed and repaired the
      CCTV (“Closed Circuit”) system operating at Hillsborough on the day o f the disaster,
      and was present in the club’s video room during the disaster. M r Houldsworth made
      a statement to lawyers for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club on 16th May 1989, and
      expected to be called as a witness at the Inquiry and the inquests. However he gave
      evidence at neither tribunal (Appendix 5). Although M r Houldsworth was well



•
     known to the investigating officers, he was variously described on the C oroner’s
      witness list as a ’sound engineer’ and as ’ground s ta ff. This statement was obtained
      by the Group from South Yorkshire Police, and so was known to the police.

45   The first part o f his May 1989 statement contains a detailed description o f the two
      closed circuit television systems in operation, one for the club, the other for the
      police. The second part o f M r Houldsworth’s statement deals with the sinister
      disappearance o f two video tapes from the club’s CCTV room on the night o f the 15 -
      16 April. This statement did not deal expressly with the allegations later made by the
      police that video equipment was inadequate. There was no reason why it should have
      done so shortly after the event. M r Houldsworth could not anticipate the police’s
      evidence.

46   M r Houldsworth’s evidence is contained in Appendix 5. It is believed that the
     significance o f his evidence was not made known to the Coroner. M r Houldsworth
     watched the disaster on the video monitors in the CCTV room, one o f which showed
     what was being displayed on the police system. He was the only independent civilian
     witness who watched what was being shown on the monitors. His evidence shows
     the police evidence analysed above to be deliberately false and misleading. In
     particular, his evidence shows the following:

     (i)     That the video camera trained on pens 3 and 4 o f the Leppings Lane terraces
             was functioning normally, having been repaired by him on the morning o f the
             disaster;

     (ii)    That the pictures from this camera were being received normally in the police
             control box before 3.02pm (the time the video shown to the jury began) and
             were being recorded continuously (rather than in time - lapse mode) on video;

     (iii)   That the camera was panning and zooming in on the terraces, and was
             therefore being operated by an officer in the control box;

     (iv)    That at the time M r Duckenfield gave the order to open Gate C, the screens

                                            15
•
                   would have been clearly showing that the terraces were full and that some
                   people were obviously in distress, with many more clearly uncomfortable. It
                   would therefore have been apparent to the officers in the control box that
                   death and injury would result if more people were permitted to enter the pens;

          (v)      That the officers stationed in the box, in particular M r Duckenfield, were
                   therefore able to see the overcrowding develop in these pens prior to 2.52pm ;

          (vi)     That those in overall control o f the policing operation at Hillsborough would
                   have been aware o f the overcrowding on the terraces as it developed, and
                   there was therefore an obvious and serious risk o f injury if gate C were
                   opened and the fans not prevented from entering the tunnels;

          (vii)    That on the night o f the disaster, 2 tapes went missing from the locked and
                   alarmed club control room

          (viii)   That the evidence given by the relevant police officers, namely that they could
                   not see the overcrowding on the terraces because the cam era was defective,
                   was knowingly false.

    47    M r Houldsworth was interviewed by Yorkshire Television for its ’First Tuesday’
          documentary on the disaster broadcast in February 1990. A transcript o f this
          interview is contained within Appendix 5. A ’minder’ from the W est M idlands police
          was present during this interview. This interview is significant because:

           (i)     It corroborates M r Houldsworth’s more recent evidence that all the cameras
                    were working properly (p2)4;

           (ii)    It shows that he was aware o f the impending disaster because o f what he could
                    see through the screens in the club’s CCTV room, which was precisely the
                    same was what the police were seeing on their monitors (pp8 - 9). The police
                    would therefore have been aware o f the situation. He saw the influx through
                    gate C and went to check on the central pens because o f what he could see on
                    the police system;

           (iii)   This interview is significant because it shows the W est Midlands police were
                   anxious not to let M r Houldsworth go ’on the record’ about anything not
                   strictly within his May 1989 statement;

           (iv)    The fact that he was accorded a ’minder’ shows the im portance West
                    Midlands police attached to his evidence.




        4In the interview M r Houldsworth refers to ’Camera 1’. In fact, this is Camera 5. This
    camera was variously described during the Taylor Inquiry and the inquests e.g. as ’the
    scoreboard cam era’.

                                                  16
48   Because o f the disappearance o f footage from Camera 5 tape and the poor quality o f
      the footage from 15.02 (which was in time lapse mode), counsel for the families was
     prevented from cross - examining the police officers in the control box effectively.
      For example, in his cross - examination o f PC Bichard, when PC Bichard had denied
      seeing any overcrowding (at p97) he said: "I cannot take that any further with you,
      officer." Had the tapes been available at the inquests, M r King could have positively
      contradicted the evidence given by the officers. As it was, he was able only to
      suggest that the officers were mistaken in their protestations o f ignorance.

49   The jury therefore assessed the culpability o f the police on the basis o f evidence
      which was false and misleading. It is almost certain that they must have concluded
      that because the cameras were not working properly it would not have been obvious
      that the terraces were overcrowded, and that the police were therefore not to blame
      for not recognising the danger on the terraces when they opened gate C.

      W hv was an incom plete video shown to th e ju ry ? The tape played to the inquest
      jury was produced by Sergeant Killoch o f the West Midlands Police as police exhibit
      TB15, on 15 March 1991 at the conclusion o f Sergeant Goddard’s evidence
      (Appendix 4, 15th March 1991, p62). It became the Coroner’s exhibit C .539. On
       13th March 1991 the Coroner had acknowledged that this footage was o f very poor
      quality. It showed only events after 3.02pm in others words, after gate C had been
      opened. The pictures were recorded in “time - lapse” mode, and the tape did not
      clearly show what was happening. The same incomplete tape appears to have been
       shown to Lord Taylor (see Transcript, 25th May 1989, pl29).

51    Shortly after the disaster Yorkshire Television began work on a ’First Tuesday’
       documentary about the disaster. They were given a set o f tapes which contained
       footage from the cameras in the police control room. Sections o f these tapes were
       used in the programme. The tapes contained high quality footage o f events before
       3.02pm. The tapes lay undiscovered in Yorkshire Television’s archives until they
       were found in a search requested by Trevor Hicks in February 1997. The statement
       of Trevor Hicks outlines the circumstances. (Appendix 6).

52    The Group believes the suppression of this evidence to be sinister, and, prima facie,
       a perversion o f the course o f justice. It was potentially the most important evidence
       in the inquest. It should be noted that two tapes also went missing from the locked
       CCTV room shortly after the disaster. The Coroner failed to pursue the question o f
       where the missing footage had gone, despite PC Bichard’s response "I have no idea
       at all where it could have gone to. It was part o f the tape and the tapes were all
       sealed up at the end o f the day." He ought to have summoned the W est Midlands
       officers responsible for gathering this evidence to give an explanation for its
       disappearance. The West Midlands Police should now be asked to explain how this
       evidence came to be suppressed. This is an issue which can only be resolved by oral
       evidence.


       5The Crown Prosecution service have suggested by letter o f 10th April 1997 that this
was in fact Exhibit TB/2.

                                             17
•
    53   The iu rv ’s requests to see th e video. The jury were fully aware o f the significance
         o f the video evidence. On 13th March 1991 the Coroner addressed the legal
         representatives (p53):

                        ... there is just one thing which the jury have mentioned to me. In
                        fact they have mentioned it twice, and that is what about the video
                        evidence o f the terraces. I have had the videos looked at and there is
                        actually next to nothing on the videos because, o f course, not
                        everything was recorded. That does not mean to say they w eren’t
                        possibly scenes (sic), but there is, I understand, a little tiny bit which
                        is actually on the compilation which you have seen. There is another
                        little bit which starts at 15.03 and goes on for a few minutes.

                        What we have done is that we have clipped it, if that is the right word,


    •
                        and we will show it to you, but it is o f very poor quality and I do not
                        think it is going to help us very much. As far as I can tell there isn’t
                        much recorded. Does that help ?

    54   The jury were therefore led to believe that the tiny clip o f film they were shown was
         all that existed by way o f video evidence o f the terraces recorded by Camera 5. The
         poor quality o f this clip would undoubtedly have persuaded the jury that the missing
          footage o f events before 15.02pm would have been equally poor and would not have
         assisted them significantly.

    55   The only acceptable explanation for the contradiction between what is shown on the
          tapes and what was said in evidence at the inquests is that the officers lied in their
          evidence. The officers in the control box were fully aware o f the situation on the
          terraces and had been monitoring the fans in pens 3 and 4 during the build up to the
          kick - off. However they failed to consider the effect that the opening o f gate C
          would have on the terraces. Thus it was that the ’blunder o f the first magnitude’ was
          made. The officers’ explanation that the camera equipment was not working was an
          excuse invented ex post facto in an attempt to shift the blame elsewhere. It should
          be noted that the explanation given by the South Yorkshire police has changed since
          the disaster. At the time the officers said that Camera 5 was defective. After the
          television programme ’Hillsborough’ was shown last year, the police initially said,
          in January 1997, that they had found the missing tape, and that it supported their
          claim that the camera had been faulty and had been subject to interference from BBC
          outside broadcast equipment. After it was learned that the Group had received tapes
          from Yorkshire television, they changed their explanation and claimed that they had
          never claimed the camera was faulty, but that the fault lay with the m onitor. This
          second explanation is also contained in a Press Release from South Yorkshire Police
          o f 1st April 1997

    56   Summary. The police evidence to the tribunals was intended to give the impression
          that they were not to blame for failing to see the overcrowding on the terraces before
          opening gate C because o f faulty camera equipment. In fact, the video tapes show
          camera 5 was working properly prior to 3.02pm. Incomplete video evidence o f very
          poor quality was shown to the jury; in particular, the pictures from Camera 5 prior

                                                18
to 3.02pm were never shown. This evidence was deliberately suppressed. The video
shows that Camera 5 was operating correctly. Roger Houldsworth’s evidence shows
that the overcrowding was clear and visible to those watching the screen. The jury
therefore considered the most important issue in the case on a false and misleading
evidential basis. The ju ry ’s requests to see the videos underlines the im portance it
attached to the officers’ assessment o f the terraces.


The medical evidence at the inquests and the evidence of Dr Edward Walker


Lord Taylor found that there was delay and confusion in evacuating the casualties
from pens 3 and 4 and in responding to the magnitude o f the disaster. The police
were obsessed by the idea that a pitch invasion was in progress, even though it was
clear to those in the television commentary box (who were further away) that the
problem was overcrowding and not hooliganism (Para. 250). In particular he made
the following findings:

(a)    No officer took effective charge o f the evacuation o f the injured from the pens
       (Para. 251);

(b)    Organised evacuation o f the injured from the pitch did not begin until 3 .12pm
       (Ibid.);

(c)    There was delay in activating the M ajor Accident Plan (although he
       underestimated the extent o f the delay - see below);

(d)    No request was made for cutting gear from the fire brigade until 3.13pm;

(e)    There was no co - ordination o f rescue efforts, and no call for the assistance
       o f doctors or nurses until 3.29pm;

(f)    There were cases where the earlier provision o f medical treatment might have
        made a difference, in that more lives might have been saved (Paras. 251 and
        252).

In contrast, the medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that all the
deceased had died quick and painless deaths, that they were all dead by 3 .15pm, and
accordingly that Lord Taylor had been incorrect in deciding that the secondary
failures o f the police had resulted in further loss o f life. For this reason, the Coroner
ruled that no evidence after 3 .15pm would be considered. The 3 .15pm cut o ff was
predicated on a number o f unrealistic assumptions about the time it took for the
deceased to be asphyxiated, such as that all the deceased were subjected to continuous
pressure so that they were unconscious within a short period and dead within minutes,
irrespective o f their locations within pens 3 and 4 and irrespective o f whether they
were crushed against barriers or against other supporters.

 Evidence which has emerged since the inquests shows this conclusion and the
•
           assumptions upon which it was based to be false. Some o f this evidence was
           presented to the Divisional Court in 1993, and some has been uncovered in the period
           since 1993.

    60     D r W alk er’s evidence. The evidence o f D r W alker is contained at Appendix 7 .6
           It consists o f his contemporaneous account o f his work on the day o f the disaster, and
           a copy o f a police statement dated 20th July 1989.

    61     D r W alker, who was not at work, responded to televised pictures o f the disaster and
           assisted a large number o f patients at the Northern General Hospital. H e was praised
           by the consultant in charge, M r W ardrope, for his efforts, and received a letter
            indicating that it was likely that he would be required to give a statement to the
            investigating police force. In due course, D r W alker gave a statement to the W est
            Midlands police. D r W alker was not called as a witness at the Inquiry or at the
           inquests, and was repeatedly referred to in evidence as an ’unidentified doctor’. The


    •
           consultant in charge o f the Accident and Emergency Department at the Northern
            General Hospital, M r W ardrope, gave a detailed account o f the thirteen deceased who
           were taken to that hospital, some o f whom were treated by D r W alker, however no
            mention was made o f him (Appendix 17).

    62     D r W alker’s evidence, in summary, is that when he arrived at the Northern General
           Hospital the staff were aware only o f a ’disturbance’ at Hillsborough. He was told
           that there was a paediatric cardiac arrest on its way to the hospital, but no connection
           was made between this casualty and Hillsborough. There was no sign that the M ajor
           Accident Plan had been activated and no awareness that the hospital was shortly to
           receive a large number o f critically ill patients. The first patient to arrive was Lee
           Nicol, and the second patient was Philip Hammond. Both boys were young
           teenagers. When they arrived at the hospital their hearts were not beating. Dr
           W alker and others worked on them and succeeded in restarting their heart and
           breathing. Lee Nicol survived until the following Monday. Philip Hammond
           survived for a time but later died, however. D r W alker then treated a number of
           patients, some o f whom died but some of whom survived.

    63     D r W alker’s contemporaneous evidence is significant in that it clearly demonstrates
           that there were a number o f patients who were extremely ill when they reached
            hospital who were successfully treated. It is also significant because it shows that the
            treatment o f the injured was hampered by a shortage o f drugs and equipment o f the
            type necessary to treat cardiac arrests. D r W alker lists eight deficiencies which
            hampered the treatment o f patients at the height o f the crisis.

    64     When the evidence given at the mini - inquest into the death o f Philip Hammond
           (Appendix 7) is compared with D r W alker’s evidence numerous deficiencies and
           inaccuracies can be discerned. The evidence at the mini - inquest would have left the
           jury with the totally false impression that Philip was dead before 3 .15pm. D r Slater,
           the pathologist who carried out Philip’s post - mortem, testified that the policeman



         6It is understood that D r W alker is also submitting material directly to the Scrutiny.

                                                   20
•
           who said that he felt Philip’s pulse probably felt his own pulse. H e said that the only
           signs o f treatment were ECG electrodes attached to his chest and that "essentially
           only lay people saw him ." D r Slater said that Philip was ’brain dead at H illsborough’
           (Transcript o f Philip Hammond mini - inquest, p5). The evidence o f D r W alker
           shows that this opinion was wholly wrong, and that Philip was alive far beyond
           3.15pm. D r W alker’s evidence accordingly raises the possibility that D r Slater’s
           other diagnoses were wrong and that patients were alive well beyond the times given
           at the mini - inquests and well beyond the 3.15pm cut - off.

     65    The significance of D r W alker’s evidence and th e M em orial to th e A ttorney -
           G eneral in 1993 There is evidence that four o f the deceased, Paul Carlile, Ian
           Glover, Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams7 were alive after 3 .15pm. This evidence
           is contained in the Memorial presented to the Attorney - General in 1993. (Appendix
           20).

    ^66    Although the Attorney - General did not consider this evidence by itself to be
           sufficient to justify him exercising his powers under section 13 o f the Coroners Act
            1988, it is submitted that this evidence together with the evidence o f D r W alker
           constitutes incontrovertible evidence that some o f the conclusions reached at the mini
           - inquests were erroneous, and that many o f the deceased were alive after 3 .15pm and
           that an inquiry into the precise circumstances o f their deaths was warranted, including
           an inquiry into the matters referred to above.

     67    It is significant that the Divisional Court accepted the validity o f some o f this
            evidence, but declined to grant relief on the basis that the Coroner was not at fault
            (Appendix 2, Judgment, pp l8 - 29, p30, p34). It can therefore be inferred that the
            Court considered that this evidence warranted detailed consideration, but because o f
            the nature o f the court’s function on an application for judicial review, insufficient
            to warrant relief. The Court specifically said that at p30 that had the hearing been
            a reference pursuant to a reference by the Attorney General under section 13 the
            position might have been different. It is respectfully submitted that the functions of
            this Scrutiny are not so limited. The issue is whether this evidence might have
            altered the outcome o f the proceedings if it had been heard by the jury at the inquests.
            For the reasons set out above it is submitted that it is more than likely that this
            evidence would have affected the outcome o f the inquests.

     68    It is plain from D r W alker’s evidence that there was evidence available to the
            Coroner o f a slow response by the police and the emergency services to the plight o f
            the injured, evidence that some people might have been saved by a more timely
            response, and general evidence o f a lack o f equipment. These were all matters
            which, it is submitted, required investigation in order to determine properly "how"
            the deceased came by their death, and they make the Coroner’s decision not to go
            beyond 3.15pm unjustifiable.




            ’Separate submissions have also been made in relation to Kevin W illiams by his
     mother.

                                                  21
69   Further evidence is now available which is critical o f the slow response to the disaster
     (Appendix 14). D r Naderassen Curpen and D r Andrew Byrne attended the match as
     spectators and became involved in the treatment o f the injured. Neither doctor was
     aware initially that there was a major incident, and so there was a delay before either
     of the doctors went onto the pitch. No tannoy announcement was made until 3.29pm .
     Once they became aware o f the disaster they both attempted to treat the injured,
     although the lack o f equipment made this difficult. D r Bull, who certified the death
     o f a number o f the deceased also criticised the lack o f equipment. This supports the
     evidence o f D r John Ashton and D r Glyn Philips, whom the Coroner refused to call
     as witnesses.

70   The justification fo r th e 3.15pm cut - off p o in t. Prior to the resumption o f the
     inquests in November 1990 the Coroner decided, in spite o f objection, that he would
     call no evidence on events after 3.15pm. His reason was that the medical evidence
     which had been given by the pathologists at the mini - inquests, in particular D r
     Slater and Professor Usher, was to the effect that death from traumatic/crush asphyxia
     occurred four to six minutes after the chest became fixed so as to prevent breathing,
     and on the assumption that the deceased’s chests had become fixed at the latest by
     3.06pm , the time the match was abandoned, it could be further assumed that all the
     deceased were dead or dying by 3.15pm, and accordingly that nothing further could
     be done for them. He also chose this time because it coincided (approximately) with
     the arrival o f the first ambulance (see Transcript, 19 October 1990, pp8, 14.).

71   The B ritish M edical Jo u rn a l A rticle an d th e evidence a t th e inquests The
     Divisional Court observed in the six families Judicial Review in 1993 that the
     Coroner imposed the 3.15 pm cut-off

            “Because he took the view that on the overwhelming pathological evidence
            available to him permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered
            by all the deceased” (Appendix 2, Judgment, page 6C).

     In November 1991, a very different account appeared in the British Medical Journal,
     written by, among others D r W ardrope (Appendix 8). Many injured people taken to
     hospital survived and recovered (see Table 3). They suffered from a variety of
     injuries, serious and minor. Some unconscious victims were revived. The following
     questions are inevitably posed by this evidence. How many other injured supporters
     died o f injuries, untended, at the football ground o f injuries other than asphyxia, or
     of asphyxia at the ground which could have been treated if they had been taken to
     hospital ? (Only 14 o f the 95 victims (as opposed to the injured) were taken to
     hospital) Why was this evidence not made known to the inquests ?

72   M r W ardrope’s criticisms contained in this article should be compared with his
     evidence at the mini - inquests (Appendix 17, 18/4/90, p l9 et seq.). There, he made
     no mention o f any failings at the hospital, and in fact gave the opposite impression,
     namely that the hospital and emergency services had responded as envisaged in the
     M ajor Accident Plan (see e.g. p27 - 28).

73   The Divisional Court held that although there was evidence tending to show that some

                                            22
#
         o f the deceased were alive after 3 .15pm (see e.g. Judgment, p34), there was no basis
         for interfering with the Coroner’s exercise o f discretion in imposing this cut-off point.
         It is submitted that the new evidence, now available, presents a completely different
         account o f events.

    74   The C oroner’s ruling had a number o f consequences:

         (i)     The main consequence was to prevent any further inquiry into the individual
                 circumstances o f the 95 deaths. At the mini - inquests the Coroner had
                 assured the families that the question o f ’how’ would be dealt with later. The
                 inquests therefore became simply a general inquiry into the circumstances of
                  the disaster. A number o f the deceased were not mentioned at all during the
                 96 days o f evidence, save when their names were read out during the initial
                 roll - call and when the verdicts were announced. Accordingly, their families
                  never discovered how they died. An example is the family o f Peter Tootle
    ^            (see M emorial, Appendix 20). His parents travelled nearly every day o f the
    P            inquests by car from Liverpool to Sheffield . His name was mentioned only
                 in the list o f victims and when the verdicts were announced.

         (ii)    The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f the deceased
                 were alive for a considerable period after 3 .15pm;

         (iii)   The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f fans who
                 were left for dead at the ground in fact survived. Therefore, they never
                 considered the possibility that a number o f those who died might have been
                 saved had they received prompt and efficient medical attention;

         (iv)    They never heard evidence about the failure o f the Northern General Hospital
                 to activate its Major Accident Plan until well after the onset o f the disaster,
                 and the detrimental effect this had on patient care. D r W ardrope’s article
                 referred to the failure to activate the M ajor Accident Plan and stated (at
                 pl381):

                        Failure to implement the major incident alert earlier meant that only
                        a few staff had to cope with a large clinical workload in addition to
                        implementing the major incident plan.

    75   In summary, the Coroner’s ruling prevented any inquiry into the secondary failures
         o f the police and the emergency services to provide prompt and efficient medical
         attention to the injured.


         New evidence undermining the Coroners’s 3.15pm ruling

    76   The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for the 3.15 pm cut-off, and
         shows that lives could have been saved. The evidence shows that:

         (i)     Some o f those who died were alive after 3 .15pm;

                                                23
        (ii)   At least one supporter who would otherwise have died was saved by proper
               medical treatment.

       Taken together, this evidence shows that events after 3.15pm, in particular the
       inadequate response to the disaster by the police and the emergency services were
       relevant to the question of ’how’ the deceased died and accordingly that in order to
       fulfil properly his statutory functions the Coroner ought to have permitted relevant
       evidence to be called on this issue. The evidence provides specific examples o f Lord
       T aylor’s general conclusion that lives might have been saved by a more organised
       response (para. 251 and 252).

77     Ian M cDermott came forward as a result o f an appeal in the ’Liverpool Echo’. He
       has been interviewed by the Group’s solicitor, and a signed statement will be
       forwarded as soon as it is received. His evidence shows that he entered pen 3 after
       gate C was opened at 2.52pm. He was swept down to the front o f the pen almost
       immediately and began to be crushed. He spent a number o f minutes fighting to
       breathe, but became unconscious some time before 3.04pm.                He regained
       consciousness on the terraces whilst being given mouth to mouth resuscitation. He
       had pains in his chest, and he was later diagnosed as having suffered a cardiac arrest
       He was eventually carried off the terraces through the wire sometime after 3.25pm 8,
       and was taken to the gymnasium where he was fitted with a drip and received oxygen
       and was put into an ambulance. After a period in intensive care, he made a full
       recovery.

78     Ian M cDermott’s evidence demonstrates how the rescue operation ought to have
       operated. He received prompt medical attention on the terraces, was put into the
       recovery position almost immediately9, received oxygen while at the ground and,
       most importantly, was taken to hospital in an ambulance10. From this evidence the
       following conclusions can be drawn:

        (i)    M r M cDermott was dead on the terraces, his heart having stopped beating
               before he was carried out through the wire. Instead o f having a jacket placed
               over his face and being given up for dead, as happened to the majority o f the
               deceased11, resuscitation attempts continued, at the insistence o f his friend
               who had accompanied him.

        (ii)   Irreversible brain damage by 3 .15pm was not an inevitable consequence o f the
                severe crushing.



    8It is known that no request for cutting gear was made until 3.13pm, and from video
evidence that the wire in pen 3 was not cut until 3.25pm.

     9In contrast to, for example, Ian Glover, who was left lying on his back.

     10As noted elsewhere, a privilege only accorded to fourteen o f the 96 deceased.

     "F o r example Victoria Hicks: see para. I l l , below.

                                               24
(iii)   The provision of prompt medical attention to him, including drips and oxygen,
         made the difference between life and death in this case.

(iv)    There is a likelihood that others could have been saved had they received the
         same medical care M r McDermott received, and that their failure to receive
         this care required investigation at the inquests.

Andrew Sefton When the treatment Ian M cDermott received is contrasted with the
treatment Andrew Sefton received, it becomes apparent how lives could have been
saved. The jury were told that Andrew Sefton had been pulled from pen 3 by fans
who assisted in trying to revive him, and that a police officer had also tried to revive
him by performing cardiac massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation (Appendix 9).

Evidence which has come to light since the inquests shows this evidence to be at best
misleading, and demonstrates a number o f disturbing features about how Andrew
Sefton was treated in the aftermath o f the disaster.

(i)     There are conflicts between written statements o f PC Kearney and PC Shipley,
        the two officers involved with Andrew Sefton. (Appendix 9). In an undated
         handwritten statement PC Shipley did not refer to assisting in the resuscitation
        o f any injured person. His role was limited to calming fans down and being
        part o f the cordon across the pitch at the half way line. In a second statement
        dated 13 September 1989, PC Shipley refers to assisting with a number of
        injured persons, however the only one he purports to positively identify is
         Andrew Sefton. In late 1989 or early 1990, PC Shipley spoke to A ndrew ’s
        parents (at their house), and he told them that in fact Andrew had been the
        only person whom he had assisted.            Accordingly, he has given three
        conflicting accounts o f his activities on that day. The Summary o f Evidence
        prepared by West Midlands police states that PC Shipley gave heart massage
        while supporter attempted mouth to mouth resuscitation. There is however no
         mention in any o f PC Shipley’s accounts that he did cardiac massage. The
        jury were therefore given a false picture about the attempts by police to
        resuscitate Andrew. The full statements, only disclosed after the inquests,
         show that no police officer tried to revive Andrew.

(ii)    PC Kearney gives conflicting accounts o f where he took custody o f A ndrew ’s
         body. In his initial statement dated 19 May 1989 he says that he took custody
         of him outside the North Stand and took him to the gym. In a second
         statement dated 4 July 1989 he says "I took over this body outside the gym
         after about half a dozen fans had dumped him there".

(iii)   He asserts in his statement o f 19 May that he took custody o f Andrew ’s body
        when it was brought into the gymnasium and remained with him until the
        early hours of the 16 April when he was identified by his mother and taken
        to the Medico - Legal Centre. He refers to an abrasion on the lower
        abdominal region, and states that no other marks were found. This statement
        contains a number of omissions, and conflicts with the known evidence about
        Andrew’s injuries. There is no reference to Andrew being certified dead; it
•
                 therefore appears that Andrew was assumed to be dead rather than known to
                 be dead and no efforts made to attempt revival. Thirdly, there is no reference
                 to PC Shipley in PC Kearney’s statement.

         (iv)    The discrepancies in the officers statements and the false presentation o f the
                 officers’ evidence gives cause for concern. On the evidence as it is now
                 known, no attempts were made by trained personnel to revive Andrew Sefton
                 at any stage before he was certified dead by D r Bull at 3.50pm.

    81   Stephen W illiams This man also contacted the Group after an appeal in the
         ’Liverpool E cho.’ His evidence and that o f Andrew W orseley (who now lives in
         Sweden) has been given in an interview to a researcher for the Group (Appendix 10).

    82   M r Williams arrived in pen 3 at around 2.50pm, as the crush began to build up. He
          became trapped against a barrier at around 3.04pm, when Peter Beardsley hit the


    •
         cross - bar. He was unable to move for 10 minutes, and tried unsuccessfully to get
          help by biting the shoulder o f someone in front o f him. Eventually he lost
         consciousness. It is clear from his description and his injuries that M r W illiams was
         severely crushed. The extent o f the crushing is confirmed by a report compiled by
         M r W ardrope, referred to in the report o f D r Clive Leveson, which shows that he
         survived 30 minutes o f intense crushing (Appendix 10). The crushing was so intense
         that he suffered five fractured ribs. In contrast, only thirteen o f the deceased suffered
         rib fractures, and none sustained five fractures.

    83   M r W illiams regained consciousness in the courtyard outside the W est Stand. He
         remembers that when he came to he was vomiting and convulsing. He was put into
         an ambulance and taken to the Northern General Hospital.

    84   He was extricated from the pile o f bodies at the front o f pen 3 by a supporter called
         Andrew Worsely. He attended the match with his father, who was pushed over in
         one o f the surges. He found M r Williams underneath his father. He was blue in the
         face, and M r Worsely thought that he was dead. H e managed to drag him out into
         the courtyard, where a policeman threw him onto the ground where a number of
         bodies were already lying. It is apparent that the policeman incorrectly assumed him
         to be dead. It was only when M r Worsely saw a news programme subsequently that
         he realised that M r Williams had survived.

    85   This case is significant for four reasons:

         (i)     It demonstrates the arbitrariness o f the 3 .15pm deadline. The evidence o f the
                 pathologists Professor Usher and D r Slater at the beginning o f the mini -
                 inquests on 18 April 1990 (Appendix 17) was to the effect that the deceased
                 would have been dead after six minutes o f crushing. M r W illiam s’ case
                 demonstrates that supporters were able to survive for far longer, depending
                 upon a number o f factors, including their individual capabilities, whether the
                 crushing was intermittent or continuous, and whether they were being crushed
                 against a barrier or against other supporters. His case confirms the opinion
                 o f D r James Bums, a Home Office pathologist, which was sent to the Coroner

                                                26
#
            during the inquests, which called into question the validity o f the assumptions
            upon which the Coroner’s ruling had been based. D r Bums confirmed his
            opinion in an interview with the producer o f ’Hillsborough’ in M arch 1996
            (Appendix 11). It also supports the opinion o f D r Ian W est contained in a
            report dated 20 August 1992 (Appendix 11).

    (ii)    M r W illiams describes how he was having convulsions and was vomiting
            when he regained consciousness. This has a significance beyond his own
            case. At the mini -inquest into the death o f Kevin W illiams (no relation) on
            2 May 1990, Kevin Williams was described by PC Bruder as vomiting and
            having convulsions whilst he was lying on the pitch, at a time well after
            3.15pm. (Appendix 20, Memorial, p26 et seq.) This caused the Coroner to
            adjourn the mini - inquest so that further inquiries could be made as to
            whether Kevin Williams was still alive at this time. During the adjournment
            the West Midlands police went to considerable lengths to undermine this
            evidence. PC Bruder was re -interviewed by officers from the W est Midlands
            police and was persuaded to qualify his earlier statement. He was also
            telephoned by D r Slater, the pathologist, and was persuaded to change his
            evidence (see below). At the resumed mini - inquest PC Bruder altered his
            earlier evidence by saying that Kevin might only have been ’tw itching’ rather
            than having convulsions, and he could no longer be certain whether Kevin had
            vomited as he lay on the pitch. The explanation given by the pathologists was
            that vomiting is just one facet o f dying from asphyxia (see "Pathological
            aspects o f the disaster" by Professor Alan Usher, p6, Appendix 11). At the
            mini - inquest Dr Slater said that "[Convulsions] only occur when the
            individual is totally unconscious" (p8). The evidence relating to Kevin
            Williams was presented to the Divisional Court in the 1993 Judicial Review,
            however the Court held that the Coroner had been entitled to come to the
            conclusion he did (Appendix 2, Judgment, p34). Stephen W illiams case
            undermines the evidence given by the pathologists, and therefore undermines
            the conclusions o f the Divisional Court.

    (iii)   Evidence available, but not presented to, the mini - inquest into the death o f
            Ian Glover was to similar effect. This evidence only came to light shortly
            before the hearing in the Divisional Court in 1993. Therefore, although no
            doctors commented upon this evidence at the inquest, Lord Justice McCowan
            assumed that if they had been asked, they would have given a similar
            explanation, namely that vomiting is merely part o f the death throes o f a
            person dying o f asphyxia (Appendix 2, Judgment, p33 - 35). In fact, as the
            evidence o f Stephen Williams shows, those who had been badly crushed and
            survived also vomited and had convulsions.          This evidence therefore
            undermines the conclusion reached by the Divisional Court in the case o f Ian
            Glover. It cannot be assumed merely from the fact that Ian Glover was
            vomiting that he was dying.

    (iv)    It is an example o f a police officer assuming that a supporter was dead when
            in fact he was alive and capable o f being saved (see below).


                                           27
86   Graham Roberts The evidence presented at the inquests in respect o f Graham Roberts
     was to the effect that he was breathing when he was carried by PC Best to the
     perimeter driveway outside the Leppings Lane end, but that he died shortly
     afterwards, when he was taken to the gymnasium (Appendix 12).

87   This evidence is contradicted by the evidence o f another police officer, PC 861 Alan
     W adsworth, whose statements were not included in the file o f evidence sent to the
     Coroner. (Appendix 12). PC W adsworth’s evidence is remarkable for a number o f
     reasons. Firstly, in his undated handwritten statement he refers to a policewoman,
     PC 3162 Ruth Pears, giving cardiac massage "to one o f the bodies which had been
     presumed to be dead." Clearly mistakes were being made as to whether or not people
     were dead. (This is developed further below). Secondly, PC W adsworth describes
     giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to this man along with PC Pears for 10 minutes
     whilst an ambulance man and a doctor fitted a drip to his arm. After the drip had
     been fitted, this man was placed in an ambulance, at which time he still had a pulse.
     In two further statements dated 4 October 1989 and 9 October 1989 PC W adsworth
     identified this man as Graham Roberts.

88   PC W adsworth’s evidence therefore unequivocally shows that Graham Roberts was
     still alive after 3 .15pm, in contrast to the evidence given to the jury. At the time o f
     the inquests this conclusion would have been impossible in light o f the ’six minute
     death’ theory. Cases such as Stephen Williams make this conclusion entirely
     possible.

89   Circumstances o f disclosure PC W adsworth’s statements were disclosed by South
     Yorkshire police in August 1997 after a request was made by the G roup’s solicitor
     for the statements made by an ambulanceman called W adsworth, who was referred
     to in the statement o f an ambulance woman c a l l e d P C W adsworth’s
     statements were sent instead. This conflict in evidence ought to have been fully
     investigated so that it could be ascertained how and where Graham Roberts died. The
     fact that it was not investigated, and was only sent to the family by accident, is a
     further example o f the suppression o f evidence which tended to conflict with the
     Coroner’s theory that all the deceased died quickly. His family were told by South
     Yorkshire police in 1992 that there was no further information concerning their son
     (Appendix 12).


90   Sup p o rte rs who were presum ed to be dead b u t survived The fact that only
      fourteen o f the deceased were taken to hospital remains one o f the most disturbing
      aspects o f the Hillsborough disaster. A number o f the families are concerned that
      during the chaos on the pitch a number o f their relatives were presumed to be dead
      and taken to the gymnasium mortuary when in reality they were still alive and capable
      o f being saved had they received prompt and efficient medical treatment. D r Byrne
      made reference to a specific case o f this nature in his evidence to Lord Taylor.

91   The evidence which has now come to light shows that there are reasonable grounds
      for these fears. The evidence o f supporters who were left for dead outside the ground
      but survived reinforces the conclusion that a number o f fans could have been saved

                                            28
     if they had received hospital treatment instead o f being left in the gymnasium.
     Because there were few marks o f violence o f the bodies o f the dead and injured, it
     was difficult to discern those who were beyond help from those for whom survival
     was still possible. This raises the possibility that there were others who, while being
     more seriously injured so that they died, might have been saved if they had been
     treated. A full investigation o f each death was therefore required at the inquests,
     rather than a generalised inquiry into the circumstances.

92   Roger Ball The evidence o f Roger Ball is contained at Appendix 13. He attended the
     match with his sixteen year old son, Kester, and two o f his friends. The two friends
     managed to escape from pen 3 before the worst o f the crushing began. M r Ball was
     crushed into unconsciousness in pen 3, while Kester died.

93   M r Ball passed out shortly after kick off, at around 3.04pm. He remembers Peter
     Beardsley nearly scoring a goal, but does not remember the match being abandoned.
     H e regained consciousness outside the Leppings Lane stand some time thereafter. He
     had lost his watch in the crush, but he thought this was around 3.30pm - 3.45pm .
     He was found by a man who called              who was later identified as
                                                                   W hoever placed M r Ball
     outside the stand (and this was no[             thought  he was  dead, because he had
     been placed next to a man who was indeed dead. Although                thought M r Ball
     was dead, because he was blue in the face, he tried to resuscitate him by slapping him
     around the face, and M r Ball eventually revived. M r Ball made a full recovery, and
     began to search for his son.

94   M r Ball gave evidence at the inquests (Appendix 13), however he was not asked any
     questions about how he came to be put with other dead bodies, nor about how he was
     revived.

95   Edward Spearitt was in pen 4 with his son Adam, who died in intensive care. He
     was one o f the fourteen deceased who were taken to hospital. M r Speantt arrived at
     hospital at around 5.00pm, unconscious and having fits and in a dangerous condition.
     He was taken to intensive care, where he eventually recovered consciousness and
     made a full recovery.

96   There is no evidence as to what happened to M r Spearitt between 3.06pm and
     5.00pm . There are medical records o f his treatment at hospital but no indication of
     where he came from, or how he came to be taken to hospital. The evidence in this
     section shows there are a number o f people who were assumed to be dead and were
     taken to one o f the areas which were set aside for dead bodies. Because o f what
     happened in other cases, it is reasonable to conclude that M r Speantt was also left for
     dead outside the Leppings Lane stand or in the gymnasium.

97   Stephen W illiams This case is analysed above. After he had been extricated from
     the pile o f bodies by Andrew Worsely he was placed beside a pile o f bodies by a
     police officer who assumed that he was dead.




                                            29
         Evidence of slow and inadequate response bv the police and the emergency
         services

98       The evidence o f Anthony Edwards. Anthony Edwards was an ambulance driver who
         attended Hillsborough at around 3.32pm. He made a statement in June 1989 but did
         not give evidence at either the inquiry or the inquests, because his evidence dealt with
         events after 3.15pm. His evidence consists o f his statements o f June 1989 and
         September 1997.12

99      M r Edwards arrived at the ground in his ambulance to find a cordon o f police across
         the entrance to the pitch. Two ambulances were already parked outside the ground,
         and had not gone in. There was a discussion between the ambulance men and the
         police officers. They were told by the police that it was not possible for him to go
         on to the pitch because "they are still fighting in there." Eventually he and others
         were permitted to go onto the pitch. M r Edwards saw a number o f dead bodies being
         taken out and so it was obvious that the incident was a disaster and not crowd trouble.
u       Eventually they were allowed onto the pitch, where they commenced attempting to
         resuscitate the injured.

100     M r Edwards’ evidence is significant because it shows that the police were not just
         slow in requesting the ambulance service to attend but that they positively interfered
         with the ambulances’ efforts to get on the pitch. For whatever reason, some o f the
         police did not appreciate that there was a disaster in progress. Although Lord Taylor
         made some findings on these aspects o f the disaster, they were not discussed at the
        inquests. This has left the families with the sense that the inquests were therefore
        deficient. Had the Coroner heard that the police had intentionally or negligently
        hampered rescue efforts then there is a possibility that he would have concluded that
        it required further investigation.

101     Ambulanceman John Flack attended the scene and assisted in taking supporters to the
        Northern General Hospital. He made two statements (Appendix 15). These
        corroborate the evidence o f Anthony Edwards that there was total confusion during
        the rescue operation, with all ambulances being sent at one point to a bus depot.

102     Ambulanceman Peter Howes Peter Howes was an ambulanceman from the Derbyshire
        Ambulance Service who attended Hillsborough. He has given a witness statement to
        the Group describing his involvement in the disaster.13 His evidence, in summary,
        is that he was directed to a pile o f bodies outside the wall o f the ground, on the
        service road running beside the River Don on the south side o f the stadium. This was
        not one o f the official casualty clearing stations, and it is not clear why bodies were
        placed there. The bodies had been thrown in a heap, and a number had had clothes
        placed over their faces. Mr Howes has identified himself on a photograph tending
        to Carl Lewis, one o f the deceased.



      12A signed copy o f this statement will be forwarded as soon as it is received.

      13A signed copy o f the statement will be forwarded as soon as it is received.
      Evidence of improper behaviour bv officers from the West Midlands police:
      procedural irregularity at the inquests

103   Evidence has come to light which tends to show that some witnesses were pressurised
      into changing their evidence (or prevented from adding to their evidence) by officers
      from the West Midlands police. In the main, this pressure was brought to bear in
      order to prevent evidence being put before the jury which tended to contradict the
      theory that all the deceased were dead by 3.15pm. This evidence demonstrates the
      biased and incomplete nature o f the investigation, and the desire on the part o f those
      investigating the disaster to keep to a minimum the scrutiny o f South Yorkshire
      police’s reaction to the disaster.

104   PC Bruder and WPC Martin The evidence o f WPC Martin and PC Bruder
      concerning Kevin Williams is contained in the memorial to the Attorney - General
|     (Appendix 20). It should be noted that the Divisional Court accepted that there were
      unresolved questions o f fact in respect o f the evidence o f these officers, in particular
      whether WPC Martin had been pressurised into making her statement (Appendix 2,
      Judgment, p28G - 29A).

105   The evidence o f these officers was crucial to the question of whether Kevin Williams
      was alive after 3 .15pm. Their evidence showed that he was alive after this time, and
      that the Coroner’s decision was therefore wrong. It was important from the
      Coroner’s point o f view that their evidence be undermined. On 3 May 1990, during
      an adjournment in Kevin Williams’ mini - inquest, PC Bruder was visited by an
      officer from the West Midlands police and was persuaded to make a statement
      contradicting his earlier statement. He also received a phone call from Dr Slater (see
      below). WPC Martin received a visit from a West Midlands officer in March 1990
      during which she was persuaded, under pressure, to alter her initial statement in
      which she had described Kevin Williams saying ’Mum’. After the inquests WPC
      Martin made a further statement in which she re - affirmed the truth o f her first
      statement, and stated that she only signed her second statement because o f the undue
      pressure which was put on her by PS Appleton o f the West Midlands police.

106   The Divisional Court appeared to indicate that it regarded the truth o f what happened
       to WPC Martin as being important, although it did not need to decide where the truth
       lay for the purposes o f the application for Judicial Review (Judgment, pp28 - 29).
       It is respectfully submitted that the functions o f this Scrutiny are not so limited, and
       that because the bona fides of the West Midlands police is now in issue, these
       important questions should now be answered.

107   Dr Slater was one o f the pathologists on whose opinion the Coroner based his 3 .15pm
      decision. He testified at the mini - inquest into the death of Kevin Williams. During
       the adjournment o f the mini - inquest he telephoned PC Bruder and discussed his
      evidence with him. In particular, he tried to persuade PC Bruder that he could not
       have seen vomit, and that it was probably phlegm or spittle. The substance of this
      telephone call was shown in a dramatised form in the programme ’Hillsborough’.

                                              31
  108   Dr Slater does not deny that the phone call took place, nor does he deny that he
        discussed PC Binder’s evidence with him. Indeed, he admitted as much during his
        evidence on 4th May 1990. Rather, he defends his actions on the basis that the call
        had been made with the full knowledge o f the Coroner. Dr Slater has maintained a
        correspondence with Dr Edward Walker, who reviewed the programme for the British
        Medical Journal, in which he has continued to defend his actions. (Appendix 16).

 109    There is no doubt that Dr Slater’s actions amounted to a serious procedural
        irregularity, whether or not he acted with the approval o f the Coroner. He should
        not have discussed evidence with PC Bruder during the inquest. He should not have
        sought to persuade PC Bruder that he could not have seen what he said he had seen.
        It was for the witness to give his evidence, and for the Coroner and the interested
        parties (all o f whom were represented) to conduct such cross - examination as was
        appropriate. His actions were improper, suspicious, and vitiated the legitimacy o f
        Kevin Williams’ mini - inquest. The Group respectfully submits that this incident
        requires full investigation.

t o     Paul Taylor was a spectator in pen 3 who assisted in removing injured fans from the
        pen. His evidence is contained in Appendix 19.

 111    His evidence, in summary, is that he was attempting to resuscitate a young man and
        a young girl, later identified as Victoria Hicks. A police officer came and felt the
        pulses o f both bodies and told him to leave them as they were both dead. Paul
        Taylor therefore covered the young man’s face with an anorak and covered Victoria
        Hicks with her cardigan. In fact, as the evidence o f Tony Edwards shows, Victoria
        was subsequently found by her father and was taken in Tony Edwards’ ambulance to
        the Northern General Hospital. She was still alive, and a concerted effort was made
        to revive her after she reached hospital. On her death certificate, her place o f death
        was recorded as being the Northern General Hospital.

 112    Mr Taylor did not include details o f this in his statement, because he was not aware
        at the time o f the girl’s identity. After speaking with Mr and Mrs Hicks he contacted
        West Midlands police and was visited at his home in Liverpool by DC McCombie,
        the officer assigned to the Hicks’ case. When Mr Taylor explained what it was he
        wanted to add to his statement, DC McCombie threatened him that he would be
        committing peijury if he made an additional statement, for which he could be
        imprisoned, if he did not know the officer’s name and number. Mr Taylor therefore
        did not make an additional statement. When he gave evidence at the inquests he did
        not make reference to the incident involving Victoria Hicks.

 113    This was clearly an improper threat. Mr Taylor merely wished to add details to his
        statement the importance o f which he now appreciated. His evidence shows that there
        was a rush to declare people dead who were not dead, and who might have been
        saved if they had reached hospital more quickly.

 114    Match tickets and gate C A consistent pattern o f evidence has emerged showing that
        West Midlands officers went to great lengths to produce evidence to show that as
        many fans as possible went through gate C rather than through the turnstiles, so that

                                              32
      attention was focused on the behaviour o f the fans rather than on the behaviour o f the
      police.

115   The evidence presented at the inquests placed Paul Carlile outside the ground at
      14.54, after gate C was opened. The photograph produced was taken by a police
      photographer.

116   This evidence was incorrect. His mother Sandra Stringer has positively identified
      Paul on a photograph inside the ground at 2.47pm, i.e. before gate C was opened.
      Paul had a ticket stub, which was returned to his mother Sandra Stringer, which
      shows that he went through a turnstile.

117   The night before Paul Carlile’s mini - inquest began Mrs Stringer was visited by
      officers from the West Midlands police who demanded that she hand over his ticket
      stub. She refused, however the officers were extremely insistent, at one point saying
      that they would not leave until she handed over the ticket. She eventually handed it
      over on condition that she be given a receipt. One o f the police officers advised Mrs p
      Stringer "Whatever you do, don’t let them say Paul went through gate C". In the |
      event the West Midlands police summary officer told the mini - inquest that a full
      match ticket was found in Paul’s personal effects (Transcript, 3 May 1990, p6).

118   Mary Corrigan, the mother o f Keith Macgrath, received a similar visit from officers
      from the West Midlands police demanding that they hand over ticket stubs. Theresa
      Glover was given back a full ticket, although it was well documented that her son had
      gone through a turnstile with his brother Joe, who survived.

119   This evidence shows that West Midlands police officers were anxious to show as
      many fans as possible entering through gate C rather than the turnstiles. This was
      to fit in with the police’s attempt to blame the disaster on fans who arrived late and
       ’stormed’ through gate C.

                            The importance of full disclosure

120   The work of those representing the Group is hampered by the fact that disclosure o f
      documents is a laboured and painfully slow process. It is submitted that it is unjust
      and unsatisfactory that the papers, formerly in the possession o f the West Midlands
      Police, are now controlled by the South Yorkshire Police. Statements o f police
      officers have been disclosed recently providing names o f officers who were apparently
      concerned with individual cases, but whose existence has never before been made
      known to the families. Documents are now being disclosed, causing a wholly
      different picture to emerge from that provided to the families and the Coroner’s court
       in 1990-91. Further submissions will be made on these documents as and when they
       are received.

121   It is submitted that the facts o f the Hillsborough inquests need to be examined in full.
       The office o f the Scrutinising Judge is requested to take possession o f all the material
       in the case and to ensure that it is made available to all parties. Statements of
       witnesses were not disclosed to the bereaved families at the time o f the inquests, and

                                              33
      disclosure has been refused since.


                              The Purpose of an Inquest


122   In R. v. H.M. Coroner for North Humberside & Scunthorpe ex parte Jamieson
      [1995] 1 Q.B. 1 Sir Thomas Bingham MR considered the nature and purpose o f an
      inquest in the context of the death o f a prisoner in custody. He said:

                     An inquest is a fact finding inquiry conducted by a coroner, with or
                     without a jury, to establish reliable answers to four important but
                     limited factual questions ... It is the duty o f the coroner as the public
                     official responsible for the conduct of inquests, whether he is sitting
                     with a jury or without, to ensure that the relevant facts are fully, fairly
                     and fearlessly investigated. He is bound to recognise the acute public
                     concern rightly aroused where deaths occur in custody. He must
                     ensure that the relevant facts are exposed to public scrutiny,
                     particularly if there is evidence o f foul play, abuse or inhumanity. He
                     fails in his duty if his investigation is superficial, slipshod or
                     perfunctory. (Emphasis added)


      In R. v. South London Coroner ex parte Thompson 126 S.J. 125 Lord Lane CJ said

                     The function o f an inquest is to seek out and record as many o f the
                     facts concerning the death as the public interest requires.

123   The Group acknowledges the difficulties inherent in holding inquests into the deaths
      o f 95 people in a single disaster. Nonetheless, the circumstances in which the inquests
      were held, in Sheffield, before a Sheffield Coroner, and the way it was handled give
      rise by themselves to feelings of profound unease. A reading o f the transcripts o f the
      evidence, particularly relatives of victims, repays study. The disproportionate time
      given to questions as to whether drink had been consumed was absurd and offensive.
      Meaningless detail was adduced about the circumstances in which supporters travelled
      to and arrived at the ground. Condescension was shown to relatives in questioning.
      Relatives were never given copies o f their own witness statements, but shown them
      perfunctorily outside court before they were called in. In contrast, all police officers
      visibly had copies which they studied, and retained, outside court. The legal
      representation was wholly disproportionate. One junior barrister sought to represent
      over 40 families, while every South Yorkshire institution with an interest to protect
      was represented.

124   These features o f the inquests intensify the belief o f the Group that justice was
      perverted and the truth hidden in order to protect the South Yorkshire authorities and
      services. Further information will be provided as soon as it is available.




                                             34
           CONCLUSION

  125     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has posed certain questions to the Group by letter. It is
          hoped that these representations have answered them. It is submitted that the fresh
          evidence of Houldsworth, Walker and Edwards (and in relation to individual cases,
          others) would have affected the terms in which Lord Taylor wrote his report and
          expressed his criticisms. The new evidence o f Houldsworth would have made
          verdicts o f unlawful killing much more likely because the question o f what was
          visible was, as the Coroner repeatedly suggested, at the heart o f the issue (see
          paragraphs 16 to 22, above) . It is known that the evidence was not submitted to the
          jury, and it appears that its significance could not have been explained to the
          Coroner. The evidence of Walker, Edwards, and the account given in the British
          Journal o f Medicine by Wardrope should and would have lead to a different type of
          inquest in which manslaughter on the additional basis o f criminal neglect o f injured
          people would have been open to the jury in individual cases as the evidence o f events
          after 3.15 pm demanded.

^^126     It is now apparent that the inquests were an incomplete and inadequate inquiry into
          the deaths of those who died at Hillsborough. In respect o f some o f the deceased,
          questions remain about even the most basic facts, such as where and when they
          died.14

  127     The Group’s task o f gathering the primary evidence from South Yorkshire police is
          not yet complete, but from the evidence gathered already and here presented it is
          inevitable that further deficiencies and contradictions will come to light which will
          further highlight the inadequacy o f the Coroner’s inquiry. The Group submits that
          this evidence justifies the quashing o f the inquest verdicts. Only a hearing before the
          Divisional Court will enable its effect on the outcome o f the inquests to be properly
          assessed, however the Group submits that had the evidence herein been presented at
          the inquests there is a real possibility that the outcome would have been different,
          both in terms o f the verdicts, and in terms of the grief and bitterness which the
          families feel as a result o f the Coroner’s flawed inquiry.




          25th September 1997




        14For example Graham Roberts, supra.

                                                35
04-SEP-S7        IB   34   F R O M : 3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                                 ID=         0171    242      4270       PAGE   1
      V\    ""


                                            3 RA Y M O N D B U ILD IN G S
                                                G R A Y 'S INN L O N D O N W C I R 5 B H

                                                     T elep h on e: 0171 831 3 8 3 3
                                                              Fax 0171 2 4 2 4 2 2 1

                                                                  LDli Box No 237

                                                   t-.-M**}         tOld&S I?42^cnaipuMrv« com


                                         THE CHAMBERS OF CLIVE NICHOLLS QC
             CLIVE NICHOLLS QC                       COLIN PITT                                               CRISPIN AYLI IT
             COJ.IN NICHOL1.S                        JOHN BLAIR-C.OUID                                        ALEXANDER CAM! RON
             (ilL.BLRT GRAY QC                       ANDREW MIJIR                                             HELEN MALC OLM
             RICHARD BECKETT QC                      KEVIN DEHAAN                                             JAMES I .F.WIS
             JOHN NUTTING QC                         RICHARD ATCHLF.Y                                         JOHN HARDY
             STEPHEN BATTEN QC                       MICHAEL BROMLEY-MARUN                                    HUGO KEITH
             A lU N J O N E S Q C                    MARK HARRIS                                              HUGH DAVIES
             DAVID WHITEHOUSE QC                     JAMES HINES                                              CAMPASPE LLOYD-JACOB
             NICHOLAS PRICE QC                       JAMES RANKIN                                             TANIA BROMLEY-MARTIN
             MONTAGUE SHERBORNE QC                   JANE HUMPHRY!*                                           RICHARD WORMALD
             FRANCIS EVANS QC                        NEIL SAUNDERS                                            ALISDAIR WILLIAMSON
             CLARE MONTGOMERY QC                     STEPHEN WALSH                                            JULIAN KNOWLES
                                                 SEMOR CLERK.            RONALD BUTLER




                                     FAX T R A N SM ISSIO N
             TO:            £ ,    P .     U v r J i.

             FAXNo: Ll i ~ 2°°^
             FROM;                             / ip           M         ,


             RE.

             DAI
             Message:                                                                                    j           .y




                  f        ,,,                                                                   ^                        ^      ^


                      r * H       i / e- d uL* 7>                                      /i# * * .


                            G        For information only                                            O       Please consult

             There are % L pages including this cover sheet in this transmission. Please notify m y errors in
             transmission to (+44)(0)I71831 383}

             The Information In thisfax transmission Is privileged and intendedfo r the addressee only. Ifyou receive
             h in error, please contact us immediately on the above number and then destroy It
                         T H f H ip i^ A L SCRUTINY INTO
                     THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




            i n t f , B im WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF Q F IM SL
                       HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY S U fg QKLGRQIIg




1.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group. These submissions arc made on behalf o f the
       Hillsborough Family Support Group (“the Group”), which consists of most ot the
       families who lost relatives in the disaster.1 The Group was responsible for the submission
       o f the new evidence to the Home Secretary in March 1997 which resulted in the
       establishment o f this Judicial Scrutiny. These submissions are provisional, for reasons
       which appear in the course o f this document.

2      The aims o f the Group. The Group contends that the fresh evidence discovered justifies
       criminal proceedings for perverting the course of justice at the inquest in 1990-91. I he
       culpability o f particular individuals needs to be discovered by further investigation.
       While some believe that proceedings for manslaughter should have been brought, others
       argue that an acceptance by police officers o f fault at the inquest would have assuaged
       grief and anger, and that the concealment o f the truth and misrepresentation o f events is
       more serious. AH seek from this Scrutiny a fHrtheLiudicjal inquiry^into thejjisastgrjHi
       the basis o f evidence not made available talhc inquiry^ fX g r d la y lor       nor to the
       inquest in 1990-91. It is accepted, eight and a half years after the event, that it is
       impracticable, and may be undesirable, for a fresh inquest to be convened. It is not
       argued that a judge should be appointed to re-examine all the issues considered by the
       Taylor Inquiry. It is submitted that the matter should be referred to the High Court tor
       a determination whether the verdicts o f “accidcntal death” should be set aside by reason
       o f the fresh evidence. However, these submissions will demonstrate that there are issues
        o f fact which can only be resolved by the presentation o f oral evidence at such a
        proceeding. The most appropriate course would be

                 (a) an invitation by the scrutinising tribunal to the Attorney-General to issue his
                 flat for an application to the Divisional Court under section 13 o f the Coroners
                 Act 1988, with a view to having the inquest verdicts quashed, combined with,

                 (b) the grant o f leave to move for Judicial Review ot the inquests verdicts, or a
                 recommendation that leave be granted.



      ‘The submissions have been prepared by Alun Jones QC and Julian Knowles of Counsel,
 3 Raymond Buildings, Gray's Inn, London WC1R 5BH, instructed by Ann Adlington, solicitor
 to the Group.
04 — S E P — 9 7   IB =35     FROM.   3 RAYMOND      BUILDINGS                ID:   0171    242   4270               PAGE   2




                            Section 13 o f the Coroners Act reads

                        (1)         I his section applies where, on an application by or under the authority o f the of
                                   the Attorney - General, the High Court is satisfied as respects a coroner (uthe
                                   coroner concerned”) either...

                            (b)   where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether by reason o f fraud,
                                  rejection o f evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry', the
                                  discovery o f new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or desirable in the
                                  interests o f justice that another inquest should be held.

                        (2)       The High Court may -

                        (a)       order... another inquest to be held into the death...

                        (c)       where an inquest has been held, quash the inquisition on thatinquest.


                        In Ee Rapisr [1988] 1 Q.B. 26 the Court stated (at p28C) that it was desirable for
                        applications under section 13 o f the Act to be combined with an application for Judicial
                        Review in order for the Court to have the broadest range o f remedies at its disposal.


                       Ths adVflOt&ggs o f a Divisional Court hearing. Such a hearing would have a number of
                       advantages over a “first instance” type o f enquiry .

                       (i)               the Divisional Court could inform itself o f background and
                                         uncontroversia! evidence by affidavit evidence;

                       (ii)              the Divisional Court could, at an inter partes hearing, decide how much
                                         evidence need be called live to determine whether vcrdicts should be
                                         quashed.

                       (iii)             the very flexible Judicial Review procedures available would obviate the
                                         need for expensive and cumbersome re-litigation.

                        i htf motives pf the. Gig,up- Most, but not all, o f the members o f the Group are from
                       Liverpool. Otherwise they have little in common beyond the fact that all of them lost
                       cherished relatives. They come from a variety o f backgrounds, circumstances and
                       occupations. The Group is not political, and has no interest cxcept in promoting the
                       legitimate legal interests of its members in relation to the disaster. A number o f letters
                       arc attached from members o f the Group who wish to express their own reasons for
                       wanting a Iresh enquiry. (Appendix 11)

                       Common to all the members o f the group is a deep-seated conviction that the legal system
                       failed them, at a vulnerable time in their lives, when they most needed its protections.
                       Hostility is not directed towards the Taylor Inquiry. Many recognise that the disaster

                                                                    2
04-SEP-97   16*36     FROM > 3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                 ID.   0171    24 2 4 2 7 0              PAGE   3




                lead, through Lord Justice Taylor s recommendations, to great and lasting improvements
                in safety at football grounds. However, the Group's attitudes to the inquest are very
                different. Repeatedly, members have told their lawyers, and wish to express to I .ord
                Justice Stuart-Smith, that they attended the inquest full o f trust in the police and coroner’s
                court, which subsequent events have proved to have been misplaccd. The feeling of
                betrayal is profound and has led to deep bitterness and, in some, a sense o f alienation
                from the courts and law enforcement authorities. Many feel that they have failed their
                dead relatives by failing to assert themselves effectively at the inquest.

                 I he new evidence demonstrates that the inquest proceedings, culminating in verdicts of
                accidental death, were deeply flawed. The inquest verdicts were procured by the
                presentation of false and misleading evidence, and by the concealment and rejection of
                material evidence. Responsibility for this lies with the South Yorkshire Police, and with
                the West Midlands Police, who investigated the disaster.

                  I he inquest verdicts were the culmination of the attempts o f the South Yorkshire Police
                 attempts to shift the blame for the disaster from themselves to others, in particular to the
                 supporters. This evasion o f responsibility began as the disaster unfolded, when the
                 officer in charge lied to the Secretary o f the FA about what was happening, and continued
                 through to the inquests, despite Lord Justice Taytor's condemnation (sec Report
                 (Appendix 1) para. 285). The fact that the Taylor Inquiry is not criticised by most o f the
                Group enhances rather than diminishes the need for a further Inquiry. The Taylor Report
                was directed to other issues than the Inquest, and was, from the point o f view o f the
                 families o f the deceased, impersonal and general. Each bereaved person looked to the
                Inquest to discover the individual circumstances o f his or her relative’s dcath;:instcad of
                this, it became apparent to them, eventually, that the Inqucstdul "At                     thc^
                                        Q-f-^ch individual’s death, but was another general inquiry into the
                overall circumstances o f the disaster, which succeeded in the minds o f certain sections 0
                ol the public in undermining and even reversing the findings o f Lord Justice Taylor, It I.
                is submitted that a useful starting point in understanding the background is to contrast the
                Interim Report o f Lord I aylor o f August 1989 with the summing-up o f the Coroner to the
                jury.

                In these Submissions the Group will:

               (i)      Present and analyse the new evidence, none o f which was considered by Lord
                        Justice Taylor or the inquests;

               (ii)     Analyse the false evidence which was given;

               (iii)    Demonstrate how the new evidence might have affected the course o f the
                        inquests.




                                                        3
04-SEP-37   1B:3B   FROM ; 3 RAYMOND      BUILDINGS                ID:   0171   242   4270                  PAGE   4




                              CHRONOLOGY AND PROCEDURAL                   h is t o r y

            !0    The most important dates arc as follows:

                  1282

                  April 15             2.52pm; Gate C opened

                                        3.06pm: Match stopped

                                       3.15pm: Mr Duekenlield tells the Secretary o f the FA that
                                       Liverpool funs have burst in through the gates. Later, other
                                       officers tell the press that excessive drinking by Liverpool fans
                                       was the cause o f the disaster.

                                       Two video tapes go missing from the locked and alarmed club
                                       control room room at Hillsborough.

                 April 17              Lord Justice Taylor appointed

                 April 18             Inquests opened and adjourned

                 April 19             The Sun article'The Truth". False police allegations that drunken
                                       fans were to blame and that they had looted the bodies of the dead
                                       presented as established fact

                 April 24             West Midlands Police begin their investigation

                 Ma>' 15              Taylor Inquiry begins (174 witnesses give evidence)

                 Jline 29             Taylor Inquiry finishes

                 August 4             Interim Taylor Report published

                 August 5             Chief Constable ot South Yorkshire (Peter Wright) offers to
                                      resign in the light of the Taylor Report. Tic expresses surprise at
                                      the extent his force's failings.

                 1990

                 February             Decision taken to hold 'mini - inquests' dealing with the statutory
                                      questions of'who, where and when’, but not with 'how'

                                                       4
04 - S E P - 9 7   IB-. 3 7    F R O M . 3 RAYMOND    BUILDINGS               ID : 0 1 7 1    242    4270                 PAGE   5




                              April 18               'Mini - inquests' resume. On average, 20 minutes spent on each
                                                     case.                     ~~                           —

                          October 30             The DPP announces his decision that no police officers will be
                                                 prosecuted because o f "insufficient evidence".

                          November 19            Main inquests begin in Sheffield.

                          am
                          March 28               The jury return verdicts of'accidcnta) death by a majority o f 9 - 2,

                          July 11                Police Complaints Authority (PC A) direct that charges o f neglect
                                                 o f duty be preferred against Mr Duckcnlield and Mr Murray.

                          November 10            Mr Duckenfield announces his retirement on medical grounds.

                          im

                         January 13              I he PCA drop the charges against Mr Murray.

                         April                   Memorial presented to the Attorney - General, for the purposes of
                                                 section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, asking for new inquests on
                                                 in the case of six families the basis o f evidence which has come
                                                 to light since the original inquest.

                         August 20              Attorney - General says that there is insufficient basis for the
                                                exercise o f his fiat

                         am
                         April 6                Leave to move for judicial review granted

                         November 5             Judicial review refused by the Divisional Court (McCowan I.J and
                                                Turner J) (Appendix 2).

                         JW 6

                         December 5             Granada Television         broadcasts        drama          documentary
                                                ’Hillsborough’

                        m i

                        March                   Roger Houldsworth's evidence, the footage from Camera 5 before
                                                15.02 pm, which the Coroner ai the Inquest stated had gone
     A                                          missing, and the evidence o f Dr E3ward WaD^erpresented to the
         (1         f                           Home Secretary and the DPP.

                        1-
    0 4 - S E P -9 7    16:37    FROM       3 RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                 ID=   0171    242   4270               PAGE




                                Junc 30                 Hume Secretary announces a judicial scrutiny o f the fresh
                                                        evidence.




                              flflre W C E W I JfKESENTF.D TQ THE INQUESTS OR TO I .o w n l u s T ir v
                              IAYLOK S INQUIRY: T W n f-f .NERAI. SUBJECTS



                             There were two serious areas o f human tailing at Hillsborough, applicable to all the
                             deaths

                                      (0       The failures o f control in the policc control box, highlighted in the Taylor
                                               Report, caused the crushing in the pens.

                                      (n)     The slow and inadequate response to the developing disaster delayed the
                                              arrival o f the emergency services, and prevented the injured from
                                              receiving medical attention. It is remarkable and shocking that only
                                              fourteen o f the deceased were taken to hospital. The remainder were left
                                              for dead in the gymnasium at the football ground, or at various locations
                                              at the back o f the Leppings Lane terraces.

Ju*                         Evidence relevant to both o f these limbs of failure was withheld from the Inquest jury.
  , 1                     0 10 the f*rst °* * ese’    evidence o f Roger Houldsworth is directly relevant. To ihe
                           <£eCOnd’ the evidence o f Dr Edward ta lk er and the ambulanceman Tony lidwards is
                             irectly relevant. None o f these was made available to the Coroner’s court nor to the
              -         /   Taylor Inquiry.

                                  Thl? PPtoce control feftx; the importance of the video tape evidence.

              ^    12             recently-discovered evidence o f Roger Houldsworth is o f central importance. In
  v^ jl W w                ° rCler t0 understanci its significance, it is necessary to consider the very different evidence
   i           i           advanced between 1989 and 1991, Lord Justice Taylor found that the primary'cause of
                            the disaster was the failure o f control which occurred in the police control box at
L'~ c-*'f “Y * ■           Hillsborough. He said that the decision to open gate C at 2.52pm should have been
                            accompanied by measures to divert the fans away from the tunnel into pens 3 and 4
                            which, he found, were overfull at 2.50pm (Para. 184). Although he acccpted the police
                            evidence that they were unable to see the terraces because o f a faulty camcra, he found
                            that it was foreseeable that opening the gate would cause injuries in the pens. He
                            described the police's failure to take these measures as "a blunder o f the first magnitude"
                           (Sss paras. 229 -232) He singled out Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the officer in
                           charge, for particular criticism. "Mr Duckenficld's capacity to take decisions and give
                           orders seemed to collapse ... He froze." (Paras. 282 - 284). Mr Duckenfield and his
                           deputy, Superintendent Murray, were charged with neglect of duty by the Policc
                           Complaints Authority, although the cases were discontinued when Mr Duckenlleld
                           retired on medical grounds,
04-SEP-37       16   3B F R O M ; 3 R A Y M O N D   BUILDINGS              ID>   0171   242   4270                PAGE   7




                       ■His false allocation o f blame ffl Liverpool supporters. The police, aided by 'The Sun'
                       newspaper, had sought to blame the disaster on drunken Liverpool fans ( m Chronology,
                       supra ). I he Taylor Report repudiated this completely. Lord Justice Taylor both
                       exonerated the fans and criticised the police, not just for their mistakes, but for telling
                       lies and refusing to face up to their responsibilities (para. 285). The Chief Constable of
                       South Yorkshire, Peter Wright, offered to resign after publication o f the Report,
                       expressing surprise at the extent to which his force had been criticised.

                       By the time the main inquests resumed in November 1990, therefore, it was clear that the
                      locus o f the evidence should be upon the actions o f the police rather than the behaviour
                      ol the fans. It was apparent that a central question would be whether the police's 'blunder' ^
                      was o f sufficient gravity so as permit the jury to return verdicts o f unlawful killing. This
                      made it extremely important that all the evidence relevant to the issue o f the police's
                      culpability was put before the inquest jury. The two police forces would have been aware
                      that the more the jury heard that it was obvious that the pens were full when gate C was
                      opened, the more likely it was that verdicts o f unlawful killing would be returned

                      Ih s basifcls&
                                   Lal issus.at the inquest. At the inquests the Coroner left two verdicts to the
                      jury, namely accidental death and unlawful killing. (See Appendix 3, 25/3/91, Day 77,
                      p3 etseq.). In relation to unlawful kilting, he directed the jury in accordance with
                      Watkins LJ's formulation in £ y. West London Coroner ex parte Gray [1988] Q B. 467,
                      namely:

                                       Was the failure to act for the benefit o f the health and welfare o f the
                                       deceased reckless ? An act o f recklessness means that he did or failed to
                                       do something where there was an obvious and serious risk to the health
                                       and welfare o f the deceased, to which that person whose conduct you are
                                       considering having regard to his duty was indifferent or that recognising
                                       the risk to be present he deliberately chose to run the risk by doing
                                       nothing about it.


            1        Issues Of Fafl. There were two main general factual questions for the jury to consider in
                      connection with the verdict o f unlawful kilting:

                     (i)      Should the police be blamed for opening gate C, given the crush which had
                              developed outside the turnstiles and, if so, to what extent ought they to be
                              blamed?

                     (ii)     Should the police be blamed for failing to take measures to divert fans away from
                              the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 when gate C was opened and. if so. to what extent
                              ought they to be blamed ?

            17       In his summary of the evidence, the Coroner first considered the events outside the
                      ground and the crush which developed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles prior to 2.52pm.
                      (Day 77, 25/3/91, p7 e( seq ). Having considered this evidence, the Coroner told the iurv
                      (p25):


                                                                7
 0 4 - S E P -97    16 =3 8 F R O M : 3 R A Y M O N D   BUILDINGS                 ID:    0171     242     4270              PAGE   8




                                            All the evidence would seem * not all but virtually all the evidence would
                                            seem to point to that direction, that the decision to open the gate was
                                            reasonable in the circumstances.

                           Therefore the Coroner effectively directed the jury that the answer to (i) was 'No'.3

                   18      I he Coroner then went on to consider the events in the policc control box On no lewer
                          than four occasions he directed the jury that the most crucial issue in the ease was the
                          knowledge and actions o f the officers in the control box. In particular, he directed the
                          jury to consider very carefully what the officers knew about the overcrowding in pens 3
                          and 4 before 3.00pm, and whether they were aware that the pens were already full when
                          the orders were given to open gate C, which led to the influx o f supporters and the fatal
                          crushing on the terraces.

                   19     At pp54 - 55 the Coroner described the following question as one o f the "root questions":

                                           [A]t what point could - assuming somebody had looked at the terrace -
                                           could anybody have realistically noted that there was serious
                                           overcrowding with the terrace (.s/V)...

                   20     Having directed the jury on Mr Puckenfleld’s decision to open gate C the Coroner .said
                          at ppl 25 - 128:

                                           Now, what about the assessment of the terraces, becausc this is may be
                                           the single most important factor which you have to weigh.

                                           The sum total o f the evidence from the Control Room, from Mr
                                           Duckenfield, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard, was that none of
                                           them had noticed any problems with the pens until people came over or
                                           the gates were opened. In other words, shall we say in round terms, three
                                           o'clock.

                                           This was partly because thctr attention was focussed on what was
                                           happening outside Leppings Lane, though J think Mr Goddard certainly
                                           said he did glance around and he had noticed nothing unusual... [he] also
P \T' o
                                           said that in fact the front o f the pens is quite difficult to see becausc o f the
                                           angles...

                                           So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have noted at



                         There are a number o f members o f the Group who believe that the decision to open gate
               ( ’ was. by itself, an understandable reaction to what was happening outside the ground 1lowcver
               a number of families believe that this decision cannot be looked at in isolation, and that because
               the police were to blame for having allowed the crush at the turnstiles to have built up, the
               decision to open the gate was o f itself a culpable act for which they ought to be held responsible;
               an alternative remedy was available, to delay the kick-off.


                                vL-            vAw- A                            k-w La         fl-~-   ri-'     X-*
0 4 - S E P -97    I B . 39    FROMi     3 RAYMOND         BUILDINGS                      ID.   0171   242   4270         PAGE   9




                                                 the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens were so full
                                                 or so over full that diversion was something which had to he taken, und
                                                 secondly, o f course, would the connection, would a reasonably prudent,
                                                 skilled police officer in the shoes, if you like, of Mr Duckenficld or
                                                 indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the opening o f the gate,
                                                 diversion o f the tunnel, and conditions on the pen?

                              I he following day the Coroner returned to this question. He directed the jury (26/3/91,

                          Day 78, p22):

                                                 [I]n the final analysis you may feel the real apex o f the problem is the
                                                 issue o f whether or not there was such a failure in not diverting (he tans
                                                 from the tunnel that you can classify that as creating an obvious and
                                                 serious risk o f injury.

                          At p24 he said:

                                             It all hinges, as 1 said to you yesterday, on whether or not; what the
                                             assessment, if any. o f the pens were becausc if the pens w'ere either not
                                             observed or were observed and not noted to be abnormal then that might
                                             help you in deciding whether or not there was an obvious and serious risk
                                             to the people involved.

                                             One of the big problems, of course, is that whenever you think about this,
                                             and when everybody thinks about it, one has to ask the question,
                                             "Obvious and serious to who ?", You have heard the officers say, "It
                                             wasn’t obvious to us” and if you believe them you might say that is the
                                             end o f the matter...                                     >f   Oi
                                                                                                      IU h
                         Thft.gyidcnce o f the police ahoiHCamera 5. The officers blamed their failure to see the
                         overcrowding on the terraces on what they said was a defective camera, Camera 5,
                         pointing at pens 3 and 4. The issue tor the jury was whether the police had ignored an
                         obvious and serious risk when they opened gate C without taking measures to stop fans
                         from entering the tunnel to pens 3 and 4. Becausc o f the evidence o f the officers (which
                         was unchallenged) the jury must have based their consideration o f thisjjuestion on a
                         finding that the police, -through, no fault of their own, did not know uboiitthe
                         overcrowded condition o f pens 3 and 4 until it was too late. It was therefore almost
                         inevitable that verdicts ol accidental death would be returned

              24          I he appropriateness o f the jury's verdicts therefore depends upon the reliability^ their
                         findings about what the police knew about the terraces. The Group submits that the new
                                                                           seriousness o f the. risk that was ignoredliy
                         thepolice, and undermines the reliability o f thisfmdttTgrarKHfeis also undefmmc?rtbe~
                        jury s verdicts. As the Coroner said, this question was the question upon which the jury's
                        verdict hinged.
                                       C^O-9 ,            jAlAt<C   .1^   1/lCyLl
                                C k5             V* «a                              .

                                Cc ^    <»t eV.wJ<*''                     few1e»*.- fa4
04-SEP-37     16:33      FROM=   3 RAYMOND       BUILDINGS                ID = 0 1 7 1   242   4270               PAGE   10




             iJ
                  ?    The evidence o f the police officers is contained ut Appendix 4.         1he following us a
                       summary o f the most pertinent parts.



                       £ L I.rgv<.>j:Bichfttd was in charge of the video cameras in the police control room. These
                       Cameras had the ability to pan and tilt, and to zoom in and out. PC Bichard was forthright
                       in his evidence to the tribunals that the picture from Camera 5 had been distorted, and
                       that was the reason that the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 had not been noticed by any of
                       the officers in the control box.

            27          1he video tape of the pictures taken from camera 5 which was shown to the jury began
                       at 3,02pm, and was a time lapse video o f poor quality. PC Bichard was asked by the
                       Coroner why the video began at 3.02pm, and whether there .should have been film o f
                       events prior to 3 02pm. PC Richard's response was inconclusive. He replied that there
                       should have been, but that (p80):

                                      1 have no idea at all where it could have gone to. It was pail o f the tape
                                      and the tapes were all sealed up at the end o f the day.

            28        At p80PC Bichard said:

                                     My recollections arc that the particular camera had been faulty and in (act
                                     you saw some ot the problems that occurred. You were getting what is
                                     called flare. It is reflection o f light coloured objects and you lose the
                                     picture, The camera was not really being used as much as it would
                                     normally be because o f the sub - standard picture. It was just left in
                                     position. That is why the picture never really moved at all because it was
                                     just left in position.

            2‘)       PC Bichard was then asked by the Coroner about when he had first noticed something
                      wrong on the terraces (p82):

                                     Q.      At what point, either visually or by monitor, anything that
                                              warranted comment, if that is ihe right word ? - A. I saw some
                                              people climbing over the fence and a situation similar to that,
                                              people climbing to the stand, had occurred tiic year earlier ...

                                     Q.      That is the first time your attention was drawn to that part o f the
                                             ground in a significant sort o f way V - A. Yes

                                     Q.      Did you sec it through a window or did you see it on a monitor ? -
                                             A. It is very difficult to remember... 1 am not sure

                      At p92 he was asked:

                                     Q.      What do you say, officer, so far as the ability of a camera, trained
                                             from the South Stand, to give you an idea in your terms of

                                                             10
04 - S E P - 9 7    IB 4 0   F R O M ; 3 RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                ID r 0 1 7 1   242   4270              PAGE   II




                                                   overcrowding within that area ? - A. Il would not give you a view
                                                   o f overcrowding.

                                           Q.    Would you agree that it would not be a sound judgment to make
                                                 any decision about overcrowding from the monitor that you would
                                                 have in Front o f you ? - A. 1 don't think it would be a sound
                                                 judgment

                                           Q.    In fact, part o f the problem is that the position and angle o f the
                                                 camera in the South Stand, instead ot ideally, if you like, being on
                                                 the centre o f the pitch gives you a difficulty because o f the angle
                                                 itself ? - A. 1 hat combined with the inadequacy o f the camera,
                                                 yes.

                   30    At p% he was cross - examined by Counsel lor the families on his evidence that it was
                         not possible to pick out facial features;

                                           Q.   ... Do you maintain the view that the zoom facility is such that it
                                                  is not possible to zoom in so that one can clearly identify a given
                                                  individual if one wishes to do so ? - A. 1 am quite happy with that
                                                  comment, yes ... when there is a group, a large crowd there, to
                                                  pick out an individual would be difficult.

                                           Q.   But you can zoom in so that you can clearly see facial features,
                                                can you not ? - A. I don’t think so, sir.'

                         At p97 he said:

                                        It 1 had seen (overcrowding) I would have done something about it.




                        In his evidence to Lord Justice Taylor on June 12 1989, PC Diehard said:

                                 1he camera was not up the mark . we were getting pictures, that is the best way



                        ' I his evidence should be compared with the evidence given to Lord Justice I'aylor on 25
               May 1989 at pp 128 - 9 where the camera systems at Hillsborough were described as 'the finest
               in the country’. The following extract from an article in 'Policc Review' by Mr Locke, the club's
               head o f security, was read to Lord Justice Taylor:

                         loday at Hillsborough . a senior officer can follow crowd movement outside the
                        stadium by using the closed - circuit cameras as his eyes. He is able to anticipate
                        problems, see incidents as they build and employ necessary resources to abate them.
                        Inside the ground he can watch crowd behaviour and identify offenders through the zoom
                        facility.

                                                                11
0 4 - S E P -97   16 =4 0   FROM = 3 RAYMOND         BUILDINGS              ID:   0171   242   4270                PAGE   12




                                o f describing it.




                        Sgl'gsaflt Goddard gave similar evidence. His evidence to Lord Justice Taylor was as
                        follows (June 11 1989, p87):

                                        Q.       What did you sec inside the ground that put you on notice that
                                                 something was wrong in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. People were climbing
                                                 over the fences.

                                        Q       When did you see that ? - A. About three o'clock time.

                                        Q.      What did you do about it ? - A. My first thought was, "We have
                                                got a pitch invasion" and it was a matter o f deploying as many
                                                men as possible down to the Leppings Lane end o f the perimeter
                                                track.

                        At p94 he was cross - examined by Mr IIytner QC on behalf o f the families:

                                        Q.        Were you aware that there was a special problem on the
                                                Leppings Lane terraces or not ? - A. No, sir, 1 was not

                                        0-      ••• Did you at any stage before you saw people climbing over the
                                                pens notice any overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 ? - A. No. sir.

                                       Q        Apart from noticing there was crowd trouble in that people were
                                                climbing over did you ever say to yourself pens 3 and 4 are
                                                beginning to look overcrowded, They have reached capacity 7 -
                                                A No, sir. 3 and 4 were getting full, were full. From my vantage
                                                point they were not overcrowded.

                                       Q-       Did no Officer in the control box, anybody, comment at any stage
                                                that pens 3 and 4 looked full ? - A. No. sir. They did look full but
                                                not overfull,

                       At p96 Sergeant Goddard was cross-examined by Mr Muller QC (lor the South Yorkshire
                       Fire and Civil Defence Authority). He said that there was a 'blind spot' at the front o f the
                       terraces, which meant that Camera 5 could not focus on what was happening on the
                       bottom steps o f pens 3 and 4. Me said

                                       You would not be able to pick out [fans] individually. You could see
                                       figures.




                       At the Inquest his evidence was (14 March 199], p92):

                                                                 12
04 - S E P - 9 7   16-40    FROM   <   3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                 ID . 0 1 7 1   242   4270               PAGE   13




                                             Q     On this day ... at what point did you yourself first notice anything
                                                   unusual about the pens ? - A. The first point 1 noticed, the unusual
                                                   part, was when I saw people start climbing over the fcnces onto
                                                   the perimeter track and then ( saw a gate open ...




                           I.atcr he said ( 15 March 1991, p6):




                                          Q        Your evidence to the Inquest i.s very .simple; you never saw
                                                   anything unusual in that Leppings Lane terrace in the pens there
                                                   until you saw the people climbing over around three o'clock ? - A,
                                                   That is correct, yes, sir




                       t CRyflfl had worked in the control box at Hillsborough (or five years. He gave evidence
                       toLordJustice Taylor as follows (June 11 1989, p52):

                                          Q.       I here was a problem with one o f [the cameras j is that correct ? -
                                                  A. That is correct, yes. There was an apparent fault with on the
                                                  camera to the West Stand, West terraces

                                         Q.       Where is it mounted ? - A. I think that is the one that is mounted
                                                  on the electronic scoreboard.

                                         Q.       ... What was the problem with that camera as you can recall ? - A.
                                                   The picture was very distorted.

                                         0-       (ford Justice Taylor) Very what ? - A. Distorted, sir.

                                         Q,       Was the fault mended ? - A. I contacted the engineer myself

                                         Q        That is Mr Moulds worth ? - A. Roger Mouldsworth, yes. He
                                                  attended and came out and worked on that camcra (or some time.
                                                  Quite how long he was there I do not know. Me was certainly
                                                  there working on it for some considerable time. The picture was
                                                  never satisfactory as far as I can recall that day although that was
                                                  not my specific duty to look at that.

                                         Q       ... When you say the picture as far as you can sec was not
                                                   satisfactory what was wrong with it ? - A It was not as clear as
                                                  you would hope the picture to lie.

                                         Q.      Did that mean the zoom facility was rendered in any way

                                                                  13
                          »
0 4 -SEP-97       16:41   FROM-   3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                  ID:   0171   242    4270                  PAGE   14




                                              inoperative or less adequate than normal o r ... - A. As far as 1 can
                                              recall the zoom was operative. It was the quality o f the picture
                                              that was the problem.

              37      P( Ryan did not give evidence at the inquests.

              ^      U l)£l frupcrmtendent Dwkflllisld began his evidence to I,ord Justice Taylor on 24 May
                      1989. He did not refer to any faults with the catncra system. On 25 May 1989 at pi 29
                     he said that he did not use the zoom facility at all, but mainly looked out o f the window.
                     On 26 May (pi 5) he referred to the surveillance system as "an excellent system".

                      ^hittUnspgflor McK^bbig gave evidence at the Taylor Inquiry; he was not called to give
                      evidence at the inquests. This is o f great significance, because his evidence to the Taylor
                      Inquiry flatly contradic ted that o f his colleagues, especially PC Bichard.

          40         ,Vlr McRobbie gave evidence on 13 June 1989. At p20 he was asked, with reference to
                      the statement he made shortly after the disaster;

                                     0       At the bottom of p5 you refer to an incident which drew the
                                             attention o f the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) ... - A.
                                             That is correct sir, yes.

                                     Q.      You say:

                                                     "Police Constable Bichard operated the camera and I
                                                     watched him to be able to zoom onto him (.v/t) which 1
                                                     thought was a super facility for spotting trouble makers in
                                                     the crowd."

                                             A. That is correct, sir.

                                     Q.     No difficulty with the picture at all ? - A. Well when you say "no
                                            difficulty" it certainly brought this person closer to us than I think
                                            it would have been possible for a Police Officer to select the
                                            correct person that Control were identifying without any problem,

                                    Q.      That is the whole purpose of it, isn't it ? - A. I would think so sir,
                                            yes.

         41          At p22 he was cross - examined by Mr Glasgow QC (for Sheffield Wednesdav Football
                     Club).

                                    Q.      Chief Inspector, the camera zoom which impressed you was that
                                            which was showing the scene on the terraces, was it ? - A. It was
                                            able to pick out someone directly under the control box, yes. but
                                            1 do not know where the camera is sited. I am sorry.



                                                             14
=41   FROM=   3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                ID = 0 1 7 1   242   4270                PAGE




                          Vou arc quite sure that was the camera that was being used, the
                          one that shows the scene on the ten-aces ? - A. I cannot speak
                          about a camera. All I cun say is on the monitor a person was able
                          to be enlarged.

                          \ ou might be rtbie to help us if you can remember by chance
                          whether it was black and white or colour. - A. It was black and
                          white.




   I his exchange shows that it was Camera 5 to which Mr Me Robbie was referring. The
  other camera trained on Lcppings Lane, situated in the centre o f the South Stand was a
  colour camera.

  At p26 he was again asked whether it was Camera 5 which had been zoomed in bv PC
  Bichard:


                 A      I would have thought so from the definition, but, as I say, I would
                         n o t...

                 Q.     (Lord Justice laylor) When you say "the definition” was it good
                         definition ? - A. It was quite reasonable, sir, yes.

 Despite Mr McRobbie's evidence. Lord Justice Taylor accepted the police's evidence that
 they did not notice anything amiss until fans began to climb out o f the pens (para. 78).
 Nonetheless, because of the layout o f the ground, and the crushes which had developed
 at previous matches in 1981 and 1988, he said it was foreseeable that disaster would \
 result from opening gate C if preventative measures were not taken                        ^ ^
                                                                                           lw

                  of                   . Roger Houldsworth installed and repaired the           ^
 CCIV (“Closed Circuit”) system operating at Hillsborough on the .lay o f the disaster, and
 was present in the club's video room during the disaster. Mr Houldsworth made a
 statement to officers from the West Midlands Police on 16 May 1989, and expected to
 be called as a witness at the Inquiry and the inquests. However he gave evidence at
 neither tribunal. Although Mr Houldsworth was well known to the investigating officers,
 he was variously described on the Coroner's witness list as a ’sound engineer' and as
 ground staff.


 Mr 1louldsw ^tV sev^ei^gjgget her w ith the missing footag^uxu^mtaincd in Appendix 1
^Jt_is believed that the significance of his evidence was not made knowntt^flw^^mer. LA
 (Vfr Houldsworth watched the disaster on the video monitors in the CCTV room, one of
which showed what was being recorded on the police system lie was the only
independent civilian witness who watched what was being shown on the monitors 1lis
evidence shows the police evidence analysed above to be deliberately false and
misleading. In particular, his evidence shows the following:
0 4 - S E P -97    16=42   FROM:    3 RAYMOND      BUILDINGS                 ID:   0171   242   4270                PAGE   IB




                        (i)      That the video camera trained on pens 3 and 4 o f the leppings I,ane terraces was
                                 functioning normally, having been repaired by him on the morning o f the disaster*

                        (ii)    I hat the pictures from this camera were being received normally in the police
                                control box before 3.02pm (the time the video shown to the jury' began) and were
                                 being recorded continuously (rather than in time - lapse mode) on video;

                        <i u)   That the camera was panning and zooming in on the terraces, and was therefore L
                                being operated by an officer in the control box;                              “

                        (iv)    I hat at the time Mr Duckenfield gave the order to open Gate C, the screens would
                                have been clearly showing that the terraces were full and that some people were
                                obviously in distress, with many more clearly uncomfortable. It would therefore
                                have been apparent to the officers in the control box that death and injury would £
                                result if more people were permitted to enter the pens;

                        (y)     That the officers stationed in the box, in particular Mr Duekenlield, were
                                therefore able to see the overcrowding develop in these pens- prior to 2,52pm;

                        (vi)    That those in overall control of the policing operation at 1lillsborough would have
                                been aware o f the overcrowding on the terraces as it developed, and there was
                                therefore an obvious and serious risk o f injury if gate C were opened and the fans
                                not prevented from entering the tunnels;

                       (vii)     I hat on the night o f the disaster, 2 tapes went missing from the locked and
                                alarmed club control room

                       (viu)     I hat the evidence given by the relevant police officers, namely that they could not
                                see the overcrowding on the terraces because the camera was defective, was
                                knowingly false.

              46       Because of the disappearance of footage from Camera 5 tape and the poor quality o f the
                       footage from 15.02 (which was in time lapse mode), counsel for the families was
                       prevented from cross - examining the police officers in the control box effectively. For
                       example, in his cross - examination o f PC Bichard, when PC Bichard had denied seeing
                       any overcrowding (at p97) he said: "I cannot take that any further with you, officer." Had
                       the tapes been available at the inquests, Mr King could have positively contradicted the
                       evidence given by the officers. As it was, he was able only to suggest that the officers
                       were mistaken in their protestations o f ignorance.

              47       I he jury therefore assessed the culpability of the police on the basis o f evidence which
                       was ,alse and misleading. It is almost certain that they must have coneluded that because
                   j   the cameras were not working properly it would not have been obvious that the terraces
                       were overcrowded, and that the police were therefore not to blame for not recognising the
                       danger on the terraces when they opened gate C.




                                                                16
0 4 -SEP-97    IB 4 2   FROM:   3 RAYMOND    BUILDINGS                 ID.   0171    242   4270                  PAGE   17




              48               an iaw m ptefc video shown to the p r y ? The tape played to the Inquesljurv
                    was produced by Sergeant Kilioch o f the West Midlands Police as police exhibit T B 1\
                    on 15 March 1991 at the conclusion o f Sergeant Goddard’s evidence (15 March 1991,
                    P62). It became the Coroner’s exhibit C.539. On 13,h March 1991 the Coroner had
                    acknowledged that this footage was of very poor quality. It showed only events a% r
                    3.02pm in others words, after gate C had been opened. The pictures were recorded in
                     time - lapse mode, and the tape did not clearly show what was happening. The same
                    incomplete tape appears to have been shown to Lord Justice Taylor (see Transcript 25
                    May 1989, pi 29).

              49   Shortly after the disaster Yorkshire Television began work on a ’First Tuesday'
                   documentary about the disaster. They were given a set o f tapes which contained footage
                    from the cameras in the police control room. Sections o f these tapes were used in the
                   programme. The tapes contained high quality footage o f events before 3.02pm. The
                   tapes lay undiscovered in Yorkshire Television's archives until they were found in a
                   search requested by Trevor Hicks in February 1997. The statement o f Trevor Hicks
                   outlines the circumstances. (Appendix 6).

              50   1hc GrouP believes the suppression o f this evidence to be sinister, and, prim a facie, a
                   perversion ol the course o f justice. It was potentially the most important evidence in the
                   inquest. It should be noted that two tapes also went missing from the locked CCTV room
                   shortly after the disaster. The Coroner failed to pursue the question of where the missing
                   footage had gone, despite PC Bichard's response "1 have no idea at all where it could have
                   gone to. It was part o f the tape and the tapes were all sealed up at the end o f the day."
                   He ought to have summoned the West Midlands officers responsible for gathering this /
                   evidence to give an explanation for its disappearance. The West Midlands Police should /
                   now be asked to explain how this evidence came to be suppressed. This is an issue which y\
                   can only be resolved by oral evidence.

              11                        to m the vi46tt, The jury were fully aware o f the significance o f
                   the video evidence. On 13 March 1991 the Coroner addressed the legal representatives
                   (p53):

                                  ... there is just one thing which the jury have mentioned to me. In fact
                                  they have mentioned ft twice, and that is what about the video evidence
                                  o f the terraces. I have had the videos looked at and there is actually next
                                  to nothing on the videos because, o f course, not everything was recorded.
                                   I hat does not mean to say they weren't possibly scenes (sic), but there is,
                                  I understand, a little tiny bit which is actually on the compilation which
                                  you have seen. There is another little bit which starts at 15.03 and goes
                                  on for a few minutes.

                                  What we have done is that we have clipped it, if that is the right word, and



                   The Crown Prosecution service have suggested by letter of 10th April 1997 that this was
          in fact Lixhibit TB/2.

                                                          17
04-SEP-37    16=43   F R O M : 3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                 ID:   0171   242   4270                 PAGE   IB




                                   we will show it to you, hut it is oi' very poor quality and I do mu think it
                                   is going to help us very much. As far as I can tell there isn't much
                                   recorded. Does that help ?

                   The jury were therefore led to believe that the tiny clip o f film they were shown was all
                   that existed by way o f video evidence. The poor quality of this clip would undoubtedly
                   have persuaded the jury that the missing footage o f events before 15.0pm would have
                   been equally poor and would not have assisted them significantly.

            53     Ihe only acceptable explanation for the contradiction between what is shown on the tapes
                   and what was said in evidence at the inquests is that the officers lied in their evidence
                   I he officers in the control box were flilly aware o f the situation on the terraces and had
                   been monitoring the tans in pens 3 and 4 during the build up to the kick - oil’. However
                  they tailed to consider the effect that the opening o f gate C would have on the terraces.
                  Thus it was that the 'blunder o f the first magnitude* was made. The officers' explanation
                  that the camera equipment was not working was an excuse invented t.vposi facto in an
                  attempt to shift the blame elsewhere. It should be noted that the explanation given by the
                  South Yorkshire police has changed since the disaster. At the time the officers said that
                  Camera 5 was defective. After the television programme ’Hillsborough' was shown last
                  year, the police initially said, in January 1997, that they had found the missing tape, and
                  that it supported their claim that the camera had been faulty. After it was learned that the
                  Group had received tapes from Yorkshire television, they changed their explanation and
                  claimed that there had been interference from television outside broadcast equipment.
                  This seeond explanation is also contained in a Press Release from South Yorkshire Police
                  o f F' April 1997

        54        kmnmaia The police evidence to the tribunals was intended to give the impression that
                  the> were not to blame for failing to see the overcrowding on the terraces before opening
                  gale C because o f faulty camera equipment. In fact, the video tapes show camera 5 was
                  working properly prior to 3.02pm. Incomplete video evidence o f very poor quality was
                  shown to the jury; in particular, the pictures from Camera 5 prior to 3.02pm were never
                  shown. This evidence was deliberately suppressed. The video shows that Camera 5 was
                  operating correctly and that the overcrowding was clear and visible to those watching the
                  screen. I he jury therefore considered the most important issue in the ease on a false and
                  misleading evidential basis.



                 IfafiJM dkai e v i d e n t .the fafllieats and the evidence of Dr Edward Walker


                  Ford Justice I aylor found that there was delay and confusion in evacuating the casualties
                  from pens 3 and 4 and in responding to the magnitude o f the disaster. The police were
                  obsessed by the idea that a pitch invasion was in progress, even though it was dear to
                  those in the television commentary box (who were further away) that the problem was
                  overcrowding and not hooliganism (Para. 250). In particular he made the following
                  findings:



                                                         18
04-SEP-37    16 4 4     FROM:   3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                ID    0171   242   4270                   PAGE   13




                   (a)      No officer took effective charge of the evacuation o f the injured from the pens
                            (Fan.. 251);

                  (b)       Organised evacuation of the injured from the pitch did not begin until 1.12pm
                            Uhul)-

                  <c)       There was delay in activating the Major Accident Plan (although he
                            underestimated the extent of the delay * see below),

                  <d)       No request was made for cutting gear from the fire brigade until 3.13pm,

                  (e)       There was no co - ordination o f rescuc efforts, and no caJl for the assistance of
                            doctors or nurses until 3.29pm;

                  if)       I here were cases where the earlier provision of medical treatment might have
                            made a difference, in that more lives might have been saved (Paras. 251 and 252).

            56   In contrast, the medical evidence adduced by the Coroner suggested that all the deceased
                  had died quick and painless deaths, thatjthey were all dead hv 11 Spm and accordinglyfOJ , ^
                  that I.ord Justice Taylor had been incorrect in deciding that the secondary failures o f the& 6"
                  police had resulted in further loss o f life. For this reason, the Coroner ruled that no
                  evidence after 3.15pm would be considered. 'I he 3.15pm cut off was predicated on a
                  number of unrealistic assumptions about the time it took for the deceased to be
                  asphyxiated, such as that all the deceased were subjected to continuous pressure so that
                  they were unconscious within a short period and dead within minutes.

        37       Evidence which has emerged since the inquests shows this conclusion and the
                 assumptions upon which it was based to be false Some o f this evidence was presented
                 to the Divisional Court in 1993, and some has been uncovered in the period since 1993.

        w        j^JV M Rj^LeyM encp. The evidence o f Dr Walker is contained at Appendix 7. It
                  consists of his contemporaneous account o f his work on the day o f the disaster, and a
                  copy of a police statement dated 20th July 1989

        59       Dr Walker, who was not at work, responded to televised pictures o f the disaster and
                 assisted a large number o f patients at the Northern General Hospital. He was praised by
                 the consultant in charge, Mr Wardrope, for his efforts, and received a letter indicating that
                 it was likely that he would be required to give a statement to the investigating police
                 force. In due course, Dr Walker gave a statement to the West Midlands police. Dr
                 Walker was not called as a witness at the Inquiry or at the inquests, and was repeatedly
                 referred to in evidence as an 'unidentified doctor'.

        60       Dr Walker's evidence, in summary, is that when he arrived at the Northern General
                 Hospital the staff were aware only o f a 'disturbance' at Hillsborough. He was told that
                 there was a paediatric cardiac arrest on its way to the hospital, but no connection was
                 made between this casualty and Hillsborough. There was no sign that the Major Accident
                 I Ian had been activated and no awareness that the hospital was shortly to receive a large

                                                          19
0 4 - S E P -97    16=44    FROM.     3 RAYMOND      BUILDINGS                 ID=   0171   242   4270                   PAGE   20




                          number ot critically ill patients. The first patient to arrive was Lee Nicol, and the second
                          patient was Philip Hammond. Both boys were young teenagers. When they arrived at
                          the hospital their hearts were not beating. Dr Walker and others worked on them and
                          succeeded in restarting their heart and breathing. Lee Nicol survived until the following
                          Monday. Philip Hammond survived for a lime but later died, however. Dr Walker then
                          treated a number o f patients, some o f whom died but some o f whom survived,

                  61     Dr Walker's contemporaneous evidence is significant in that it clearly demonstrates that      , u
                         there were a number ot patients who were extremely ill when they reached hospital who j u t
                         were successfully treated. It is also significant because it shows that the treatment o f the
                         injured was hampered by a shortage o f drugs and equipment o f the type necessary to treat      Vt u
                         cardiac arrests. Dr Walker lists eight deficiencies which hampered the treatment o f          °
                         patients at the height o f the crisis,

                  62     When the evidence given at the mini - inquest into the death o f Philip Hammond
                         {Appendix 7) is compared with Dr Walker's evidence numerous deficiencies and
                         inaccuracies can be discerned. The evidence at the mini - inquest would have left the jury
                         with the totally false impression that Philip was dead before 3.15pm. Dr Slater, the
                         pathologist who carried out Philip's post - mortem, testified that the policeman who said
                         that he felt Philip’s pulse probably felt his own pulse. He said that the only signs of
                         treatment were ECG electrodes attached to his chest and that "essentially only lay people
                         saw him." Dr Sluter said that Philip was 'brain dead at Hillsborough' {Transcript, P5).
^      \V                1he evidence o f Dr Walker shows that this opinion was wholly wrong, and that Philip
                         was alive far beyond 3.15pm. Dr Walker's evidence accordingly raises the possibility that
I oi                     Dr Slator's other diagnoses were wrong and that patients were alive well beyond the times
                       ' yiven at the m ini' inquests and well beyond the 3 .15pm cut - off.

              63         Thfi signifreatifig of Dr Walker's evidence and the Memorial to the Attorney -
                         Cfencrai in 1993 There is evidence that four o f the deceased, Paul Carlile. Ian Glover,
                         Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams' were alive after 3.15pm. This evidence is contained
                         in the Memorial presented to the Attorney - General in 1993. (Appendix 8).

              64         Although the Attorney - General did not consider this evidence by itself to be sufficient
                         to justify him exercising his powers under section 13 o f the Coroners Act 1988, it is
                         submitted that this evidence together with the evidence o f Dr Walker constitutes
                         incontrovertible evidence that some ol the conclusions reached at the mini - inquests were
                         erroneous, and that many o f the deceased were alive after 3,15pm and that an inquiry into
                         the precise circumstances o f their deaths was warranted, including an inquiry into the
                         matters referred to above.

                         It is significant that the Divisional Court accepted the validity o f some o f this evidence,
                         but declined to grant relief on the basis that the Coroner was not at fault (Judgment o f 5
                         November 1993, ppl8 - 29, p30, p34). It can therefore be inferred that the Court
                         considered that this evidence warranted detailed consideration, but because of the nature



                         Separate submissions have also been made in relation to Kevin Williams by his mother.

                                                                 20
0 4 - S E P -97       I B =45 F R O M -   3 RAYMOND     BUILDINGS                  ID = 0 1 7 1   242   4270               PAGE




                             of the court’s function on an application for judicial review, insufficient to warrant relief.
                              I he Court specifically said that at p.30 that had the hearing been a reference pursuant to
                             a reference by the Attorney General under section 13 the position might have been
                             different. It is respectfully submitted that the functions o f this Scrutiny are not so limited.
                              I he issue is whether this evidence might have altered the outcome- o f the proceedings if
       ^                    it had been heard by the jury at the inquest. For the reasons set out above it is submitted
     vs-irvoi-ij,           that it is moreJhanJLikely that this evidence would have affected the outcome o f the
                             inquests.

                  (>6       It is plain from Dr Walker's evidence that there was evidence available to the Coroner of
                             a slow response by the police and the emergency services to the plight of the injured,
                             evidence that some people might have been saved by a more timely response, and general
                             evidence o f a lack of equipment. These were all matters which, it is submitted, required
                             investigation in order to determine properly "how" the deceased came by their death, and
                             they make the Coroner's decision not to go beyond 3.15pm unjustifiable

                  ^         i -faft mstlfigafiftH for..t to,3iLSpm cut- off point. Prior to the resumption o f the Inquests
                              in November 1990 the Coroner decided, in spite o f objection, that he would call no
                             evidence on events after 3 .15pm. His reason was that the medical evidence which had
                              been given by the pathologists at the mini - inquests, in particular Dr Slater and Professor
                              Usher, was to the effect that death from traumatic/crush asphyxia occurred four to six
                             minutes after the chest became fixed so as to prevent breathing, and on the assumption
                         Uthat the deceased’s chests had become fixed at the latest by 3.06pm, the time the match
                         l| was abandoned, it could be further assumed that alt the deceased were dead or dying by
                         1,13.15pm, and accordingly that nothing further could be done for them. He also chose this
                             time because it coincided (approximately) with the arrival o f the first ambulance (ssc
                             Tran-cript, 30 October 1990, pp8. 14.).

              ^            Tt>i fln te h Medical Journal Article The Divisional Court obser cd in the six families
                           Judicial Review in 1993 that the Coroner imposed the 3.15 pm cut-off

                                    "because he took the view that on the overwhelming pathological evidence
                                    available to him permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered by
                                    alt the deceased” (Appendix 2, page 6C; McCowan U ).

                           In November 199], a very different account appeared in the British Medical Journal,
                           written by, among others Dr Wardrope (Appendix 9) Many injured people taken to
                           hospital survived and recovered. (See Table 3) They suffered from a varied injuries,
                           serious and minor. Some unconscious victims were revived. The fbllowin           ,ons are
                           inevitably posed by this evidence. How many other injured supporters died o f injuries,
                           untended, at the football ground o f injuries other than asphyxia, or o f asphyxia at the
                           ground which could have been treated if they had been taken to hospital.? ( On.I; ’ 4 o f
                           the 95 victims (as opposed to the injured) were taken to hospital) Why was this evide'- »
                           not made known to the Inquest?

                            I he Divisional Court held that although there was evidence tending to show that some
                           o f the deceased were alive after 3.15pm (ssst e.g. p34), there was no basis for interfering

                                                                     21
                              ■■ . ■ ■   '■ i:' ' 1   '#        :     •*“                     .■
04 - S E P - 9 7    16- 4 5 FR O M -     3 RAYMOND BUILDINGS                      ID-. 0171        2 42 4 2 7 0           PAGE         22




                             with the Coroner’s exercise of discretion in imposing this cut-olT point. It is submitted
                             that the new evidence, now available, presents a completely different account o f events.

                   7!)       The ruling had a number o f consequences:

                             (i)     The main consequence was to prevent any further inquiry into the individual
                                     circumstances o f the 95 deaths. At the mini - inquests the Coroner had assured
                                     the families that the question o f ’how’ would be dealt with later. The Inquest
                                     therefore becamc simply a general inquiry into the circumstances o f the disaster.
                                     A number o f the deceased were not mentioned at all during the 96 days o f
                                     evidence, save when their names were read out during the initial roll - call and
                                     when the verdicts were announced. Accordingly, their families never discovered
                                     how they died. An example is the family o f Peter Tootle (see Memorial section
                                     of Appendices). His parents travelled nearly every day of the Inquest by car from
                                     Liverpool to Sheffield . His name was mentioned only in the list o f victims and 1A 0 ^*4^
                                     when the verdicts were announced.                                                  H(]     1

                                                                                                                             c
                            (ii)     The jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f the deceased                /VW        • s'
       o                             were alive lor a considerable period after 3.15pm;
 &-vuA a u , , N',
                            (ii i)   I he jury were prevented from hearing evidence that a number o f fans who were
  Q L        s                       left for dead at the ground in fact survived. Therefore, they never considered the
    pj                               posWrrtyThaTa mmiN^oTthosrwlKTdied might have been saved had they
                        J            received prompt and efficient medical attention;

                            ( iv)    They never heard evidence about the failure o f the Northern General Hospital to
                                     activate its Major Accident Plan until well after the onset o f the disaster, and the
                                     detrimental effect this had on patient care. Dr Wardrope’s article referred to the
                                     failure to activate the Major Accident Plan and stated (at pi 381):

                                              Failure to implement the major incident alert earlier meant that only a few
                                              staff' had to cope with a large clinical workload in addition to
                                              implementing the major incident plan.

                   71       The Coroner's ruling prevented any inquiry into the secondary failures of the police and
                            the emergency services to provide prompt and efficient medical attention to the injured.
                            The fresh medical evidence undermines the justification for the 3. 15 pm cut-off.

                   72       Ihgevidence of Anthony Edwards Anthony Edwards was an ambulance driver who
                            attended Hillsborough at around 3.32pm He made a statement in June 1989 but did not
                            give evidence at either the inquiry or the inquests, because his evidence dealt with events
                            after 3.15pm. His evidence consists of a note of an interview' with a television researcher
                            in December 1995, and his statement of June 1989

                   73       Mr Edwards arrived at the ground in his ambulance to find a cordon of police across the
                            entrance to the pitch. Two ambulances were already parked outside the ground, and had
                            not gone in. There was a discussion between the ambulance men and the police officers.

                                                                      22
45   F R O M : 3 RAYMOND   BUILDINGS                 ID -. 0 1 7 1   242   4270            PAGE


              O U tJ


  I hey were told by the.police that it was not possible for him to go on to the pitch because
 "they are still fighting in there." Eventually he and others were permitted to go onto the
 pitch. Mr Edwards saw a number of dead bodies being taken out and so it was obvious
 that the incident was a disaster and not crowd trouble. Eventually they were allowed onto
 the pitch, where they commenced attempting to resuscitate the injured,

  Mr bdwards1evidence is significant because it shows that the police were not just slow
 in requesting the ambulance service to attend but that they positively interfered with the
 ambulances' efforts to get on the pitch. For whatever reason, .some o f the police did not
 appreciate that there was a disaster in progress. Although Lord Justice Taylor made some
 findings on these aspects of the disaster, they were not discussed at the inquest. This has
 left the families with the sense that the inquest was therefore deficient Ilad the Coroner
 heard that the police had intentionally or negligently hampered rescue efforts then there
 is a possibility that he would have concluded that it required further investigation.

 f urther evidence on this point is awaited by the Group. It will be submitted as .soon as
 it is received.

                                 Individual Cases

 In recent weeks, much new material has been disclosed to individual families, and to the
 Group. Numerous examples are coming to light, and have already conic to light,
 indicating that deaths occurred in a variety o f circumstances and times, contrary to the
 evidence presented to the jury. Other examples arc o f persons left for dead, who survived,
 and who were recovered, at hospital or at the ground, from unconsciousness.) The
 evidence in those eases (Including that of Roger Ball, Appendix 10) will be summarised
 and presented to the Scrutiny, it is hoped by ! 5th September, Evidcncc presented by the
 six families to the court in 1993 is in the Memorial section o f the Appendices

The work o f those representing the Group is hampered by the fact that disclosure of
documents is a laboured and painfully slow process. It is submitted that it is unjust and
unsatisfactory that the papers, formerly in the possession o f the West Midlands Police,
are now controlled by the South Yorkshire Police. Statements o f police ofliccrs have been
disclosed recently providing names o f officers who were apparently concerned with
individual cases, but whose existence has never before been made known to the families.
Critical ambulance records are now being disclosed. A wholly d i f f e r e n t picture is
emerging from that provided to the families and the Coroner’s court in 1990-91.

                       I h c im purtaiw of full dtefto&urfi

It is submitted that the facts of the Hillsborough Inquest need to be examined in full. The /
office of the Scrutinising Judge is requested to take possession of all the material in the/
case and to ensure that it is made available to all parties. Statements of witnesses were
not disclosed to the bereuved families at the time of the inquest, and disclosure has been v
refused since.
04-5EP-e7    18.47 F R O M = 3 R A Y M O N D   BUILDINGS




                                                       i(l




                   Q R 1 Sir Thomas Bingham M.R, considered the nature and purpose of an inquest inthe
                   context of the death of a prisoner in custody. He said:

                                   An inquest is a fact finding inquiry conducted by a coroner, with or
                                   without a jury, to establish reliable answers to four important but limited
                                   factual questions ... It is the duty of the coroner as the public official
                                   responsible for the conduct of inquests, whether he is sitting with a jury

                                   invcstigtUvd- He is bound to recognise the acute*public"concern rightly
                                   aroused where deaths occur in custody. He must ensure that the relevant

                                                                                   if his investigation is
                                   aupcrlklaL slipshod or perfunctory (Emphasis added)


                   in & v ^ u t h LondQoXomD.ci:       pang lh<>mpa?n 126 s.). 125 ford 1,ane o      said

                                   The function of an inquest is to seek out and record as many of the {acts
                                   concerning the death as the public interest requires.

            SO    The Group acknowledges the difficulties inherent in holding inquests into the deaths uf
                  95 people in a single disaster Nonetheless, the circumstances in which the inquest was
                  held, in Sheffield, before a Sheffield Coroner, and the way it was handled give rise bv
                  themselves to feelings of profound unease. A reading of the transcripts of ihe evidence,
                  particularly relatives of victims, repays study The disproportionate time given to
                  questions as to whether drink had been consumed was absurd and offensive. Meaningless
                  detail was adduced about the circumstances in which supporters travelled to and arrived
                  at the ground. Condescension was shown to relatives in questioning. Relatives were
                  never given copies of their own witness statements, but shown them perfunctorily outside
                  court before they were called in. In contrast, all police officers visibly had copies which
                  they studied, and retained, outside court. The legal representation was wholly
                  disproportionate. One junior barrister sought to represent over 40 families, while every
                  South Yorkshire institution with an interest to protect was represented.

            81    1hese features of the Inquest intensity the belief of the Group that justice was perverted
                  and the truth hidden in order to protect the South Yorkshire authorities and services,
                  f urther information will he provided as soon as it is’ available

            82    I ord Justice Stuart-Smith has posed certain questions to the Group by letter. U is hoped
                  that these representations have answered them. It is submitted that the fresh evidence of
                  Houldsworth. Walker and Fdwards (and in relation to individual cases, others) would
                  have affected the terms in which Lord Taylor wrote his report and expressed his
                  criticisms. The new evidence of Houldsworth would have made verdicts of unlawful

                                                             4
  P*,..        .U,             ...    .         .,.. . t               TJT’-   ■,.,

SEP-37     IS 47 F R O M        3 RAYMOND      BUILDINGS                ID:     01 71   2 42   4270           PAGE   25

     ^     -




                     killing much more likely because the question of what was visible was, as the Coroner
                     repeatedly suggested, at the heart of the issue (see paragraphs 18 and 19, above) It is
                     known that the evidence was not submitted to the jury, and it appears that its significance
                     could not have been explained to the Coroner. The evidence of'Walker. Edwards, and
                     the account given in the British Journal of Medicine by Wardrope should and would have
                     lead to a different type of inquest in which manslaughter on the additional basis of
                     criminal neglect of injured people would have been open to the_jur> in individual eases
                     as the evidence of events after 3.15 pm demanded. This aspect will become clearer when
                     the analysis of individual cases is submitted. The address of Tony Iid wards is being
                     sought.


          4"’ September 1997.



 4
