                                                                                                            r\ _      v   &
                                                                            *V, VL*~~yLr)                       ^ r*~ (fa

 mPT.TAMRm aRY ODESnCM                  H3R WRITTEN ANSWER CM 26 APRIL 1989




 Mr Bruoe George (Walsall South): To ask the Secretary of State for the
   Heme Department, if be has had discussions with the West Midlands
   Police over the percentage of the costs of the inquiry being
   undertaken by its officers into the Hillsborough disaster to be borne
   by central funding.




 ERAFT KEEL?

      I have been approached by the South Yorkshire Police Authority
 about the possibility of special payment from central funds to them to
 cover the costs of the police inquiries into the Hillsborough, disaster,
•^ iih id r - a i,e -fe e in g u n J e i l a t o r r m H M H ttl o f S u u lli Y e rita h ire lay t h e W oct------
•Midlands polioe?— We* shall give those representations proper
 consideration, and reply to them as soon as possible. 1 have also
 heard from the West Midlands Police Authority seeking clarification on
 the matter of responsibility for the reimbursement of these costs, we
 shall reply as soon as possible in the li<#it of that consideration.
It is important to avoid any acceptance at this stage of central
Government responsibility for the police inquiries into Hillsborough.
They start with the responsibility of the South Yorkshire Police, who
would not only have done the work for themselves, but also for the
judicial inquiry, but for their own close involvement in the tragedy.
If the costs are beyond South Yorkshire's ability to pay, it is (as
they now ask) for us to consider the case they put forward for support
frcm central funds. That will not be settled in a day or so (the scale
of the cost is itself very unclear - Mr Dear's own estimate is up to
£4m).


West Midlands have no direct responsibility save at the request of the
South Yorkshire force (or the inquiry itself) whether to establish the
facts or potentially (as is agreed) to investigate any complaints under
PACE.

It would be helpful if the reply - especially given growing political
concern in West Midlands - could be distinguished between the two.

        ? As in revised draft 'B'.
