MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512

Date:    23 January 1998

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I have made the amendments you asked for, and you will see the result in your red folder.

2.      The only points to note are

                I have slightly reworked the material in the second half of Chapter 4 (police
                statements). I think you should read it all the way through to make sure you
                are content. A particular point is that I think we ought to mention that the
                police tinkered with some of the statements themselves, without getting Mr
                M etcalfs advice (but on the basis of the advice he had given in earlier cases).
                See para 84.

                I have also tinkered a bit with Appendix 7, detailing these statements. Here
                the main point is that I think there was some confusion over PC Huckstepp.
                There was no ‘PC Hickstep’ - 1 checked this with South Yorkshire - and it
                seems to me that, in suggesting changes to ‘Hicksteps’ statement Mr Metcalf
                actually meant Huckstepp. The dates fit. I hope the draft of Appendix 7
                now covers this point.

                We also needed a bit about this in the summary Chapter, 7. I’ve had a go at
                that - see paras 19 to 21.

3.      I have put all the papers you left on my desk on Thursday on your meeting table.
        Also on the meeting table you will find a green folder which is my mock-up of the
        report as we’ll hand it to Mr Straw next week. Do have any thoughts on it? It
        contains what I understand to be all the Appendix material in the form in which I
        believe you want it (apart from the two photos for appendix 2 which are still with the
        developers). Is there anything else missing from this?

4.      I told Paul Pugh and Mr Straw’s office earlier this week that we would deliver
        (assuming no fresh emergencies) on Thursday or Friday. I now agree with you that
        we could probably do it earlier, but have been politely warned off a Monday -
        Wednesday delivery because it would disrupt the schedule for the Press Notice from



G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\052.DOC
        the Home Secretary to say he’s got it and is studying it.

5.      Perhaps we could discuss - there’s no point in any of us hanging around if we haven’t
        got anything to do, but the timetable gives us a chance for a final polish.

6.      Paul Pugh wants to discuss the publication of evidence with me. I’d be grateful for a
        steer on that.

7.      Dr David Williams (our A & E consultant) rang to say that he’s perfectly happy with
        Dr Bull’s efforts. I read him the relevant bit of the report - he was content.




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\052.DOC
