      /rom: Paul Pugh                                cc:   Sir Richard Wilson
            Head of Operational                            Mr Boys Smith
            Policing Policy Unit                           Mr Halliday
            Room 529                                       Miss Loudon
            Queen Anne’s Gate                              Miss Weston
            Tel: 0171-273-3141                             Mr R Evans
            8 May 1997                                     Mr Granatt     Z7
                                                           Mr P Edmugit&on
                                                           Mr Warner
                                                           Mr Owen



     1.            Mr Michael

^   2. Home Secretary


     HILLSBOROUGH


     Issue

    In December a Granada television dramatisation of the Hillsborough disaster
    claimed that there were grounds for reopening the inquiry into the disaster. Since
    then further claims have been made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
    supported by local MPs and others. This submission assesses the case for a new
    public inquiry; and considers whether you should make and announce a decision.

    Timing

    2.    There is no firm deadline for your decision, but the outcome is awaited with
    keen interest by those involved.

    Summary and Recommendation

    3.    After the Granada programme we asked Richard Wells, Chief Constable of
    South Yorkshire Police, to provide a full report on the claims made in the
    programme. We have examined that report and the transcripts supplied by South
    Yorkshire Police, watched the video film which Granada suggested might be new
    evidence, and examined the video tapes produced by the Hillsborough Family
    Support Group. Our assessment is that there are no grounds for establishing a new
    public inquiry. The material has also been considered by the DPP, and by the
    Attorney General’s Office. None of those who have examined it consider that there is
    evidence to, justify a new public inquiry, a reopening of the inquest, or the
                                ..< But a decision not tor reopen tH e ir ^ ir y wduld be a
    severe blow to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, whoubelieVSffirmly that they
    have been the victims of a miscarriage of justice. You may therefore wish to


    f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
consider whether the recent representations should be further considered by officials
or independently examined. This is further discussed in paragraphs 28 and 29.

Background

4.     The Hillsborough disaster happened on 15 April 1989; 95 people died as a
result of overcrowding and crushing. There have been four separate investigations
or reviews of what happened; a public inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor; the
coroner’s inquest into each of the deaths; an investigation into police conduct
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority; and a judicial review of the verdict of
the inquest.

5.     The Taylor Inquiry was set up by the then Home Secretary immediately after
the disaster. The terms of reference were to inquire into the events and to make
recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.
The Inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings during May
and June 1989 and received some 71 hours of video evidence from different
sources. Lord Justice Taylor published an interim report in August 1989 which set
out the causes of the disaster. He found that there were a number of causes:

       (i)     The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding was the failure to cut
               off access to the central pens which were already too full.

       (ii)    They were already too full because no safe maximum capacities had
                been laid down, no attempt was made to control entry to individual
                pens numerically, and there was no effective visual monitoring of
               crowd density.

       (iii)   When an influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the barriers
               there afforded less protection than they should have done and the
               barrier collapsed.

       (iv)    Ih e need to open gate C was because of dangerous congestion at the
                turnstiles. That occurred because, as both the club and police should
                have realised, the turnstile area could not cope easily With the numbers
                unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The police had
                failed to draw up plans about how they would control large numbers
                should they arrive in a short period.

       (v)     The presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too much
                aggravated the problem, as did the Sheffield Wednesday football
                club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.

6.     He did not attribute all bjame to a single cause or person, but put a significant
portion of the blame for the. disaster at the door of the police: ‘... the main reason for
the djsasterAVais the|fa§y                      (paragraph 278, interim repiort).
 7.     He made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January 1990
 made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken place
 since then in safety at sports grounds and in the policing of football matches have
 been based largely on those recommendations.

 8.      The second investigation was the inquest into the deaths conducted by the
 coroner for the western district of South Yorkshire. The purpose of an inquest, as
 determined by the Coroner’s Rules, is to establish the identity of the deceased; the
 place of death; the time and date of death; and how the deceased came by their
 deaths. The inquest jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for
 the Hillsborough victims was accidental death.

 9.      The third investigation was conducted by West Midlands Police, supervised
 by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
 criminal proceedings. The investigation also considered whether any police officer
 should be subject to disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the taking
 of over 5000 statements, and scrutiny of all the material which had previously been
 examined. The evidence was sent to the DPP, who concluded that no person
 should be subject to criminal proceedings. The Police Complaints Authority decided
 that the senior officers in charge on the day, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
 Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty.
 Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health in advance of a disciplinary ruling. The
 PCA later announced that disciplinary proceedings against Murray would be
 withdrawn because the retirement of Duckenfield meant that what, in effect, was a
 joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
 senior officer. Murray later left the police service.

 10.     The fourth investigation was a judicial review of the coroner’s
 proceedings. An application was made on the grounds that the coroner wrongly
 failed to direct the jury about the verdict of lack of care or accidental death due to or
 aggravated by lack of care relating to the negligence of the police which caused the
 disaster; that the coroner wrongly excluded evidence of lack of care by the
 emergency services, including the police, and wrongly insisted on a cut off point of
 3.15pm for the evidence, given that there was evidence that at least one of the
victims was alive after 3.15pm; and that pressure has been put on two witnesses to
 retract their evidence about those signs of life. Having considered the conduct of
the inquest, the divisional court ruled that none of the procedural or technical points
raised justified the court’s intervention. In particular, the divisional court found that
the cut off point of 3.15pm was reasonable, and that the coroner’s directions to the
jury were impeccable.

 Resent allegations

  11.   The programme “Hillsborough” was a drama documentary which followed
  three families through the disaster. A pcfs^^felease supporting the program/pe
  claimed that it uncovered . n e y ^ ^ ^ e p c ^ t e n unresolved questions, jtlrte
j^ipgrammjet was followed by                         instigated’ by Peter Kilfd>^|®rt
i 1^D ecem ber.      Mr Howard in response,^safd vthat he would consider all


f:\oppu\houMongsub\pp0167pd.doc                               ''r 1
                                   ..............   .V-■ i: ..i       ;     :    •’
    representations and that        I must emphasise the fact that I would not take a
    decision to re-open the inquiry lightly. I must be convinced that it would be in the
    public interest to do so. The charge has been made - it is one that I will consider
    carefully - that there has been a cover up, an attempt to pervert the course of justice.
    I shall also consider whether there is any new evidence, and if so, whether that
    evidence is of such significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or the
    Coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would
    have been different.’ (Hansard, cols. 861-2).The programme makers, the bereaved
    families, local MPs, David Sheppard, the Bishop of Liverpool, and the Daily Mirror
    have since been among those calling for the inquiry to be reopened. The issue has
    generated 48 Ministers’ cases and 125 letters from the public, all but one of which
    have been in favour of a fresh inquiry, plus about 700 printed cards supporting the
    request.

    12.   There have been three broad categories of evidence put forward in recent
    months:                                                                1

    • ten allegedly “unresolved questions" identified in the Granada programme;

    • other issues arising from the programme;

    • further allegations put forward by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the
      opinion which they have obtained from Alun Jones QC, that in his view “these
      new pieces of evidence call for a full police or public inquiry”.


    The ten “unresolved questions”

    13.    The chief constable has provided a detailed response to each question and
    pointed to the recommendations that Taylor made in respect of each of the
    questions. This is at Annex A - we have not included the supporting transcripts but
    these are available. In examining this material we have not attempted to consider
    whether the Taylor inquiry reached the “right" conclusion - nor have we pursued
    every possible* point of detail. We have sought to establish whether the Taylor
    inquiry considered the questions raised; and whether the evidence put forward in
    recent months was available at the time of the Taylor inquiry. We are satisfied that
    none of the evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the
    time of the Taylor inquiry. In eight cases not only did the Taylor inquiry consider the
    questions but made specific recommendations as a result.

    Other allegations

    14.     Unravelling the~other allegations is more difficult. In the Granada press
    release they took the form of loosely connected questions which suggested, though
    did riot overtly assert, that there had been a police cover-up. We also met members
    of tfle|j|ni§bbrbugh Family Support Group in order t6 clarify their concerns; it
    b e^rn ^lear^th at whilst their ^ll^&tiohSfw ii^ similar to lhfOS6 irhplied by Granada
    they idok^'a more extreme form. The families firmly believe that there was a
              ;                                         ■
              ■ •           •     :    •v
'   ' ■   '         1   -                   .   .   .       ;   ,   .
conspiracy by South Yorkshire Police, West Midlands Police, who conducted the
investigation into the disaster, and the Coroner, to minimise the role of the police in
the disaster. The families feel that, as a result of this conspiracy, evidence was
deliberately withheld from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, and that in the case of
the inquest, this led to the jury returning a verdict of accidental death when a more
fitting verdict would have been death due to lack or care, or even unlawful killing.

15.     The police were reluctant to accept any blame in the months after the
disaster, and were criticised by Taylor for that, although they have since accepted
their responsibility. We have seen, however, a continuing degree of defensiveness
from some South Yorkshire officers. It is possible to understand why the families
have come to the view that they have.

16.    There are two main strands to the case put forward by the Hillsborough
families and by Granada: first questions surrounding the video tapes; and secondly
the questions surrounding medical testimony - although the latter are more directly
relevant to calls for a new inquest rather than a fresh inquiry. Detailed consideration
of specific points is at Annex B. The Chief Constable ‘s assessment is at Annex C.
The opinion obtained by the Family Support Group from Mr Alun Jones QC is at
Annex D.

The “missing” video tapes

17.    Many of the allegations are focused around the video tapes recorded by
South Yorkshire Police. These have been subject to a number of
misunderstandings. The families have not yet seen the police video recordings in
their entirety; if these had been made available at the outset some of the concerns
which are now being expressed might have not have arisen.

 18.    There is confusion about two events. One set of tapes was stolen on the night
of the disaster; Richard Wells explains in his letter that in addition to the police
control centre within the ground, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had a video
 recording facility in a separate recording suite; this was under the supervision of the
 Club and thejjplice had no control of its operation. During the night of the disaster
two video tapes went missing from that particular room; the discovery of the theft
was recorded as a crime and West Midlands Police made enquiries to trace the
person responsible but were unsuccessful. These tapes are still missing. One of the
tapes would have shown a brick wall but the other would have shown the turnstiles
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Neither would have given a view of the
terracing. The Hillsborough Family Support Group believe that the tapes were
probably stolen by the police in the belief that they showed material which the police
believed to be damaging. South Yorkshire have told us that the police did not have a
key to the room and that-they considered one motive for the theft could have been
that the tapes could have shown irregularities in the way that admissions were
handled at the turnstiles that could have implicated club employees. These missing
tapes have Been confused by some commentators, though n6tthe families, with the
vidieo tap^s Ffeld By South Yorkshire Police.'                          -*
                       -■                                                       '



f:\oppu>ho\AlonpuB^pp0167p4.doc                                 *"
The police videos

19.    Granada suggested in their press release that the tapes held by South
Yorkshire Police might represent new material which had not been seen by the
Taylor inquiry. South Yorkshire have supplied these tapes and we can confirm that
for the most part they are of no consequence showing general views of the stadium
and surroundings. In the final half hour before the disaster occurred the recording is
almost entirely taken up with the turmoil outside the turnstiles. It does not show the
gross overcrowding in the central pens and does not prove therefore that the police
knew the extent of the overcrowding. In this respect the tapes cannot be said to
represent new evidence. Far from proving the culpability of the police, by showing
the extent of the chaos outside the ground, they could even be said to demonstrate
how it was that Duckenfield came to lose sight of what was happening elsewhere.

20.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group have a more sophisticated allegation
concerning the video material. They claim that it was withheld because it showed
that one of the police cameras - number 5 - was working when the police asserted
in evidence to Taylor and to the inquest that it was not. The significance of this
camera was that it could have been used to zoom in on the central pens to show the
extent of the distress experienced by the fans. It is clear that the video evidence,
including a detailed transcript of its contents, was made available to Taylor. The
inquest jury saw an edited version - the way this was handled has in itself given rise
to allegations which are discussed in Annex B.

21.     The extent to which the police claim camera 5 was not working is partly a
matter of interpretation. The families believe that PC Bichard, the police video
operator, misled the inquiry and the inquest, but our reading of the transcripts
suggests that he claimed the camera was not working very well; this continues to be
the police view.    This is a point on which our assessment differs from that put
forward by the police; we do not see any evidence that pictures from camera 5 were
any less clear than those from any of the other cameras. But we do not believe that
this divergence of view is significant.
             ~ *


Medical evidence and the inquest verdict

22.     The question of a fresh inquest is in law a matter for the Attorney General.
Under the Coroners’ Act 1988 the Attorney’s consent is required for an application to
the courts to order a fresli inquest. The families have also appealed to the Attorney
General to recommend a new inquest, proffering the testimony of Dr Ed Walker. He
claimed in an article in Hospital Doctor that he tended Philip Hammond whom he
says was alive after 3.1J5. Dr Walker gave a statement at the time of the disaster. In
it, Dr Walker said of a boy, whom now he believes to be Philip Hammond:

      'W hilst I and another doctor were treating Lee, the second victim arrived. He
      was o f a sim ilar age (around 12- 14 years) with blond hajr. M e       also in
      Cardiopulmonary /arrest. I intubated him and noticed evidence o f gross
      inhalation o f stomach contents. He also had marked gaseous abdominal
        distension possibly indicating that he had has mouth to mouth resuscitation at
        some time.

        I also established venous access and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was
        also established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but his pupils were fixed and
        dilated throughout, and I believe he has since died.”

The statement, though arguably slightly ambiguous because it is not entirely clear
whether there was any heart beat when the boy arrived in casualty, did not appear
at the time to contradict the findings of the Home Office pathologist that the victims
were effectively dead by 3.15. Dr Walker was not called to give evidence to the
inquest because the consultant in charge, Dr James Wardrobe, presented a
composite picture.

23.     Although the Attorney is bound to consider any fresh applications for a new
inquest, evidence that some of the deceased may have survived beyond 3.15 has
not been considered sufficient grounds to reopen the inquests in the past. In the
judicial review of the coroner’s decision in November 1993, Lord Justice McCowan
found that in respect of one of the victims there was “a realistic probability” he was
alive after 3.15. but nevertheless concluded:

        “ I have discovered no good reason for ordering a new inquest o r for merely
       quashing the existing verdict.

        If I had found such a reason and had to exercise my discretion the following
        matters would have weighed with me. What would be the purpose o f a fresh
       inquest? To get a verdict criticising the police. Such criticism has already
       been firmly levelled by the Taylor Report. The police have admitted fault and
       paid compensation. To get a verdict criticising the emergency services? I see
       no evidence to ju stify such criticism, and in any event it would be irrelevant if
       all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination o f the last
       minutes o f their lives. I doubt that anything more would be learned, but the
       process would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers o f witnesses
       and lasting if not for 96 days, for not far short. Moreover, irrespective o f
       whosezfa u lt , if anyone’s, it is , the fact is that four and a h a lf years have
       already passed since the tragedy occurred. A s to the alternative suggestion o f
       a mere quashing o f the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would
       regard that as absolutely valueless”.

24.    We believe that overturning the inquest verdict is what the families most
desire. We met Mr Trevor Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters, and Mr Philip
Hammond who lost his fourteen year old son in the disaster. They agreed that
Taylor had done a goodJob, though they maintained that there were aspects of the
inquiry which needed to be looked at again. But they tbld us that they considered the
inquest verdict to be a gross miscarriage of justice. They strongly criticised the
cOrorie^s selection of witnesses as well as file ^ ’o f^ tli^ q f ^                    he
would not hear evidence? Their hope is that a fresh5inquest Wight f>r6d§(^% finding
of deStehrougH           cere" or "‘unlawful killing”. It appears4herefc»^lfiatftheir call
 for a fresh inquiry is not so much an end in itself but a means by which they hope
 that the Attorney would consent to an application to reopen the inquest, or failing
 that, a means by which the police might be held more directly accountable. If there
 were to be a change in the verdict it is likely that there would be renewed pressure
 from the families on the Director of Public Prosecutions to bring criminal charges.

 Criminal charges

 25.     The question of prosecution was considered by the DPP in 1989 but he
announced in September 1990 that the decision had been made not to prosecute
anyone in respect of the disaster. The CPS Code of Practice sets out the
circumstances when decisions to prosecute can be reconsidered. This includes
cases where there is new evidence, but the CPS stress that there needs to be a
high threshold in such cases because of the principle of finality - that people should
be able to rely on their decisions. Although new evidence could trigger a
prosecution, the CPS have found no evidence in the recent representations of any W
wrongdoing that would in their view justify criminal charges. The most they believe
that they have found is that PC Bichard regarded the quality of the video recordings
less favourably than the Sheffield Wednesday video technician, Mr Houldsworth. A
report is currently under consideration by the DPP herself; the firm recommendation
is that the criminal investigations should not be re-opened.

Police disciplinary charges

26.    A further cause for bitterness among the families is that no disciplinary
charges were upheld against any members of the police. In addition to Duckenfield
and Murray, all other officers involved in the case have left the force 'with the
exception of PC Bichard who worked the video camera. Though it might be argued
that Bichard’s testimony may have demonstrated a gloss favourable to the police
position, his conduct, in our view, falls far short of being involved in a cover-up of the
kind suggested by the families.

Conclusion
                      ^ %

27.    Our assessment is that there is no evidence to suggest that it would be in the
public interest to establish a new public inquiry.

28.    We recognise, however, that there is no likelihood that the families will
accept a Home Office assessment that there is no new evidence; they would see
such a decision as a further indication of the establishment sticking up for its own.
We have considered how to demonstrate objectivity and fairness. One option would
be to secure an independent assessment of all the material which has been
submitted in recent months. You may wish to consider asking a respected barrister
or member of the judiciary to carry out an independent assessment of the evidence
that has been .cbfripiled-a-lTI?is-<could M ^lirpited exercise; but he or she could look
once more at theeyideflcejlf^^                          to have examined and consider
written representations. r That would joniy go half way towards the full public re-


,                                  -----------------------                   _       . ^   7--------------------
                                                             .■         i-;.-: -r.y-; *'' -v.          ;■ :•■■■ ■
f:\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0167pd.doc
                                               r
                                                   ■   ‘„r              /r       ■
                                                                                                      o
                                                                                                  ' : 0 ........
examination of events which the families want, so would not fully meet their
concerns.

29.     A further disadvantage is that it would keep the families’ hopes alive without
real justification. I would feel happier about an independent external review if I felt
that there were anything in the representations which, if substantiated, might
suggest that it would be in the public interest to convene a further public inquiry or
that such an inquiry might achieve more than the previous investigations. But we
have seen no such evidence. On balance, I would advise you to announce a
decision now that you do not intend to establish a new inquiry.

Handling

30.    You may want to discuss the issues. Whatever decision you reach we will
need to prepare carefully for the handling of an announcement, and we will put up a
further submission at the appropriate time discussing the handling in detail. We will
need to consider who will need to be informed and how this might best be done;
there are a number of separate interests involved: Parliament, the media, the
Hillsborough Family Support Group who have asked for prior warning of the
announcement, and the families who have made direct representations. We will
also need to take account of the separate roles of the DPP and the Attorney in
considering the grounds for criminal proceedings or a fresh inquest. Their distinct
statutory responsibilities mean that they may want to announce their decisions
separately.




                                    PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\longsub\ppO 167pd.doc
                                                                                                I
                  V*iy mbs Chief Sqperintendent David Duckenfield put in charge of a major
                  semi-final cnly 21 days before the game, when he was relatively
                  inexperienced at policing matches?
              1   Mole 1-2, Duckenfield 3-4, Jackson 5-6



                  Vfcy were there no barriers or cardans to filter the crowd and prevent a
                  build up outside the Leppings Lane end of the gromd if, as the fens

              2   insist, there were the previous year?
                  Duckenfield 7-11, Jackson 12-13, Marshall 14-15



                  Why ubs the game not delayed, as a nunber of police officers thougit it
                  should have been, when it became obvious that it would not be possible to
              3   get all the Liverpool ffens safely into the grand before the 3 pn kick-
                  off?
                  Duckenfield 16-31, Murray 32-39, Bichard 40-41_________ _____________


                  Vfey didn't police recognise overcrowding an the Leppings Lane terrace
                  when eye witnesses, including football cannentatcr John Motscn, were
              4   aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?
                  Duckenfield 42-52



                  Vfcy wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they became

              5   fUll, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-Pinal?
                  Duckenfield 53-66, Crawford 67-77, Marshall 78-79



                  Mby did Chief Superintendent Ducloenfield mislead the Secretary of the FA


              6
                  fcy telling him that flans bad forced open Gate C, when the officer knew he
                  had given the order for it to be opened?
                  Duckenfield 80-92, Murray 93-95, Crawford 96, Bichard 97-101,
                  Jackscn 102-103


                  Vfcy did it take i an hour after the first crushing began to pull dom the
                  10 foot spiked fence vMch trapped the flans, and wby were the gates Which
                  led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an emergency evacuation?
                  Duckenfield 104-108, Seaman 109-115, Hopkins 116-118, Eastwood 119-125,
                  Murray 126-129, Taylor 127, Bichard 130/1, Jackson 132/4, Calvert 135-137


                  fcfcy was no public address amwcement made - either informing the ffens


              8
                  as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any mpHiral
                  personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pn?
                  Duckenfield 138-143, Jackscn 144-148



                  Vfcy, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get cn to the
                  pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent need of trained
              9   medical help?
                  SYMAS 149, Hopkins 150-152, Higgins 153-154, Eason 155-156



                   liy did only 14 of those      died ga to hospital?
U niversal
omcEsyppuEs
UDIV110C
              10   Higgins 157-159


                                                                        -   .1
                                                                                 —
                                                                                     .ij-r
                                                                                           ■J-



                           QUESTION                 ONE


Why was Chief Superintendent Oavid Duckenfield put in charge of a
major semi-final only 21 days before the game, when he was
relatively inexperienced at policing football matches?


Chief Superintendent Mole, his predecessor, understood that Chief Supenntendent
Duckenfield had not previously policed a Semi-Final but had policed at Hillsborough
although at Chief Inspector rank and as such had experience of the ground
His experience of policing football and other major events was wide although he was
not as well acquainted with the finer points of policing Hillsborough as his predecessor
but he knew the area having policed it before.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson did not consider anyone other than Chief
Supenntendent Duckenfield to police the Semi-Final as he knew him to be a police
officer experienced in policing the City Centre, Sheffield United Football Club and
previously Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Mr Duckenfield was aware of football
problems and was surrounded by very experienced ground commanders.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 1 - 6, Volume 2


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

275. Mr Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge of F Division only 21 days
before this semi-final. The pre-planning was already in progress under Mr Mole who
had been in command both in 1987 and in 1988. It might have been wiser to have left
Mr Mole in charge of this operation. On the other hand, it is quite understandable that
Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events in his Division
from the date of his promotion. In view of his lack of experience at Hillsborough and
of a semi-final match, however, it was imperative that he be fully briefed and that he
should ate6 brief himself


Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report

215. The ultimate control at any match must be that of the Police Commander
He has authority to decide how many officers he needs and to deploy them in and
outside the ground. He has. if necessary, to take such decisions as to postpone kick-
off. to stop the match, to evacuate the ground or any area of it. Police Commanders
tend to remain in post for lengthy periods. They thus acquire skill, experience and
special knowledge of the problems at their particular ground. However, there must
come a time for change. It is then essential for the new Commander to have
adequate time and training to acquaint himself with his functions and the problems of
policing peculiar to the ground. Training for such functions should be the subject
of a specific course to be attended by senior officers presently acting as Police
Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course would give induction


  ■'   v   ... ''                                         -   .   .
                                                      :
Why were there no barriers or cordons to filter the crowd and
prevent a buiid up outside the Leppings Lane end of the ground if,
as the fans insist, there were the previous year?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield stated that the Operational order for 1989
Semi-Final was based on previous experience, intelligence reports did not indicate
that there would be a lot of non-ticket holders. Police Operations had worked
previously with fans arriving over a period of time and obeying instructions in the
programme and press. It was never envisaged that a situation would arise where we
would have to change our operational plan.

Assistant Chief Constable Jackson stated that at all ticket matches it has always been
the practice for Police Officers to filter and weed out wherever possible. Those who
are boisterous and refuse to co-operate are dealt with by strict positive control
however we would soon lose manpower if making wholesale arrests.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 7 -1 5 , Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendation 46

46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should
enable the police to cope with any forseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a
match and in their departure. It should provide for sufficient reserves to enable rapid
deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.




                              .....
         : " V :-    ■
                                 ^ £<V;-
                                 .14 vo ;■
                                                                 '   V."'.
                        QUESTION                 THREE

Why was the game not delayed, as a number of police officers
thought it should have been, when it became obvious that it would
not be possible to get all the Liverpool fans safely into the ground
before the 3 pm kick-off?


Consideration to delay the kick-off was in Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's mind as
the build up progressed, through his conversation with Superintendent Murray.
However when the time to consider taking up the option to postpone the kick-off was
reached staff in the Police Control Room were overcome by other events principally
the fault with the radio communications and soon after, as the teams were on the
pitch, the option to delay became more difficult. Danger to life and injury would be the
purpose for delaying the kick-off.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 16-41, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

226. At various stages in his evidence, Mr Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he
thought it too late to postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already
come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group of photographers at the tunnel had
wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out Finally, he did not know why
he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until
2.54 pm, two minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked
for a postponement of kick-off before gate C was opened. It should not however,
have needed a Police Constable in the thick of the crowd (and there were others of
like mind) to think of postponing the kick-off. The need should have been dear in the
control room.

227. The ttuth was that Mr Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed
with Mr Murray. Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some major
cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking
behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is postponed whenever a
proportion of fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a commander must deal with the
problem of the day. Faced with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd
safety should have been his paramount consideration. Kick-off should have been
delayed.


Lord Justice Taylor • Interim Report Recommendation 29

29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in
command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in
deciding whether to exercise it
  Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 49

  49. The option to postpone kick-off should be m the discretion of the officer m
  command at the ground. Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration m
  deciding whether to exercise it.




                   u .-
               -    :V ,




v*; '                                            , i-   ■   ,;   ;   .-v } vf   ;
                              QUESTION                    FOUR

Why didn’t police recognise overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terrace when eye witnesses, including football commentator John
Motson, were aware of the problems fifteen minutes before kick-off?


No information was received from any source to the effect that there was
overcrowding or problems with density in the central pens 3 and 4. Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield saw nothing untoward on the terraces to cause concern
and the problems with density were not immediately obvious to him. It would be fair to
say that the view from the elevated position of football commentator John Motson in
the South Stand compared to the lower more acutely angled view afforded to Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield in the Police Control Room gave the former a more
realistic concept of the situation, and the fact that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's
attention was focused on the continuing build up outside the turnstiles in Leppings
Lane.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 42 - 52. Volume 2.

Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control
room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct
view of them from an elevated position through their window. Although they had no
field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by then
working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly
excessive air traffic on channel 25. attempts could have been made to alert officers
on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding and report their observations.
In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges took place, fans
were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the
control room.
        . *
245. The 20 officers detailed to the penmeter track were distributed round the pitch so
that some five officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no
reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The same applied to the
officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood admitted that his oral briefings also
contained no mention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone "access
to the track from the terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive
medical attention)!! At the end of the 1988 semi-final, there was a minor pitch
invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989 Operational Order
by being put into capital leters. The combination of no instructions as to overcrowding
and a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition of
crushing slow and their response reluctant. Small wonder that the grpywing pressure
and ;"cohg#stidn*'6«t^^                 -^aind '2:59 pm went unheeded‘orVcertainiy
                                                                                            v " .* r




                    '        ; - '    •■ •


              : r       i-      -r'Ssi;      ■ '?—■   -
                                                                                               '1

                                                                                         C/^



unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
consent of a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

247 "Senior officer” meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher The Inspector m
charge of the 20 officers on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed himself by the
players' tunnel, the most central position for supervising his men. In evidence he said

"I would only take action if I thought crowding had got to such a stage that the fans
were in danger. I'd then inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed
to the back of the stand."

That underlines the inhibition against opening perimeter gates. So did the evidence of
one Constable who said it had been so drummed into officers not to open the gates
that when he saw distress in pen 4. he "debated" with himself before opening the
gate, thinking: "If I'm wrong, I'm going to get a right bollocking for this". Naturally, one
would hope that common sense and humanity would make some officers cut through
the rules and open a gate if fans were dearly in distress.                                 ^

248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even
then not immediately. Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again
before they were finally opened and at first those seeking to dimb out over the fence
were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as some
witnesses believed.     They probably misinterpreted the hand movements from
Mr Greenwood and others aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the
pressure as attempts to stop those dimbing out at the front.

249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the
problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to be lost.


Lord Justice Tayior - interim Report Recommendation 27

27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the
pre-match brtefing of all officers on duty there should alert such officers to the
importance of preventing any overcrowding and. if any is detected, of taking
appropriate steps to remedy it.


Lordtlustice Taylor - Final Report

204. It is convenient to mention a modification I think sensible regarding intenm
recommendation5. That provided:-

.. * 5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other terraced area, a steward (if the dub is monitoring that area) or a police
officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions m
that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the period the area is
occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other
steward or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer
authorised under Recommendation 9 below, and by radio to tine control room."

I repeat that recommendation (with a *lig & change of working to achieve clarity)
but qualify it to avoid absurdity when numbers are small. The recommendation



                                                        ! -
need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do
not exceed one third of the area's maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000,
whichever is the lower.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 11,12 and 16

11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the
police, setting out their respective functions as to crowd safety and control and m
particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or other standing area and the
monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding
Any variation of the document in respect of an individual match should agreed in
writing in advance.

12.(a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained
pen or other standing area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitohng
that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check
crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in
addition to any other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a
police officer who can authorise access through gates to the pitch under
Recommendation 20 below.

16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and
especially those with duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed
and trained with regard to the recognition of crowd densities, to the recognition of
signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include demonstrations at
the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
different crowd densities.
                          QUESTION                FIVE

Why wasn't the tunnel leading to the central pens closed when they
became full, the procedure adopted at the previous year's Semi-
Final?

The tunnel was not closed as Chief Superintendent Duckenfield did not perceive
overcrowding in pens and that fans entering Gate C would go in direction of tunnel.
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield took no steps to block off or stop people going
down central tunnel.

The fullness and overcrowding in central pens 3 and 4 were not identified by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield or brought to his attention by any other person,
consequently no instruction to block off or stop fans going down central tunnel..
On giving instructions for the gates to be opened, radio on talk through,!
hoped/expected for officers on concourse to take appropriate action to close tunnel.
In 1988 the central tunnel was dosed at 2.35 pm, possibly because central pens full.
All fans in at 2.45 pm. However in 1989 different situation and atmosphere.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 53 * 79, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

231. Planning apart, however, it should have been dear in the control room where
there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to
be dosed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the fans
could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings and this disaster could still
have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder of the first magnitude.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 9

9.   Arrangements should be made:-

(a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the
maximum capacity figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above
either electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by counting or
otherwise, and

(b) to dose offfurther access to such pen or area when its maximum capadty is
about to be reached.
Why did Chief Superintendent Duckenfieid mislead the Secretary of
the FA by telling him that fans had forced open Gate C, when the
officer knew he had given the order for it to be opened?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield accepted that he may have said the gate was
forced but referred to the first occasion the gate was forced open. Accepted that he
gave impression that fans had broken down the gate but had not wanted to
communicate to the world at large that it was a police instruction for the gates to be
opened. He was concerned it would cause massive disorder not so much inside the
ground but outside. Needed to keep routes open for emergency services. Acted as
he believed correct in a crisis moment.

Did not tell Mr Kelly a lie as gates had been opened without authority earlier
However did not tell him whole truth that gates opened on police instruction as he was
concerned that if this information conveyed to fans they would cause massive public
disorder outside ground playing havoc with the emergency services arriving at the
ground.


OBSERVATIONS
This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 80 - 103, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Tayior - Interim Report

98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly. Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also of
the FA and Mr Graham Mackrell, Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the
controLroom for information. Mr Duckenfieid told them he thought there were fatalities
and       game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a gate had been forced and
there had been an inrush of Liverpool supporters. He pointed to one of the television
screens focused on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said "That's the gate
that's been forced: there's been an inrush". Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little
later live on television. He spoke of the two stories concerning the gate - the fans'
account that the police had opened it. the police assertion that the fans had forced
their way in.

99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club's boardroom.
Mr Duckenfield went there and met Mr Kelly, the referee and representatives of the
three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr Duckenfield indicated the match was
likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that he did not
want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd hamper the
emergency operations


    '
                                                     QUESTION   SEVEN

Why did it take half an hour after the first crushing began to pull
down the 10 foot spiked fence which trapped the fans, and why were
the gates which led on to the pitch too small to be effective in an
emergency evacuation?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield recollects that a request was made at the Police
Garage at Claywheels Lane for cutting equipment but none was readily available.
Fire brigade called at 3.14 pm. There were difficulties in the rescue due to the width
of the perimeter gates.

Mr Seaman. Fire Service, stated that the gates in the perimeter fence were
discounted for means of escape purposes, and only saw a minor need for use of thea
gates, such as a small localised emergency not a mass evacuation to the pitch, w
The evacuation time which was calculated for the Leppings Lane terrace did not
include the perimeter gates.

Mr Hopkins, SYMAS stated that the SYMAS ambulances located at the Ground and
used as a base communication vehicle and possibly those that went onto the playing
area, carried a breaking-in kit which includes small bolt croppers, but his impression
was that he was doubtful if they would have fulfilled the task in question, and had the
experienced ambulance men thought that they had the tackle on their vehicle that
could have helped, they would have used it.

Mr Eastwood, an engineer, agreed the penmeter gates should have been 1.1 metres
but were not. The treasury counsel stated "A breach of Safety Certificate requirement
- may have been causation". Eastwood stated prime purpose of perimeter gate for
localised problems, not used in determining capacity. He took into account the
perimeter gate when considering escape. He agreed that it was within his knowledge
that the width of the perimeter gates, nghtly or wrongly, had been a conscious and
deliberate decision of the certifying authority and they decided that the gates should
be less than the recommended guide. The effect of a certificate was to ratify the
decision to leave the gates.
     .   «=*
Superintendent Murray believes he was the person to ask for cutting equipment. The
first request was made tc Ctaywheels Lane and the accident unit was directed but
would have to travel some distance If it had been at Ctaywheels Lane it could have
been at ground very very quiddy.

Lord Justice Taylor, in response to Mr Jackson’s statement "that anyone who had
considered the possibility of crushing at Leppings Lane end would have instantly
realised that the gates at the front were pathetically inadequate" said, "I follow that
point. As I thinkJ have said earlier in this inquiry I don't think I am going to require a
lot of persuasion about that".

When Police Constable Bichard realised that the request for cutters from Claywheels
Lane was unsuccessful, passed a message requesting the fire service to bring cutting
equipment.                                               *




               .       :.y           -yr.:i- : y :   O"
                   :         .   '
Assistant Chief Constable Jackson refers to Chief Supenntendent Duckenfieid's
request for the police vehicle carrying cutting equipment from Claywheels Lane and
the two requests to Force Ops from the Fire Service.

The views of Inspector Calvert on the perimeter gates were that they were for security
access and emergency egress purposes. When used in past have been adequate for
the number he had wanted to bring out.

Every effort was made to arrange for bolt cutters to be brought to the stadium,
however before that task was accomplished the fans and police had taken matters
into their own hands and removed fencing panels themselves. The police vehicle
which carried such equipment and lodged only minutes away at Claywheels Lane was
away and not immediately available. Unfortunately bolt cutters which form part of the
'Breakin-Kif on SYMAS ambulances were not used as they were possibly considered
not up to the task by the ambulance crews.

The use of the perimeter gates were generally thought to be for security access and
evacuation for small localised emergencies NOT a mass evacuation. They were not
used in the calculation of evacuation times and should have been 1.1 metres wide but
were not; 'A Breach of Safety Certificate Requirement*. The certifying authority issued
a Safety Certificate which ratified the decisions to leave the gates, not as wide as they
should have been.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 104 -137, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor • Interim Report


Gates

258. The perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were
intended to afford access by the police to cope with any local disorder or with an
emergency. The kind of emergency contemplated was not massive crushing but, for
exampiertne collapse or illness of an individual. Emergency evacuation of the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal
since the terraces, west stand and tunnel were of concrete construction, the fire
brigade were the principal arbiters of evacuation procedure. They aimed to be able to
empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the tunnel
If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat then the
alternative route would be along the back of the terraces, through the gates in the
radial fences and round the sides of the west stand. The fire brigade were satisfied
that each of these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less than six
minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be
available, but their use was excluded from the calculation of evacuation time.

264. Even if the width of gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide
standard, they would have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release
spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the Green Guide says nothing about the
number of gates required for a pen of given size. Whilst the Club, Dr Eastwood, the
Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing stnctly to
conform to the Guide, the real failure was common to all those who have been
responsible for considering safety on the terraces. The anxiety to protect the sanctity
of the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk of a crush due to
overcrowding. Certain it was. that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4
were wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.



Cutting Equipment

101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3. i0 pm a
request came from the perimeter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire
mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage dose by without success
At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.

 104. At the Kop end. Leading Fireman Housley arrived with an emergency tender and
Station Officer Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency
tender came along the roadway by the south stand but owing to its height was unabie(
to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings Lane entrance
losing some eight minutes. From there, Mr Housley and his crew went onto the pitch
with resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium.
Mr Fletcher and his men ran along behind the south stand carrying cutting equipment
and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the fence, the cutting equipment was not
required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed from the
pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen
assisted in carrying victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.


Lord Justice Taylor • Final Report


Gates

201. I made an interim recommendation to leave gates fully open when the pen or
enclosure was occupied. This was for three reasons; first, to afford instant access to
the pitch; secondly, to provide visual reassurance to fans after Hillsborough that there
was an escape route and thirdly, to keep police and stewards alert to conditions inside
the gateway. I also had in mind that the numbers and size of gates might at some
grounds "be inadequate and I was not making any recommendation for structural
change at that stage. Along with reduced capacities, provision of sufficient gates and
lower fences, I must now consider whether to keep or modify my recommendation to
leave gates fully open. I know that some Police Commanders have been anxious that
to clo so is an invitation to pitch invasion; hence the practice at some grounds of
closing the gates near the end of the game or keeping them shut but not locked.
I would still hope that gates would be left fully open wherever those in command
feel this can safely be done. However, I recommend that whether they be fully
open, partially open or closed they be kept unlocked throughout the period when
the pen or enclosure is occupied. They should thus be easily available for
emergency exits and spectators should be confident of this.

                                         ;v           . .   - f e te '

     wnm-X'-: ■ * -                 : --v,.                   :>%>« <y;. /
  fiifte T                 !                                   rr*-' j ' V'
                                                                                           "1
                                                                  G^VA-S-i. "W OVV     7



Cutting Equipment

205. In the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, I recommended that suitable and
sufficient cutting equipment should be provided to enable spectators to be released
from behind perimeter fencing. Assuming the recommended maximum capacities are
observed, that fences are lowered, that sufficient gates are provided and left
unlocked, cutting equipment should not be necessary. Something in these provisions
would have to go badly wrong for such equipment to be required. Nevertheless, I
recommend that the equipment should be maintained in case of some
unforeseen emergency.


Lord Justice Taylor • Recommendations 17 and 21

17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained
area sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to
be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of
that pen or area.

21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the dub at each
ground where there are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough
fenang to release numbers of spectators if necessary. Agreement should be reached
as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade or stewards.
Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a
decision of a nominated senior police officer at the ground.




        '* -ti': 1 \



        -i-
                  ■■■■• ; -   ,'••■■■: -
              _                         .;
                        QUESTION                 EIGHT

Why was no public address announcement made • either informing
the fans as to what was happening, asking for their help or for any
medical personnel at the ground to help - until 3.30 pm?


Chief Superintendent Duckenfield South Yorkshire Police indicates that instructions
were given for tannoy messages be transmitted for fans to ease back in ihe pens in
the Leppings Lane terraces, also for fans to dear the playing area, the latter because
they were hampering the rescue attempts. His impression is that he had asked for all
doctors and medical staff to got to the Leppings Lane end of the ground, and that as
a result of this request the perceptive fans in the crowd must realise there was a
difficult situation.

The reason the announcement to inform the fans that the game had been abandoned*
was delayed due to the need to keep the routes dear which was one of the duties of
the site commander. The likelihood of the fans leaving the ground once a tannoy
message had been transmitted was a serious consideration for him and their leaving
the ground may hamper the rescue. There was also the fear of an adverse reaction
by the fans.


OBSERVATIONS

Please see pages 138 -148, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

Medical

89. At 3.13 pm a St John's ambulance came onto the pitch at the north-east comer
and drove to the perimeter fence dose to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and
nurses on the public address system until nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the
minutes'ticked past, some of them came onto the pitch to help of their own accord
when they saw the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity of the
situation. Many fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the
dying, in some cases their own relatives and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to
mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled and the unskilled
but usually in vain. Those capable of survival mostly came round of their own accord.
The rest were mostly doomed before they could be brought out and treated.

Fans

97. Apart fromlhe message to dear the pitch and the belated call for medical
assistance about 3.30 pm, no information or advice was broadcast on the public
address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd might turn hostile or might all
attempt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those
close enough at the west end to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majonty of
the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially Nottingham supporters in the Kop
still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by Liverpool fans
They continued singing and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool
fans who were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end
The police feared violence might result on top of the existing disaster. Accordingly,
they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the width of the pitch at
the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping any Liverpool fans back as
they moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing.
Other officers were posted to the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same
purpose. To those distressed and distraught who wanted urgent action, this large
contingent of passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 57

Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with
individual areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground. Important announcements should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the
attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This arrangement
should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.




                                                                  -   '--jjpi-   -r -i


     ! ;v
Why, when 42 ambulances reached the ground, did more not get on
to the pitch where the dying and severely injured were in urgent
need of trained medical help?


The SYMAS ambulance located at the ground was for use in the event of a major
incident as a base for communication and not for use in the rescue operation.

Mr Hopkins SYMAS was aware of damage caused to ambulances who had in fact
been onto the pitch and of the problems encountered by the drivers of the
ambulances as they attempted to negotiate the ramp giving the only access and
egress to the playing area.

Mr Higgins SYMAS took the view that it was impracticable to take ambulances onto
the playing area due to the crowd and melee that was going on there. A bottleneck
would have been formed by there being only one route into and out of the playing
area. The evacuation of the injured and dead to the Gymnasium was carried out very
quickly and because of the involvement of the police and fans it helped the operation
of dealing with them more smoothly than if they had been dealt with in isolation out on
the pitch.

Mr Eason SYMAS describes actions taken Dy Mr Higgins in radioing for assistance
and preparing Gymnasium area to receive casualties.

The problems experienced with the only ramp giving access and egress to the playing
area, the crowd, the melee, in contrast with the speed in which the casualties were
evacuated from the playing area by the rescuers would indicate that the decision not
to allow the ambulances onto the playing area was correct.


OBSERVATIONS

Pteas^ fee pages 149 -156, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor • Interim Report

296. ! say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15
April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances did not
arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage. He was
proved to be vwopng in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on
television on 15 April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people
milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at
the north-east comer of the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that the
top of the ramp leading to the pitch the access for ambulances was inadequate.
There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for ambulances to use the
two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end of the ground as in and out
routes was frustrated by the presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event,
none of these matters affected operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down.
The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and ambulances used one entrance
satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.


Lord Justice Taylor - Recommendation 64 to 69
64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first
aider per 1,000 spectators. The club should have the responsibility for securing such
attendance.

65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms.
The number of such rooms and the equipment to be maintained within them should
be specified by the local authority after taking professional medical advice and should
be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000,
the club should employ a medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with
any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in
advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-
off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts
should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
contactable.


  (b) At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000,
the club should make arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned
immediately to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained
and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be known to
those in the police control room.

67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate
ambulance authority should be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd
of 5,000 or more.

68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger
crowds are expected should be specified by the local authority after consultation with
the ambulance service and should be made a requirement of the Safety Certificate.

69. A "major incident equipment vehicle" designed and equipped to deal with up to
50 casualties, should be deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a
match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.
                                                                          vap ibiov\        VO       ^


                              QUESTION                            TEN

Why did only 14 of those who died go to hospital?


Mr Higgins SYMAS took a leading role with the injured and fatalities at the
gymnasium. A triage was implemented and the casualties were assessed, those who
were injured and capable of surviving being placed in ambulances which conveyed
them to hospital and those apparently dead placed in the temporay mortuary.
This was a difficult task for Mr Higgins due to the speed casualties were arriving at the
gymnasium. A number of casualties had already been assessed by Mr Higgins and
conveyed to hospital before a doctor arrived and assumed control of the triage, when
many more casualties were conveyed to hospital.

Mr Higgins also arranged the ambulance operation which in spite of problems with
parked vehicles still ran smoothly.

In Mr Higgins experience within the ambulance service he didn't think they could have
saved many lives. Those that died had been in the pens for a longer period than you
would normally expect to be able to successfully resuscitate anyone, they were
cyanosed, the worst cases he had ever seen in his service.

Why only 14 of those who died got to hospital is that the triage implemented by
Mr Higgins SYMAS and continued by the doctor was successful in so much that
valuable spaces in the ambulances were taken up by those capable of
recovering/surviving and not those who were in fact dead.


OBSERVATIONS

This question was raised at the Lord Justice Taylor inquiry. A number of witnesses
gave evidence concerning this matter and their observations would have been
considered by Lord Justice Taylor in his eventual conclusions.

Please see pages 157 - 159, Volume 2.


Lord Justice Taylor - Interim Report

296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be made of the
response by the St John Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on
15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any criticism of them. The only
attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipment and that there was a lack of triage.
He was proved to be wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go
on television on 15^April when he said more lives could have been saved if staff and
equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact as to the times
of arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was not possible to say
whether lives could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible.
The other doctor complained of the absence of defibrillators. I am satisfied on
overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a defibrillator on the pitch with people



                                                      f•   ;:.v
                          .       :   ...

                              ■             ' ....                          T .''       *: '     ‘
                     ■ ■ — —- ..                     .V
                                                                                Vi a w   I 0




milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the
electric charge.

301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the
emergency services. It is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been
called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature and extent of the
crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short pehod for
which those unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to
the emergency services would have saved more lives.
                                                                               ANNEX B

Questions raised by Granada and the families

The police suggested that one of the cameras was not working ( presumably
to dissuade the inquiry from watching the tape) while the video technician Mr
Houldsworth testified that he had repaired the fault on the camera trained on
the Leppings Lane end of the pitch and it was working perfectly.

This is seen to be a crucial issue by the families. Mr Houldsworth has sworn an
affidavit to this effect. On the day of the match there were five cameras scanning
the ground linked up to five monitors. These monitors did not each record the
material they displayed; the recording took place on two further video recording
machines, which were linked to monitors and took place automatically unless the
officer controlling the video made a decision to record. PC Bichard who controlled
the videoing procedure explained in his testimony that one of the cameras had not
been working well but added “ the quality has been improved. It was not up to the
mark but it was a lot better than it had been . We were getting pictures that is the
best way o f describing it. ’’ Therefore it is not true to say that the Taylor inquiry was
led to believe that the pictures from the camera were so defective that they were not
worth viewing.

In cross examination during the inquest PC Bichard maintained his view that the
camera was defective and that whist it could zoom in it was not possible to
distinguish facial expressions. However, we have examined the video tapes and
cannot distinguish any material difference in the quality of the recording which came
from camera 5 to that coming from the other cameras. This does not prove that there
was not a quality difference discernible to the police in the control box on the day. It
could be argued though that PC Bichard was putting a gloss on the evidence in a
way which he felt would be helpful to the police position. In that he was not alone.
Lord Justice Taylor commented adversely on the way that officers had been
defensive and evasive.

The inquest jury and the inquiry only had the police account of what could be
seen from the police control box on that day and the capabilities of the video
system. The faulty camera was never challenged.

South Yorkshire have sent us the two video tapes that were the product of their
recording as explained above: For most of the tape the recorded material shows a
sequence of 25 second shots from each of the five cameras. PC Bichard testified to
the Taylor inquiry thaThe was instructed by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to
record the activity at the turnstiles which is where Duckenfield considered at .the time
that the trouble Was taking^plaCe; The video footage from 14.35 until about 15.00 is
mainly of this area. Later parts of the footage cover what was happening Inside the
ground. A full schedule of the video footage and the tapes themselves were
available lo the TayloP^ihqetffiy^The schedule, would have been available tolawyers
re p re s e n tirig tl^ f|i^ iji^ ^ i^ im e of the inquest.   -1 >«'* it»             :
  South Yorkshire have been unable to ascertain whether the Taylor inquiry looked at
  these tapes. The inquiry instead considered a compilation tape which was made by
  West Midlands Police and contained the most relevant footage of the disaster taken
  from a variety of sources, including material from the BBC, from the underwater
  search team who had hand held camcorders as well as from the police monitoring
  equipment.

  The compilation tape, which was seen by Taylor inquiry, showed the overcrowding
  in the central pens. The question of whether the camera could have zoomed in on
  the crowd is a detail which does not appear to have been an issue to the Taylor
  inquiry. The line of questioning pursued by the inquiry was rather that, whatever the
  police claimed they had or had not seen, they should have anticipated the problem
  of overcrowding. This is shown in the transcripts, for example, of Lord Justice
  Taylor's questioning of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:

                   Mr Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We have seen
              videos and it really is not any use you saying that. It is plain, is [it] not that by
              2.50 the two wing pens at the Leppings Lane end were pretty empty, whereas
              the two centre pens, if you won’t have them full, were getting on for being full.
              A. Yes sir.

              Q. You agree with that? It must therefore have been very important to ensure
              that there was no further crowding o f pens 3 and 4. A. That there were not
              more than the number to fit in comfortably be allowed into those pens?

              Q. Yes, and another 100 or so even on your perception would have put those
              pens at full. A. You are quoting numbers sir. I would say they were
              approaching being full.

              Q. Yes. Therefore they had reached on your view a critical stage in crowd
              control. There was going to come a time shortly when somebody would have
              to cut g ff the inflow into those pens. A. Yes sir."


  The report was heavily critical of the police in the detail of the lack of planning and of
  the decisions made at the time. It attributed to the police the major responsibility for
  the disaster:

              “It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given
              excellent service to the public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively
              and s u c c e s s fu lly ^ a large number o f football games...Unfortunately their
              policing on 15 April broke down in ways already described and although here
              were other causes the main reason for the disaster was the failure o f police
              control.                                      : v : : r   . f p r 1 v v > ; :   v   .




               In all some 65 police offif&rsigavetioml evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must
               report that for the most p a ^ ^ h e ^ fju ^ ity ^ fQ th e ir evidence was in inverse
     -                                    -        ;                ■ ".y.i.-.'f        \             '     .
                                        r i            \   • :                     ■■ : :                 ......
  : r:
yr, f:\oppuvhou\JongsubXppO167pd.doc          __                         '• •                                      11
          proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables who as
          witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. By contrast with some notable
          exceptions the senior officers were defensive and evasive. Their feelings o f
          grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine No doubt those feelings were
                                                                     .


          intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their
          management . But neither their handling o f problems on the day nor their
          account o f it in evidence showed the qualities o f leadership to be expected o f
          their rank.”

Video tape shown to the inquest jury was badly duplicated and blurred so that
it wrongly appeared that individuals could not be identified.

This seems to have been an unfortunate misunderstanding. The Hillsborough Family
Support Group asked South Yorkshire Police for a copy of the material from camera
5 which was shown to the inquest jury. We have seen a copy of the tape that was
provided. This was indeed badly duplicated and blurred but South Yorkshire Police
say that the copy which was supplied to the jury which they still have was not badly
duplicated and blurred. Because of the degree of mistrust the families feel, they did
not question whether the poor quality of the video was for their copy alone but
assumed that this was what the jury had seen. South Yorkshire are sending us a
fresh copy of the version of the video which was seen by the inquest jury.

The compilation tape made by West Midlands deliberately included poor
material from camera no 5.

This allegation does not appear to hold water. The compilation tape was designed to
explain the disaster to the inquiry and in our judgement does so extremely
effectively. It does not appear to be attempting to cover anything up. The tape
covers the run-up to the disaster; the situation looks dangerous; there is evidence of
overcrowding. The most likely reason that material from camera 5 was not used is
that the BBC material was so much better. We do not see any evidence that
particularly poor material from camera 5 was included in the compilation tape.


Mr Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately suppressed.

One of the questions which has been raised in connection with the renewed calls for
an inquiry was why Mr Houldsworth was not called to give evidence to the Taylor
inquiry. His statement would have been available to the Treasury Counsel who was
acting on behalf of Lord Taylor. The interim reports explains:

           ‘The w itnessed called were only a small fraction o f those from whom
           statements were or could have been taken. Nevertheless , I am satisfied that
           they were sufficient in number and in reliability to enable me to make the
           necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from
           presenting an interim report in the required time and would not have added
           significafjtjy to the relevant evidence,"
                                   1
                                   ,   '
                                                       .:•„ •'
                                                       .■v-: - 1:1 i     .   —   :   r t f   *   .   f"   j:;.




                                                    • '",7   •   -
f:dppu\tioutlongsubvpp0id7pd<ioc                                                                                 12
The suggestion that police were involved in a cover-up

The central implication of the Granada programme is that the police were, and
continue to be, involved in a cover up about their conduct and the extent of the
negligence. This allegation is forcibly made by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group and appears in Alun Jones opinion in which he says:

           “One o f the most striking aspects o f this history is the way in which evidence
           presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to exculpate the South
           Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious questions arise
           as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West Midlands
           Police who assisted the coroner.”

This ignores the crucial point that the purpose of an inquest is not to apportion
blame but to meet the statutory responsibility to determine the answer to three
limited questions - who the deceased was and when and where he met his death.

 It is certainly true that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield attempted to minimise the
extent of his responsibility in his testimony to the inquiry. But he was manifestly
unsuccessful in these attempts: criticism was not averted either about his
involvement or that of South Yorkshire Police as a whole. In the interim report Lord
Justice Taylor wrote:

           “It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing and in their submissions the South
           Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at
           fault in what occurred. M r Duckenfield under pressure o f cross examination
           apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But that
           apart the police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk and to
           blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal
           crush was not cause by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a
           being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to
           whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more seemly and
           encoumtjing for the future if responsibility had been faced”.

Houldsworth’s evidence contradicts that of the police in other respects.

PC Bichard claimed in evidence that the police recording of the CCTV cameras was
inadvertently changed to time lapse mode (producing a series of pictures rather than
continual motion) probably by him catching the machine with his knee when moving
positions within the control box. Mr Houldsworth stated that it was impossible to
switch recording modeswhen the machine is already running and that the relevant
buttons are so tiny that they are unlikely to be caught accidentally; It is hard, though,
to see any particular significance to this evidence, since the mode was changed
before the crucial events occurred and the machine continued to record the relevant
images.''                                      -   !

Bichard is also said to have claimed that the pictures shown to the inquest jury were
greatly enhanced’ compared to those available to the police on the day.

-           ■'          ■■ ■                                    .-V-:-';          V

f'oppu'hou'IongsubvppO\ 67pd.doc   *
Houldsworth indicates that the police monitors were 14 inches in size rather than the
12 inches claimed by Bichard and that the monitors were capable of showing the
same information as shown on the larger screens used at the inquest.           Again,
despite Houldsworth’s contradiction of Bichard’s evidence, it is impossible to attach
any significance to what amounts to a difference of opinion.

West Midlands Police were invited to conduct the investigation despite the fact
that force was subject to serious allegations involving the Serious Crime
Squad and Superintendent Beechey, said to be Deputy Head of the Serious
Crime Squad, was appointed as one of the investigation team.

The decision to call in West Midlands Police was taken by the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, with the approval of the Police Complaints Authority and
Lord Justice Taylor. In his Interim Report, Taylor comments:

            “It was therefore decided that the investigation o f the disaster and the
            gathering o f evidence for this Inquiry should be conducted by an independent
            police force. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable o f West Midlands
            Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me;
            he appointed Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge
            o f the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both o f them”.

The PCA, who supervised the investigation, subsequently expressed its satisfaction
with the conduct of the investigation.

The responsibility for selecting the other officers on the investigation team would
have rested with Mr Jones. We understand from West Midlands Police that Mr
Beechey never, in fact, served on the Serious Crime Squad although his position
may have meant that he had certain supervisory responsibilities encompassing the
Squad. At the time of the Hillsborough tragedy, allegations had been publicised
about the Serious Crime Squad but it was not until 14 August 1989 that the Chief
Constable disbanded the squad and invited West Yorkshire Police to investigate the
allegations against it.

Other allegations raised by the Hillsborough Family Support Group included:

            • allegations that the coroner improperly relied on guidance from
              Superintendent Beechey of the West Midlands Police in his conduct
              of the inquest;

            • that the coroner chose to hear discredited evidence of drunken
              Liverpool supporters; and

            • that there has been no proper inquiry into the aftermath of the
              disaster. The Taylor inquiry considered the causes of the disaster and
              the inquest dealt with events up to the 3.15 cut-off point. The actions
              and decisions taken beyond that point, it is argued therefore, have
              not been publicly examined.


f:\oopuvhott\lonesub\poOI67ixLdoc                                                     14
An inquest is an investigation of the facts by the coroner, and he is informed as to the
inquiries he should make by the information he obtains from relevant persons,
including the police. It is entirely a matter for the coroner to decide what evidence and
witnesses should be heard.

Although the focus of the Taylor inquiry was on the causes of the disaster, its terms
of reference were ‘to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground
on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control
and safety at sports events’. As such it was able to consider fully the actions of the
police and other emergency services at the ground throughout the relevant period.
Sections of the interim report dealt with what happened to deal with the disaster
after it occurred and the response of the emergency services.




                         .   .    •    ■       ■   ■■

                                 —.—       !            ..          •       --
                                 • v '"vf ;                  '■   , •   ;


        ,       V:
                 -:' •
                     '
f:\dppu\hoa\lonfsu&^p016?pd.doc
            South Yorkshire

            POLICE                                                            R ich ard W ells
                                                                              Chief Constable
                                                                                                 Q[*M . M A i(h cn n ). C lM jS.

            J U S T I C E   u   i   t   h   C O U R A G E




Police Policy Directorate                                       Your Ref:
Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)
Home Office                                                     Our Ref:    D&C/JML/SW CSF 15/97
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                                          Date:       3 February 1997
SW1H9AT




HILLSBOROUGH

Following the screening of the drama documentary "Hillsborough" on Thursday 5 December 1996
and your letter dated 20 December, I have now had the opportunity to study in some detail the
contents of the programme and to conduct further research.

As a result of the research into the material collected by West Midlands Police for the Lord Justice
Taylor Inquiry and the transcripts of evidence given at that inquiry, two volumes of documents
have been compiled which cover the matters raised in your letter. It would serve no useful
purpose for me to transcribe certain parts of the evidence into this letter and it seems appropriate
to provide the documents to you in their present form.

Volume One deals with video evidence, together with comments from the coroner, Doctor Popper,
Home Office Pathologist, Professor Usher, Doctor Gumpet, a consultant neurologist, and
Doctor Slater. Also in these documents are comments from Police Constable Bichard concerning
the operation of the video cameras in question.

Let me say at the*outset that no new evidence has emerged and the issues raised in the television
programme have all previously been aired in Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest.

Perhaps I can address specifically the concerns mentioned in your letter dated 20 December. First
of all I must emphasise once again that there is no new evidence. Secondly, you seek clarification
on whether film from a video camera trained on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor
Inquiry. Such a video film was made available to the Taylor Inquiry and a copy is enclosed for your
information, together with another video film, completing the video record available from police
sources, that day. The second video, like the first, was made available to Lord Justice Taylor. You
will see that they did not provide any useful information to the match commanders on the day of
the disaster and the programme makers may be mistaken in thinking that they did.




                                                        4 252 3243
                                                                                                        v*r.'




                                                -2   -



Police Policy Directorate                                        3 February 1997


Police Constable Bichard gave evidence to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry concerning the workings
of the camera on the day in question and his evidence can be seen in volume one of the
documents provided, at Section Two.

Police Constable Bichard told the Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry that whilst some pictures were
available from the camera in question they were of poor quality although the camera was in fact
working.

There does seem to be some confusion about the video tapes and perhaps I can clarify the
position. Evidence given by Police Constable Bichard concerns the camera filming inside the
ground although, as I have previously mentioned, it was not working properly. Whilst it was
focused on the Leppings Lane end of the ground exclusively, the recorded material on the tape
enclosed is a compilation of a number of cameras situated around the ground. Several carries
are used by control room personnel to scan the ground and its environs but these record fo d ^ e
only when transferred to certain monitors in the control room. It will be seen from the enclc -d
video that footage from several cameras had been recorded on the day in question. Where the
reproduction is of poor quality then that is the camera trained on the Leppings Lane end of the
ground. For your information I have also included a video schedule (prepared by the West
Midlands Police for the Taylor Inquiry and included here in their original form) of these particular
tapes which form the basis of a transcript of the film which was made available to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Please see Section One in Volume One.

Although your letter of 20 December does not refer specifically to the aspect of missing tapes, it
has been an issue causing some confusion. We clarified this for the Minister, David MacLean, for
his intended contribution to the Adjournment Debate of 17 December. For your convenience, I
repeat that clarification here. The missing tape is a separate issue entirely from that of whether or
not the police cameras were working. In addition to the police control centre within the ground,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also had a video recording facility and indeed had their own
recording suite. This was entirely under the supervision of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
the police had no control in its operation. During the night following the disaster two video tapes
went missing from that particular room. Sheffield Wednesday employees say that the room was
locked and the alarm set. When they returned the next morning the room was still locked with the
alarm still armed. They did, however, discover that two video tapes were missing. One of the
tapes was of refuse whatsoever owing to the fact that following building works around the ground
the camera was trained on a brick wall. The other tape was from a camera at a fixed point outside
the playing area and was trained on the turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. As
such it did not give a view of the terracing or indeed any internal part of the ground.

Following the discovery of the theft the crime was recorded and West Midlands police officers
made enquires to trace the person responsible! To date that crime remains undetected. I hope
that clarifies the position concerning the video tapes.

A further point raised is the matter concerning the coroners imposing a 3.15 pm cut off point after
which he would not take~ahy evidence. In Volume One of the enclosed documents this issue is
explained in some detail. Doctor Popper took evidence from, among others, Professor Usher,
Doctor Slater and Doctor Gumpet concerning the injuries to the deceased and their likely time of
remaining alive after the initial crush. That evidence, coupled with Doctor Popper's own
observations of the disaster, led him to believe that 3.15 pm was an appropriate point at which to
call a clearly defined cut off time.
Police Policy Directorate                                       3 February 1997


Finally, if I might turn to the ten questions posed to the Home Secretary, then once again I have to
inform you that there is nothing new in these questions. They have all been asked previously at
either Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry or the coroner's inquest. The second volume of documents
enclosed deals exclusively with the ten questions and you will see, from the copy of the transcripts
provided, that the questions were indeed addressed and debated at some length. In fact eight out
of the ten questions resulted in a direct recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor. The two
questions which did not result in a recommendation were questions six and ten - the first about the
allegation of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's lying and the latter about why only fourteen of
those who died were taken to hospital. Though there were no recommendations from these two
points, they were fully addressed.

A separate section has been allocated to each question with the relevant comments from
witnesses highlighted for ease of reading. I have also added a brief resume preceding each
section, again to facilitate reading.

Extracts from Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry have been included to illustrate the fact that all the
issues raised in the ten questions have been fully examined. Having heard all the evidence of
events surrounding the disaster, Lord Justice Taylor arrived at his conclusions and made
recommendations.

It is my considered opinion that the drama documentary "Hillsborough" provided no evidence upon
which to launch a new inquiry or anything to affect Lord Justice Taylor's original findings.
-3 7   I   7   t« t   r*OM.   BRUCE   CAM PBELL    =0



                                                                                                      A
                                   The Hiilsbormwh Ptaaatcr: April IS89.


                                                   Opinion


 Introduction

  1            I am naked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group oa the
                appropriate legal course to follow in the light of three areu of fresh evidence that
                have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of Liverpool
                Football Club, died in the Hillsborough Stadium In Sheffield as i semi-final of the FA
                cup wax beginning in April 1989. After a long Inquest, hold in April and May 1990,
                and later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, vcrdicu of accidental death
                were recorded on the victims.

 2             A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six of the
               bcrcavod families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest The main
               complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
               presented in (he Divisional Court hearings on their behalf, attached ax Annex A. In
               summary form, those main complaints were,

               2.1     The Coroner imposed in arbitrary cut-ofTpoint in time of 3.15, which had the
                       eflect of excluding relevant evidence as to tho failure to implement the **M^or
                       DLsaster Man" promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                       emergency services promptly.

               2.2     The Coroner failed to enquire to o the individual circumstances of the deaths
                       of the 95; he failod therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                       of the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                       medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to 5.12, and 7)

               2.3     The Coruner dcvutcd an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages of his
                       summing-up o r the subjcct, to (he unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                       Liverpool supporters were under tin influence o f drink. The report by Lord
                       Taylor, which was severely critical of the police, had ruled oat tho
                       consumption of alcohol as a cause of the disaster (paragraph 10.10)

               2.4     Th«Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                       selection of evidence and treatment o f wftoenei (paragraphs 10 and 11).

               2.5     The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial task to perform, in
                       directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                       and unlawful killing.
 The inquest verdicts were not quashod. th e judgment of the Court is at Anne« h .
 The Court was strongly influenced by tho Act that the lawyer# originally instructed
 for the families had acquiesced in many of the Coroner's decisions (eg page 7), that
 the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have made a difference, or had
 been properly excluded (pages 14- 36); that the direction of the Coroner to the jury
 wore orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
 40).

 Since 1993, as 1am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
 Family Support Group as a whole, have continued to believe with deep conviction
that the legal xystem failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
circumstances of death. After the 1993 judicial review it seemed to me that the
disaster would probably recede, from the legal point o f view, quidly into history, (t
has not. In the post six months, there have been three developments which, in my
professional opinion, provide strong evidence o f perjury by individuals police officers
at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
coursc o f justice at the inquest None o f the following matters were nude known at
the inquest

The evidence of Roflor Houldsworth Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth.
dated 25* November 1996, attaching a statement of May 1989 and supporting
documents, and commenting on cvidcnec given at the inquest (Annex Cl. Contrary to
(he evidence presented, no cameras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures of the
I -eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
tapes and Mr Houldsworth’s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
officers committed perjury. This evidence was made known to the world at largo in
December 1996 when Granada Television televised a drama-documentary on the
duastcr. (The evidence of tho witnesses referred to by Houldsworth i« at Annex 1"K

Th<i n«w YidfiOtftpg CvidfiBSB- Very recently, a member o f the Family Support group
Has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies of
those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
told that tapes, occupy tapes, were made available to Yorkshire Television by the
South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
inquest I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks of the Family Support
Group in the presence of Mr liouldsworth, Mr Philip Hammond of the Family
Support Group, sod Ann Adliagton of my instructing solicitors. The tapo indicates
that poitM officers were lying, and that the pictures of all relevant areas o f the ground
were clear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
Mr Houldsworth in bis evidence of November 1996. Events a the relevant area may
m*, foe various reasons, have bocn recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm. but
they wens dearly visible on the monitors to those on ditty at the time.

\ have also been shown a copy orwhat was, I am told, presented to the jury. It i« a
very hadly duplicated and biuired picture o f Individuals escaping from the stricken
pens shortly after 3 pm, in which it Is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The

                                        2
 tope has bad interference in the picture. It appears that this tape is « copy at several
 generations removed from either the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
 the videotape of vrhich the new evidence is a much better copy, but it presents only
 events after 3 pm.

 The imoortiince of the new evidence. The question whether the police could and did
 notice the pressure on the pens before 3 pm wax central at the inquest. On Day 77,
 puge 123, the Coroner directed the jury fAnnex Rv.

 “The asuewtment of the terraces” it a “vary important factor” aod “maybe the aiogJc
 most important (actor in the whole inquest'*. "The total turn of ovidencc from the
 Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
 that none of them noticed any problems with the pen* until 3 o-clock”.

 None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue in the
 caw in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded aa by the Coroner RSthc critical time. I
 believe that the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
 the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

!ltc cvidcnec of Dr Ed Wilkw In February 1997 the evidence of Dr Walker came lo
light; ace AflttBX.E- • The evidence at the inquest to which it must be contrasted
appears at Annex G. The new evidence discloaes that Philip Hammond junior had
“sinus rhythm and cardiac output* after arrival at tike Northern General Hospital,
Sheffield. The statement Or Walker made very shortly after, in 19S9, shows serious
criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walkar
points out in his letter of 7* February 1997 that hia evidence conflicts with that of Dr
Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3* May 1989 by Dr Wardrope, who was
dosely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15* June 1919 to
stand by to make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
at the inquest.

 it is difficult to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr Walker's
ovidencc. At page 10 of the Divisional Court's judgment of November 1993 the
Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
the evidence disclosod the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousness leading to rapid
death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the roost
revealing remark comes from Dr Waidrope in his letter of 3* May 1989 “Almost
immediately the department was flooded with large numbers of acutely ill patiaata
requiring urgent resuscitation’*. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, wai
structafcdiiy the Coroner on an utterly different Actual assumption.

Xho previous inyaligatiop. One of the most striking aspects of this history ii the way
in which the evidence presented to the inquaat was avidenoa which tended to
exculpute the South Yorkshire authorities and the police ftom blame. Very serious
questions arwe as to the process by which evidence was selected by the Weal
Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner.
 12    Conclusion, In my viow th«e new pieces of evidence ctll for a full police enquiry or
       public inquiry. Exhibit* such u the (apes must be secured and subjected to forensic
       analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
       production o f evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
       this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be tent to the Director of
       Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with a full copy to th* Home Secretsty,
       who hus expressed interest in this matter in the last fewmoathi.

13     [ hope that the Director might feel able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
       two or three o f the Family Support Group, Aim Adlington and me to expand upon this
       advicc.




3 Raymond Buildings
Grsy’s Inn
London WCl


3rd March 1997.                                                   Alun Jones QC
WV ,u.-t 1.   ? ' t S OLp I
              11
                              I   I   ■ I -        at i      i                              1C. L- VI ■ i   0^0     V030               Y. UUi




                                                                                                            ^ 5 ^ < j f d «•

                                                                                                            A '""               v-C_




                                                                          A     ,




                                          Fy4X TRANSMISSION
                                              Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
                 Attorney General’s Chambers, 9 Buckingham Gate
                                                                 London SW1E 6JP

                                                     TEL:            0171 828 1721/158!
                                                     FAX:            0171 828 0593

        TO:

        O RG ANISATIO N:                                                  Q $fr&

        f a c s im il e n o                    :                    £72       <£>73c5

        FROM:                                       STEPHEN W O O LE R

       S C P PLEM ENTA R V M ESS.AC E:




       DATE: b /S /f l                                T IM E :                  No. OF PACES:                         S>_______ _
                                                                                        ■                      (including this one)
      Hurd copy to follow:                                \3£S?N0
                                                                        ANNEXD

                                 HILLSBOROUGH


  The disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 and the handling of its
  afterm ath by the authorities continues to cause dissatisfaction am ongst the
  relatives of m any of the deceased who have formed the Hillsborough Family
  Support Group. They do not appear to have any clear objectives and their
  dissatisfaction focuses on the fact th at individual police officers have not, in
  their view, been called adequately to account for their negligence/incompetence
  in allowing the disaster to occur, perceived insensitive and inadequate
  response to the tragic events combined with a belief th at there h as been a
  substantial "cover-up" notably in relation to the Inquest. There is also concern
  about the state of the civil law which enabled certain police officers whose
  health was adversely affected to secure compensation whilst leaving the
- families whose experience was more ’remote’ w ithout compensation.

  The  activity of the Hillsborough Family Support Group increased markedly
  after the "Hillsborough" TV docum entary dram a broadcast in December and
  they have m ade calls for a further public inquiry, a reopening of the criminal
  investigation and a fresh Inquest. The latter affects the Attorney General m ost
  directly but he also has an interest in the second by virtue of his
  superintendence of the Crown Prosecution Service.

  The Inquest in relation to the Hillsborough disaster concerned the deaths of a
  total of 95 people and was conducted against the background of a full public
  inquiiy conducted by Lord Justice Taylor (as he then was). The position was
  further complicated as the result of the interim Taylor Report because the DPP
  advised th at there should be a criminal investigation into police conduct. That
  was undertaken by the West Midlands Police. The Coroner therefore decided
  th at the Inquest should proceed in three phases:

  (i)    Inquests on the deceased were formally opened on or about 19 April
         1989 and th en adjourned. This is quite normal.
                                                 ”*1
  (ii)   Between 1 May and 4 May 19^9)the Coroner held a series of "mini-
         Inquests" covering the death of each victim. Lord Justice Taylor had
         delivered his interim report in A ugust 1989 which dealt with events at
         Hillsborough (but not on the wider issues relating to safety a t sports
         grounds) and the criminal investigation was in progress. It w as clear in
         May 1990 th a t it was likely to be some time before the DPP reached any
         decisions.

 (iii)   The evidence taken a t the "mini-inquests" was heard by th e jury. The
         Inquest was then adjourned until November 1990 when evidence relating
         to the incident as a whole was heard. The jury returned verdicts of
         "accidental Death".
In deciding to proceed by way of "mini-inquests" the Coroner appears to have
been motivated by an appreciation of the desire of families to know the details
of the fate of their loved ones. He decided to hear evidence in relation to each
deceased confined to the statutory questions of ’who" the deceased was and
"when" and "where" he m et his death. He indicated that he would postpone all
wider investigation to the further question of "how" the deceased came by their
deaths until after the decision by the DPP on w hether to initiate criminal
proceedings.

During the "mini-inquests" the Coroner took evidence from the pathologist and
the balance of th e rem aining evidence in two parts. First, a sum m ary was
received from a police officer of evidence of eye w itnesses of the movements of
the deceased on the day of the disaster, the sightings m ade of them a t the time
of the fatal crush, the finding of their bodies on the pitch, any attem pts at
resuscitation m ade, the taking of their bodies to the temporary m ortuary in the
gym and the certification of death. Generally, he took no direct oral evidence.
Second, a police officer took the ju ry through all the docum entary evidence
relating to the individual such as sightings of them on photographs and videos
recovered from the media plus positions m arked on plans by various
witnesses.

The Coroner proceeded for the purposes of considering availability of verdicts
on the basis of pathological evidence which indicated th a t all of those who
direct would alm ost certainly have perished by 3.15pm. He did not however
declineto receive evidence relating to m atters arising after 3 .15pm. Indeed, he
was careful to ensure th at all evidence about w hat happened to individual
deceased persons w as drawn together and presented to the ju iy .

The form of these "mini-inquests" was unorthodox and does not appear to
comply with Rule 37 of the Coroner's Rules. Rule 37 requires th a t before
docum entary evidence is put before an Inquest the evidence should be
sum m arised and th e consent of the interested parties sought. However, such
an irregularity does not, of itself, render a fresh Inquest necessary in the
interests of Ju stice b u t it is one of the factors to be considered in m aking a
decision on the application.

There have been three formal applications u nder Section 13 of the Coroners
Act 1988 and the question of a fresh Inquest h as been raised In m ore general
term s on a num ber of occasions. Certain of the families obtained leave to
bring judicial review proceedings and there was a full hearing before the
Divisional Court. Judicial review refused m November 1993 and the judgm ent
of the Directional Court echoed m any of the points which had influenced the
Law Officers’ decisions.

The m ain planks of tffe applications under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988
and the judicial review application were the "mini-inquest” procedure adopted
by the Coroner and his decision not to leave "lack of care" to the jrn y as a
possible verdict. The Divisional Court endorsed the decision of th e Coroner to
proceed by way of "mini-inquest" and his handling of the so called "3.15pm
cut-of point".
As to the verdict of "lack of care" the Divisional Court held that th at would not
have been appropriate in the present case as the verdict was concerned with
the failure to provide care m the form of food, clothing, shelter etc and not with
carelessness. The Coroner was right not to treat the Inquest as a public
enquiry into the responses of the emergency services to the disaster - th a t had
all effectively been covered in the public enquiry conducted by Lord Taylor.

So far as the 3 .15pm cut-off part was concerned, the court focused on the
purpose of ordering a new Inquest to conduct a further examination of the last
m inutes of the deceaseds’ lives and doubted th at anything would be learned
and th at the process would be a very harrowing one. The Court also
em phasised th a t 4Vn years had already passed since the tragedy had occurred
and th a t it would be wrong to ask w itnesses to come along some five years
later to try to cast their m inds back to events they m ust be trying to forget.

In the light of the above judgm ent, the Attorney General stated in an
Adjournment Debate tabled by Sir Malcolm Thornton MP on 26 October 1994
th a t it "will require really cogent and persuasive argum ents if they are now to
result in an order by the High Court th a t there should be a fresh Inquest".

Special m ention should be made of the case of Kevin Williams. The first
Section 13 application by his parents was m ade in January 1992 followed by
a further request in April 1992. On th a t latter occasion it was m ade in
conjunction with five other applicants. This was carefully considered,
especially in relation to Kevin Williams, and consent refused in August 1992.
H ie application in relation to Kevin Williams was renewed in Jan u ary 1996 but
declined. This h as proved the m ost unsatisfactory because the evidential
position was confused at the Inquest and h as subsequently become even more
confused. New evidence has been p u t forward on a t least three occasions
which h as confused the m atter further. In particular, there has been evidence
suggesting th a t Kevin Williams displayed sighs of life whilst receiving attention
on the pitch and in the m ortuary uttered sounds which was interpreted as
words (ie after 3 .15pm). The pathological evidence - and the Coroner took the
trouble to obtain a second opinion - w as unequivocal th at he could not have
been alive at the stage when those events occurred. Most im portantly, the
uncertainties flowing from the evidence and the changing positions of
w itnesses do not appear to have any bearing on any issue. The case of Kevin
Williams h as however been the focus of the attention of those campaigning for
a fresh Inquest.

Following the ITV dram a docum entary referred to above, num erous
representations were received b u t no actual request under Section 13 of the
Coroners Act 1988. LSLO officials viewed the video which contained no
evidence or information which would have affected the issues relevant to the
Section 13 applications which had already been considered. Consideration
was also given to a substantial bundle of docum ents (and accompanying video
tapes) provided Uf th e Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in response to a list
of questions p u t to him by Home Office officials reflecting points m ade In the
dram a docum entary. All those points related to the conduct of the police, in
relation to th eir short-comings in the policing of the event as a whole or their
failure to response quickly and effectively to the disaster and none had any
bearing on issues which arose in consideration of th e Section 13 applications.
                   .iiivlV.tLt   U L . 'L f t. - tL    ItL;U1■i 828 Uo9o                   P. 005




    Against th at background the present position of the Law Officers rem ains th a t
    there is no basis for reconsideration of the decisions already taken b u t th a t if
    relatives or others were to m ake a fresh application under Section 13 based on
    further evidence, th a t would be considered carefully in the usual way. That
    rem ains the position.




P
