                                                reference   ffo/q-? vlns'ol7 b


                  Minister's Case - Draft Reply

Divisional        PW/97 5/21 8 0/9 7
Reference:

Private O ffice   2 0 7 69 /9 7
Reference:

Notes For         Eddie O'Hara MP writes regarding a letter sent
M inister:
                  by Mr & Mrs Aspinall to the Home Secretary
                  about the Hillsborough Scrutiny. Mr & Mrs
                  Aspinall's son James died in the disaster. Mr
                  O'Hara asks for a copy of the Home
                  Secretary's response.

                  The Aspinalls' letter (copy on file) was dealt
                  with as an advice case. MP case held back
                  awaiting final reply.        ________________ _

Enclosures:        In Pouch


Copy To:



Contact           Julia Dolby
Details:          OPPU
                   Rm 528
                   QAG




                                       <J c J & b ty
                                           ia


                                                                   c * |u ,/r i

                                                            M   DEC ;sj7

                                                                 S. wrote as wiihkv
                                              QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT




Eddie O'Hara Esq MP                             Our Ref:    P W /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /7 6
House of Commons                                            PO 2 0 7 6 9 /9 7
LONDON
S W 1A OAA

                                                            2 3 DEC 1991




Thank you for your letter of 10 November on behalf of M r and Mrs Aspinall of
                                               whose son, James, sadly died in the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster in April 1 9 8 9 .

As you know , M r and Mrs Aspinall w rote to me on 2 7 October 1 9 9 7 about
Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's Scrutiny into new or overlooked evidence. As
requested, I enclose a copy of my response.




                                  JACK STRAW




                                                                                      i
                                                 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                      27HOV19JJ
M r and Mrs Aspinall




  aiiWKA A(V. f~ AAj f ai t . ’              ^


Thank you for your letter of 2 7 October about Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith's
reported comment during his recent visit to Liverpool.

I am sorry that you w ere upset by the Judge's comment to M r Phil Hammond.
The Judge has said on the record th at he deeply regrets this remark, which he
made off-the-cuff and w ithout any intention to offend or for it to be taken
seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not the subject of
the Scrutiny.

The term s of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith for the
Scrutiny will allow him to establish conclusively w hether any material evidence
was overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the
consideration of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest. His
terms of reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident thafcthey
will allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which has been
submitted by the fam ilies and others.

I am sure you will appreciate th at it would not be appropriate for me to com ment
on the detailed issues you raise in your letter, many of which fall within the
remit of the Scrutiny. As I have indicated before, I will make public the advice
given by Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith in his report, and will take w hatever action is
needed in the event th at he suggests material evidence about the disaster has
been overlooked.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to w rite his report.
I am satisfied th a t Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith will produce a thorough
which the families and the public can have confidence.



                          y
                          *


                                   JACK STRAW
                                 EDDIE O’HARA M.P.
                                     (Knowsley South)

                                                                                Westminster:
                                                                                Tel: 0171 219 4538 / 5232
                                                                                Fax: 0171 219 4952
                                                                                Constituency:
10th November 1997           HOUSE OF COMMONS                                   Tel: 0151 489 8021
                                  LO NDON SW1A OAA                              Fax: 0151 449 3873
Rt.Hon.Jack Straw MP
HOME OFFICE
Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1


                                              1 °1 7
                           2&




Dear Home Secretary,

RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - SCRUTINY OF NEW EVIDENCE

I have received a copy of a letter sent to you by my constituents,
Mr.& Mrs. Aspinall of                              .               "□d a te d
27 October 1997, whose son, James, died in the Hillsborough stadium
disaster in April 1989.

 Mr.& Mrs. Aspinall seek clarification of a number of points relating
 to.your statement to the House on the 30th June 1997, when you announced
 there would be a scrutiny of evidence not previously available. I should
 begiiteful if you would let me have a copy of your response to Mr. & Mrs.
 Aspinall.

 Yours sincerely,      .
                                         G-‘> X


                               v ^y.      4 b , H v..... ,‘V   27 October, 1997
                                                          ••
                                                        •v
 The Home Secretary                  V   ><>-   ^
 Rt. Hon. Jack Straw
 50 Queen Annes Gate
 London, SW1H 9AT
                                                                  OPPU REGISTRY
 c.c. Rt. Hon. T Blair
      Rt. Hon. E O’Hara
                                                                     12 NOV 1997

 Dear Mr Straw,                                                   R E C E IV E D

                       The Hillsborough Disaster, April 1989
                           Scrutiny of “New Evidence”

        ™nt!"g t0 egress our extreme dismay in relation to the remark made by Lord
Justice Smith on Monday, 6 October, along with other issues we believe require
comment. As you may be aware the remark was made to Mr Hammond who lost his
 14 year old son at Hillsborough. Far from being “late” for our meeting with Lord
Justice Smith, quote, “like Liverpool fans arriving at Hillsborough” we, along with the
other families awaited his arrival at the venue for the initial meeting; whilst he played
c 1* kr°u     I7160113 circus. We would like to say, never has any member of the
Establishment generated such intense disgust, but we have found this sort of
ignorant/arrogant behaviour commonplace.

We have personally expressed our opinions as to the remark to Lord Justice Smith.
He did apologise, but may we add, many of the families felt that the proceedings had
already been undermined.                                                      a

We attended a second personal meeting on Tuesday, 7 October, in relation to the
circumstances surrounding the loss of our son James. The conclusion we came to
 o owingi the meeting, was that Lord Justice Smith is far from “open minded”. Our
initial optimism that a new Government would bring a fresh “open” approach to the
issues is waning rapidly.

We have been advised that if the outcome of the “scrutiny” is unfavourable our legal
options are limited. This is because six of the families received a Judicial review
Why should the remaining families be penalised? We would welcome clarification
we believe this is grossly unfair given that generalisations as to the specific
circumstances surrounding the loss of our loved ones cannot be made.

    hawnn!Udied th® statement V°u made to the House of Commons on Monday 30
June, 1997, and we request clarification of a number of points relating to your
statement and other matters.                                               y
 If, as you state, Lord Taylor cited the main reason for the disaster was the
 failure of police control, how could the DPP find that there was insufficient
 evidence for a prosecution(s)?

 Is it not true that Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and indirectly, the Football
 Association owed a Common Law Duty of Care to the spectators on that fateful
 day, to ensure their health and safety whilst on the premises? If so are there
 not grounds for a civil prosecution for negligence?

Could you explain why the Coroner’s rules, whilst prohibiting the framing of an
inquest verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any question of
criminal liability; can be used as a means of restricting the terms of reference,
 3.15 pm cut off”, of subsequent investigations, e.g. the scrutiny. It is a fact
that some of our loved ones were alive post 3.15 pm, yet events after this time
cannot be investigated. We request that you intervene even at this late stage
and amend the terms of reference to include evidence after 3.15 pm.

Could you explain why the blood alcohol concentration of the deceased,
including children was determined and used in the inquest? Yet the blood
alcohol levels of those who where responsible for their safety were not
assessed? Could you determine on our behalf why Dr Popper chose to include
this data as evidence and yet discount so much other information?

Could you explain why the HSE were never involved in the investigations into
the disaster as you know they carry a Royal Warrant and are quite capable of
investigating organisations, e.g. Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

Could you provide a copy of the DPP’s conclusions as to why no person should
be subject to criminal proceedings? This disaster was not an “Act of God”, our
loved ones were killed due to human failings at every level.

Could you explain why investigations into possible criminal proceedings
against the Police are conducted by the Police? This undermines public
confidence, and requires review. We require an organisation similar to the FBI.
I hope you will consider such a possibility in future legislation to improve our
democratic process.

The Police Complaints Authority found that both the Chief Superintendent in
charge on the day, and Superintendent should face disciplinary charges for
neglect of duty. Why can retirement due to ill health be used as an escape
route. The Police disciplinary rules must be changed. Does not a vicarious
liability remain with the South Yorkshire Police? Please clarify.

Forgive us, but we do not understand how the Attorney General and the DPP
can say that the new evidence does not justify fresh criminal investigations, if
the independent scrutiny by Lord Justice Smith finds in our favour, their “view”
is wrong. It appears almost like a verdict being reached before there is a trial,
please explain, as we are beginning to see the scrutiny as a sham, a tactic, a
device, of which we have many examples over the past 8 years.
      Would you explain where the “evidence not previously available” came from?
      Was it wilfully withheld/filtered out or “conveniently” lost? Provided the
      circumstances surrounding this evidence can be established, is not withholding
      evidence a criminal offence?

We believe only a comprehensive unfettered review/inquiry of all of the evidence and
events surrounding the tragedy both before, during and after will satisfy our desire
for the truth. Irrespective of the outcome of the “Scrutiny” our resolve will remain
indefatigable to attain our goal. Our lives were irrevocably changed as a result of the
events on that fateful day, we have seen families torn apart, lost lovedones through
gnef and stress, suffered all manner of slander/libel at the hands of the media, and
professional people. To you this is one of many issues, to all of the families the fight
Tor truth and justice has become the focus of our lives.

Thank you in advance for taking the trouble to answer our questions.

Yours expectantly,




M r & M rs Asninall
                                                                                        c   s




EDDIE O 'HARA Esq. MP                              Our Ref:   P W /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /9 7
House of Commons                                              2 0 7 6 9 /9 7
LONDON
S W 1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 10 November on behalf of M r and Mrs Aspinall o fQ

j                                            whose son, James, sadly died in the

Hillsborough Stadium Disaster in April 1 9 8 9 .



As you know , Mr and Mrs Aspinall w rote to me on 2 7 October 1 9 9 7 about Lord

Justice Stuart-Sm ith's Scrutiny into new or overlooked evidence. As requested,

I enclose a copy of my response.




                                    JACK STRAW
