Association of Chief Police Officers of Scotland




POLICING OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS


 GUIDE TO CURRENT PRACTICE
          AND PROCEDURES
                                                                  CE
                                CONTENTS


                                                                       Page
Introduction...........................................................      5
Part 1—Stadium .............................................                 6

Part 2—Communications.................................... 12
Part 3—Liaison...................................................... 16

Part 4—Intelligence.............................................. 20
Part 5—Traffic....................................................... 23
Part 6—Briefing.................................................... 27

Part 7—Emergency Procedures........................ 32
Part 8—General.................................................... 36

Part 9—Operational Considerations................ 39
A ppendix............................................................... 42
Index....................................................................... 49



                                                                                  7/89
                                                               CE
                         INTRODUCTION

The booklet incorporates guidelines applicable to the main aspects of police
involvement in policing football grounds in Scotland. The contents have been
approved by The Association of Chief Police Officers of Scotland following
consultation with Forces and other agencies. The code is neither exhaustive
nor definitive but is nevertheless presented as an authoritative catalogue of
combined elements of good practice. The guide should serve as a reference
source to all police managers professionally involved with senior football
clubs, officials, supporters and other associated parties and agencies.
The guide is designed in a format which will allow amendments and additions
to be incorporated in the light of experience, developments, new legislation
or changes in policy, practice or procedure.




Strathclyde Police Headquarters
173 Pitt Street
Glasgow                                                            July 1989

                                     5
                                                                                7/89
PART ONE




STADIUM




           7/89
                                                            GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART ONE



1. STADIUM
1.1 While football clubs and their respective Certifying Authorities have
    specific responsibilities for conditions within stadiums, in some areas
    facilities within the ambit of police interest at the football stadium are
    reviewed by a senior officer and written observations sent to the football
    club management where required standards have not been achieved.
    Urgency, priority and implications are governed by the prevailing
    conditions. In other areas less formal means of contact exist.


2. ANNUAL INSPECTION
2.1 The annual inspection of the ground as required under the Safety of
    Sports Grounds Act 1975 should be carried out in sufficient time to allow
    remedial work to be completed during the closed period. Interim and
    spontaneous inspection may also take place.


3. PRE-MATCH INSPECTION
3.1 Police inspections should be carried out before every match and are
    usually made with a club official (a) during the week prior to a match
    and (b) before the turnstiles are opened on the day of the game.
    Involvement of the Certifying Authority may on occasion be appropriate.
3.2 The pre-match inspection usually covers important aspects of public
    safety which may include attention to:—
    3.2.1 Basic structural conditions, state of terracing, including clearance
          of snow and ice and genuine good housekeeping considerations
          within the ground, consistent with crowd safety and fire
          prevention objectives. Special emphasis should be placed on
          clearing building material and general rubbish that has been
          allowed to accumulate within the stadium.
    3.2.2 The effect of any maintenance and construction work on the safety
          and evacuation arrangements for the ground.
    3.2.3 Exit routes are to be checked to ensure that they are clear and exit
          doors/gates are operating properly.
   3.2.4 The erection, position and maintenance of high quality signposts
         giving clear instruction to the public on:
          (a) direction to turnstiles
          (b) home and away support areas
          (c) segregated areas within ground (where appropriate)

                                        7
                                                                                 7/89
                                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                    PART ONE




            (d) turnstile numbers
            (e) OAP/boys/season ticket gates
            (f) notices at turnstiles outlining restrictions imposed by Criminal
                Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 on patrons entering the ground
            (g) exits
            (h) police office
            (i) first aid stations
            (j) toilets (male/female)
            (k) no smoking (in stands)
           (1) CCTV in operation
3.3 Where appropriate checks of equipment and facilities m ust be recorded
    in relevant documents.
3.4 There is also merit in surveying the exterior of grounds and approach
    routes with a view to taking any action which may be necessary to reduce
    availability of missiles, weapons etc. from obvious sources e.g. skips,
    scaffolding, debris, building operations etc.

4.   STEWARDING
4.1 The stewarding requirements will vary depending upon the size and
    configuration of the ground, the nature of the event, crowd levels and
    the ste warding policy of the club.
4.2 Agreement should be pursued with the club management to achieve an
    acceptable level of stewarding plus a proportional increase in stewarding
    for higher crowd events during the football season as appropriate. Such
    agreement should be confirmed in writing.
4.3 The Chief Steward, appointed by the club, performs an important part
    in the management of crowd control and a close liaison requires to be
    established if a co-ordinated response is to be achieved in normal and
    emergency situations.
4.4 The stewards have to be clearly identifiable and clubs are to be
    encouraged to adopt a standard fluorescent garment to be worn at all
    times so that the function of the wearer is easily recognisable.
4.5 The senior officer in charge of policing the stadium should ascertain from
    the Chief Steward the number and positions of stewards on duty on the
    day of the event and that all exit doors/gates are unlocked and manned.
4.6 Arrangements should be made in conjunction with the club to establish
    a training programme for stewards.

                                        8
                                                                                   7/89
                                                            GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART ONE



4.7 Police involvement in the training of stewards in liaison with the Chief
    Steward is recommended. A minimum of three sessions are suggested
    one pre-season, one during the season and a third which would be an
    exercise in the evacuation procedure from the ground. The programme
    of training should follow the guidelines set out in Appendix 'W of the
    HMSO publication “ Guide to Safety at Sports G rounds". Written
    instructions on duties should be available and form the basis of training
    syllabus.
4.8 Stewards should be briefed on their duties prior to every match and
    consideration should be given to the provision of Aide Memoire cards
    specific to their area of responsibility.

5. MEDICAL FACILITIES
5.1 Adequate resources and equipment supplied by
     (a) Scottish Ambulance Service
     (b) St. A ndrew 's Ambulance Association
     (c) other voluntary organisations who can assist in initial treatm ent of
         casualties with injuries of any description
    should be available at the match.
5.2 The requisite number of authorised persons from the above agencies
    should be determined and arranged before the event.
5.3 The person in charge of the medical support team should liaise closely
    with the nominated official from the club, and with the senior police
    officer in command.
5.4 Certain major clubs have arrangements with medical practitioners from
    local hospitals, under which the doctors view matches from specially
    reserved seating areas, and are immediately available for emergency
    needs.
5.5 The provision of identity tabards to doctors in attendance is an important
    consideration which has been implemented at some grounds.
5.6 The availability of club doctors for administration of emergency treatment
    should also be considered.
5.7 Account should be taken of the obligation placed on clubs through most
    Safety Certificates, to ensure that there is a suitably equipped First Aid
    Room/First Aid Points/Ambulance Room provided, to the satisfaction
    of the Certifying Authority.

                                      9
                                                                                 7/89
                                                            GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART ONE




6. POLICING
6.1 While local arrangements vary, the Divisional Commander will usually
    indicate the manpower requirement for policing football matches after
    discussion with a nominated official of the club before each match,
    thereafter specifying the number of officers to be employed within the
    ground.
6.2 In line with Force arrangements the club will be liable for the cost of the
    agreed number deployed within the ground.
6.3 There is no precise formula for determining desired manning levels and
    this is a professional judgement arrived at by the Divisional Commander
    taking account of all known factors at the time including such as
    intelligence reports, the importance of the fixture (cup or league,
    promotion or demotion), recent incidents of disorder (on or off the pitch),
    where the same clubs were involved, or historical hooliganism.

7. ALL TICKET GAMES
7.1 The Police will exercise the right to direct that entry to certain fixtures
    will only be by pre-sold ticket. Such a decision will normally be made
    after consultation with the club where:
    7.1.1 the crowd is likely to approach ground capacity as specified in
          the Safety Certificate,
    7.1.2 where this would enable segregation of rival supporters, or
    7.1.3 where for other reasons the police consider this essential for the
          maintenance of order on crowd safety.
7.2 It may be appropriate to initiate an all-ticket requirement in writing to
    the club.

8. POLICE ACCOMMODATION
8.1 Specific room(s) should be designated and reserved exclusively for use
    of the police at the ground.
8.2 While there can be no model design for such premises given the variation
    in local requirements and conditions the configuration, number and size
    of rooms m ust be adequate to cope with the likely volume of enquiries
    and custodies which will be processed.
8.3 The facility should be sufficiently secure to permit the temporary
    detention of prisoners, while at the same time offering convenient access
    from the playing area and the public thoroughfare.

                                      10
                                                                                  7/89
                                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                    PART ONE




8.4 Adequate heating and toilet facilities should be available within the police
    room complex.
8.5 Direct dial telephone equipment and radio communication facilities are
    basic essentials.
8.6 Other facilities may include briefing area, refreshment provision and
    writing room.
8.7 Staffing arrangements are based on predicted workloads assessed from
    relevant factors relative to the scale and duration of the event.

9. PRISONERS
9.1 The police room within the stadium will require to be sufficiently staffed
    to enable prisoners to be speedily processed to the stage that
    apprehending officers are free to resume operational duty with the
    minimum of delay.
9.2 Documentation of custody cases should be minimised at the initial stages
    by the adoption of a standard pro-forma summary report suitable to the
    local Procurator Fiscal.
9.3 At major fixtures or where previous experience indicates that a large
    number of apprehensions can be expected, arrangements should be made
    for prisoners and their apprehending officers to be photographed by
    polaroid camera to facilitate future identification.
9.4 Suitable vehicles will usually be allocated for the purpose of transferring
    prisoners, to the Divisional Police Office.
9.5 Where the usual detention rate does not justify fully manning the police
    office at the stadium a vehicle will usually be utilised to receive and
    transport prisoners arrested at the ground direct to the appropriate police
    station.
9.6 Procedures set in Force Standing Orders relating to detentions of
    prisoners apply with equal weight to persons temporarily detained in
    the Police Office at the stadium and procedures shoud reflect this
    requirement.




                                      11
                                                                                   7/89
GUIDE TO PRACTICE
    PART TWO




COMMUNICATIONS




      12
                    7/89
                                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                    PART TWO




1.   COMMUNICATIONS
1.1 A Public Address System capable of effectively and distinctly relaying
    voice messages to all parts of the ground, both in normal circumstances
    and in emergencies, is essential. Loudspeakers should also be capable
    of broadcasting to persons waiting to enter the stadium.
1.2 The system is to be quite separate from police radio facility and able to
    operate independently in the event of a failure in mains power supply.
1.3 Control of this system should be available to the police either directly
    or via an override facility for immediate use by the police in emergencies.
1.4 The whole system should be tested by the police before each match as
    a matter of good practice.
1.5 The public address system should be augmented by an adequate number
    of loud hailers available to stewards and police officers employed in
    directing or instructing spectators.


2. POLICE CONTROL ROOM
2.1 A central police control room should be provided within the ground
    containing a full range of modern facilities essential to policing
    requirements and compatible with local requirements.
2.2 The control room must be sited and constructed so that it can continue
    to function in the event of fire or crowd disorder emergency and should
    have a direct link with the clubs own control room (if provided).
2.3 Staffing requirements will be consistent with perceived workloads and
    range of functions to be undertaken in the control room at each event.
    Consideration should be given to the presence of a steward equipped
    with a stew ard's radio where this will improve co-ordinated action in
    crowd control or safety.
2.4 The room should have telephone and radio facilities extending to all parts
    of the ground, particularly the turnstiles and entry and exit gates.
2.5 The control room should have direct radio link to the main Force Control
    Room (or satellite control room) and Divisional Control Room.
2.6 Many clubs are adopting a computerised metering system to record
    admissions at the turnstiles. It is important that the police should have
    ready access to this data as the information will be invaluable for issuing
    instructions on crowd direction and control.
2.7 In the absence of a centralised metering system arrangements should
    exist where by designated club officials supply the officer in charge with
    updated admission figures at regular intervals.

                                      13
                                                                                  7/89
                                                               GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                      PART TWO




3.   POLICE RADIO FACILITIES
3.1 Wherever possible a unique police radio channel should be allocated for
    exclusive use of police personnel employed at the ground.
3.2 At major games consideration should be given to establishing a Satellite
    Control at the Divisional Office or where appropriate in the stadium
    control room.
3.3 Such a facility is to be used exclusively for the management of police
    personnel in and around the stadium and the collating of information
    on crowd movement.
3.4 The police radio system for the stadium and ground should be in addition
    to the Force/Divisional Control Room Communications which should
    have listen-in facilities to the dedicated system/network/channel.

4.   CLOSED CIRCUIT TELEVISION
4.1 The principle that close circuit television will be installed in the grounds
    of all Premier Division clubs has now been accepted as an “ essential"
    requirement to assist arrangements for the safety of patrons.
4.2 The purchase, installation and maintenance of a compatible CCTV system
    will be the responsibility of the club while control and operation is
    essentially a police function.
4.3 Such a facility should be designed to provide comprehensive cover of
    all key areas and pressure points including
     4.3.1 the main approach roads on the perimeter of the ground.
     4.3.2 all turnstiles—viewing inside and outside the ground.
     4.3.3 all exits.
     4.3.4 terracing and stand areas.
     4.3.5 any other area of the stadium which is identified as requiring
           specific or close coverage by virtue of problems which exist due
           to design/landscaping or historical complaints.
4.4 The camera controls and individual monitors should be sited in the
    stadium police control room.
4.5 Video recording and instant photographic reproduction should be
    considered for incorporation in any CCTV system.
4.6 It is essential that officers are properly trained in the use of a CCTV system
    if the full benefits of crowd management and control are to be achieved.
    Recording may also prove of vital importance in any future inquiry or
    prosecution.

                                       14
                                                                                     7/89
                                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART TWO



4.7 Advice on camera specification is available from commercial suppliers
    specialising in this market.
4.8 Funding for CCTV equipment may be available from the Football Trust
    via the Scottish Football Association.
4.9 The configuration and specification of the CCTV network will require
    to be discussed with the club prior to purchase and before any future
    replacement or modification. As a general rule cameras within the ground
    should have the full facilities to give both wide area and close coverage.
4.10 Signs should be prominently displayed inside and at access points
     advertising the existence and use of closed-circuit television facilities.




                                     15
                                                                                  7/89
GUIDE TO PRACTICE
   PART THREE




     LIAISON




      16
                    7/89
                                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                    PART THREE




1. LIAISON
1.1 The value of establishing regular channels of contact with various bodies,
    associations and agencies involved in football affairs has been recognised
    and the following are particularly helpful to police efforts related to
    football fixtures.


2. THE CLUB AND THE POLICE
2.1 As well as regular arrangements for contact throughout the season the
    Divisional Commander should formally meet with the Executive
    Management of the club prior to the commencement of each new season
    to review, clarify and develop individual and joint policy in relation to
    spectator safety.
2.2 A senior officer will usually be responsible for liaising with the club
    management on a continuing basis throughout the football season. This
    liaison is essential for two-way exchange of information on aspects of
    mutual interest and to ensure any changes are approved under the Safety
    Certificate.
2.3 These discussions will generally take account of past events; requirements
    under the Safety of Sports Ground legislation; and club and police
    commitments to imminent games.
2.4 Shortly prior to each game the Divisional Commander will usually contact
    or meet with senior club officials to discuss anticipated attendance, ticket
    arrangements, policing levels, as well as crowd control and safety.
    Ground inspection may be included in these local arrangements (see Part
    1 para 3).


3.   SUPPORTERS ORGANISATIONS
3.1 A monthly meeting between the executive of the local supporters clubs
    and senior police officers has, in certain areas, proved a profitable forum
    for exchange of information.
3.2 These meetings help to establish regular dialogue between the police
    and supporters organisations, the resolving of any misunderstandings
    and their co-operation in police efforts to improve spectator safety, control
    and traffic management.


4. THE REFEREE AND THE POLICE
4.1 Printed instructions regarding emergency procedures should be displayed
    in the referees changing room.

                                       17
                                                                                    7/89
                                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART THREE



4.2 The senior officer on duty at a game will prior to the commencement
    meet with the match referee and linesman and direct their attention to
    the local procedures on evacuation.
4.3 Agreement has to be reached on the circumstances and method of
    clearing the players from the playing area in the event of crowd disorder,
    invasiqn of the pitch, or other emergency. The general instruction should
    be that the referee will arrange for players and officials to assemble in
    the centre circle and await directions from a senior officer.
4.4 Any decision to stop play in the interest of public safety lies with the
    senior officer on duty at the ground.
4.5 Where circumstances develop in which the level of hostility towards
    match officials is particularly potent, it may be necessary to formulate
    plans to protect match officials as they leave the playing pitch and later
    depart from the stadium.

5. MEDIA COVER
5.1 The use of the national press to disseminate information as to the
    arrangements for football matches is well established and the Force
    Information Officer should maintain these contacts.
5.2 In the absence of a Force Information Officer a media liaison officer should
    be appointed for major football events.
5.3 Divisional Commanders are encouraged to make use of the locally
    distributed newspapers and any supporters club publications to advertise
    arrangements for spectators, access routes and parking facilities for
    private cars and buses.
5.4 The national and local press are normally represented at the game and
    the clubs are to be encouraged to issue clearly identifiable lapel badges
    to club authorised media representatives. Press representatives should
    have special passes and a specific point of entry to the press
    accommodation.
5.5 Press photographers deployed on the pitch area should be equipped by
    the clubs with distinctively coloured numbered or named "Press”
    ponchos.
5.6 The clubs should define the scope of access permitted to the media
    representatives particularly in the area adjacent to the playing field.
5.7 The senior officer on duty at major matches should as soon as possible
    after the conclusion of the game supply accurate figures of persons
    apprehended within the ground and give an appraisal of crowd behaviour
    to the Force Information Officer or nominated media liaison officer.

                                      18
                                                                                   7/89
                                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                    PART THREE




5.8 At those events where the media wish to establish television or
    broadcasting equipment at the ground, the Divisional Commander
    should appoint a liaison officer with responsibility to identify a suitable
    area for parking these vehicles where no obstruction is caused particularly
    to exit gates and to advise on security. Such vehicles should not be
    allowed inside the ground.
5.9 The liaison officer will also ensure that press representatives as well as
    technical, commentary and support staff are aware of evacuation
    arrangements in the event of an emergency situation occurring.
5.10 Every opportunity should be taken to use media outlets to broadcast and
     publish positive and clear messages on the limitations imposed by the
     Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980 on alcohol and controlled containers
     at sports grounds.

6.   SECURITY ADVISERS
6.1 Security Advisers—Scottish Football Association/League
    The Scottish Football Association employs a security adviser as do some
    of the senior football clubs. These officials should be consulted on national
    and club policies and involved whenever possible in the pre-planning
    and briefing for matches.




                                       19
                                                                                    7/89
GUIDE TO PRACTICE
    PART FOUR




  INTELLIGENCE




      20
                    7/89
                                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                      PART FOUR



1. INTELLIGENCE
1.1 The availability of good, current intelligence as an aid to planning football
    matches is invaluable.
1.2 The Divisional Commander will normally delegate the responsibility to
    collate information to the Divisional Intelligence Officer or other suitable
    nominated officer.
1.3 Current intelligence relevant to travelling supporters should be made
    available to the Divisional Commander of the area in which the football
    fixtures are being played.
1.4 The following sources of information are suggested as a guide and should
    not be considered exhaustive.
    NON-POLICE                             POLICE
    Club Officials/Management              Traffic Division
    Supporters Organisations               Criminal Investigation Department
    Local Press                            Scottish Crime Squad
    British Rail                           Uniform Beat Officers
    Bus/Shipping Companies                 Force Intelligence Officer
                                           Divisional Intelligence Officer
                                           British Transport Police
                                           Other Force
                                           Intelligence Officers
                                           The TREVI Liaison Officers

1.5 The intelligence gathered should cover the following areas.
    1.5.1 Traffic—estimated number of buses, trains, cars travelling to the
          venue, time of arrival and support carried. Proposed entry and
          exit routes for the different types of transport.
    1.5.2 Pedestrians—traditional routes taken by supporters walking to the
          ground.
    1.5.3 Construction Work—roadworks and building construction in the
          area and on the route to the stadium should be obtained and the
          effect on pre-planning evaluated.
    1.5.4 Special Events—information to be obtained of any other special
          event taking place in the Division or adjoining Divisions which
          may affect the free flow of traffic or have a disruptive influence
          on those attending or leaving the football match.

                                      21
                                                                                    7/89
                                                      GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                            PART FOUR




1.5.5 Supporters—identification of disruptive elements among the
      supporters and where appropriate the preparation of a record of
      group names, styles of dress, modes of operation etc.
1.5.6 Rendezvous Points—known meeting places of home and away
      supporters and historical points where opposing supporters have
      clashed.
1.5.7 Local Information—as to opinions, attitude or intentions expressed
      by persons representing or allegedly representing sections of the
      supporters or the football clubs which would have a bearing on
      planning traffic movement or crowd control.
1.5.8 Complaints—record to be maintained of complaints received
      which emanate directly from the staging of football events, for
      consideration in future planning.
1.5.9 Weather—which can have a direct effect on the numbers, mode
      of transport, and time of arrival of the spectators attending.




                                22
                                                                           7/89
GUIDE TO PRACTICE
    PART FIVE




     TRAFFIC




      23
                    7/89
                                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                    PART FIVE



1. TRAFFIC
1.1 The management of traffic forms an important part in the planning for
    football matches as such events have a direct effect on local traffic
    movement and indirect repercussions on public safety, crowd movement
    and complaints.

1.2 Routes

    1.2.1 Routes into and from the stadium should be identified and
          consideration given to the need for signposting. The Regional
          Roads Department can assist in preparing and erecting permanent
          route notices if desired.

    1.2.2 Route marking can be helpful but experience has shown that it
          should be supplemented by pointsm en at key junctions
          particularly near the stadium.

    1.2.3 Where the local road system permits, consideration should be
          given to separating, particularly at the approaches to the stadium:

          (a) supporters' buses and private vehicles, and

          (b) transport of opposing supporters.

   1.2.4 In the interest of safety no private cars, officials, sponsors or media
         vehicles should be allowed to park at or near turnstiles, or exits.

   1.2.5 The separation of supporters at the end of the game is particularly
         important and supporters' buses should be directed to leave the
         area by different routes and where this is not possible their exit
         from the parking stances should be phased, to prevent
         confrontation.

   1.2.6 On the occasions when a game is expected to attract a volume
         of supporters which will place an inordinate stress on the normal
         movement of traffic, then discussions should be held with the
         Regional Authority Roads Department on the advisability of
         imposing a Temporary Traffic Regulations Order for the control
         of buses and private vehicles approaching the stadium.

   1.2.7 To ensure direct access to the stadium by players, officials and
         the press, the club will usually issue coloured passes to be
         displayed on vehicles in such a position that they are clearly
         identifiable to the police on points duty and controlling access
         points.

                                     24
                                                                                   7/89
                                                           GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART FIVE




    1.2.8 This system of vehicle identification can be extended, where
          appropriate, to differentiate supporters buses.
    1.2.9 The importance of consulting local residents and seeking their co­
          operation in the implementation of traffic plans should not be
          underestimated.
1.3 Parking
   1.3.1 A survey should be carried out of the “ on” and "off” street
         parking available within a one mile radius of the stadium prior
         to the commencement of each football season.
   1.3.2 The survey should consider the effect of new building
         developments or road management schemes and confirm the
         existence of traditional parking areas.
   1.3.3 Maximum utilisation of "off" street parking is desirable but as
         most stadiums are already sited in built-up areas, it is essential
         that " o n " street parking is controlled so that it does not hinder
         emergency vehicle access to the ground nor cause obstruction to
         local residents. As a general rule on-street parking should not be
         allowed within % mile of the stadium.
   1.3.4 Segregation of supporters buses is an important tactic in crowd
         control and is designed to minimise friction and disorder between
         opposing fans.
   1.3.5 Areas within reasonable walking distance of the ground should
         be identified for the exclusive use of supporters buses.
   1.3.6 There should be a designated bus parking area for each team 's
         supporters and wherever possible sited in the area adjacent to the
         recognised side of the ground to which the respective supporters
         gather.
   1.3.7 Officers detailed to control bus parking are to ensure that the buses
         are parked facing the direction of egress. This will facilitate the
         smooth and speedy movement of spectators from the area.
   1.3.8 In the circumstances where supporters buses are obliged to travel
         through hostile parts of the town/city, particularly after a
         contentious match, consideration should be given to—
          (a) giving priority to buses on the routes and/or
          (b) forming manageable convoys of buses to travel with or without
              police escort depending on the circumstances.

                                    25
                                                                                 7/89
                                                           GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                  PART FIVE




   1.3.9 The dubs must arrange that the “ team ” buses are dearly
         identifiable and consult with the police on the parking and security
         of these buses during the game.
   1.3.10 The police and the club should consider the need for a police escort
          for the team buses or the game officials where there is a history
          or indication on the day, of aggression on the part of the
          supporters.
1.4 Emergency Routes
   1.4.1 In planning traffic movement and parking facilities for football
         events it is essential that separate access and egress routes to the
         stadium are identified for the use of emergency vehicles in the
         event of a major disaster.
   1.4.2 The routes are to be clearly identified and all emergency services
         informed of their location by the police. Consideration should be
         given to involving the Club Secretary/Security Adviser/Chief
         Steward if an exchange of ideas would eliminate continuing
         problems.
   1.4.3 The limitations placed on parking are to be vigorously enforced
         without exception by the police officers detailed that duty on the
         day of the event. The routes are to be patrolled for the duration
         of the game, ideally by police motor cyclists, who would also be
         available for escort duty in an emergency.
   1.4.4 Incorporated in any plan for the emergency routes should be
         provision for the physical removal of vehicles causing obstruction
         in the designated roads or where necessary in the adjoining streets.




                                    26
                                                                                 7/89
GUIDE TO PRACTICE
     PART SIX




    BRIEFING




      27
                    7/89
                                                            GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART SIX



1. BRIEFING
1.1 The success of an operation depends largely on the quality of briefing
    given to the staff detailed to implement the preplanning and the success
    of the briefing is to be seen in the awareness of the officers on duty.
    Supervisors must instruct and translate the briefing into positive action
    on the day. The instruction can either be written, visual, verbal or a
    combination of all three, the latter being the most effective.
1.2 Written Orders
    1.2.1 A divisional order laying down police commitments to the event
          and instructions on individual involvements is standard practice.
          This has the advantage of being both a general and specific
          instruction to all those concerned and also as a document for
          reference.
    1.2.2 It is important that the order is detailed, unambiguous and relevant
          to each rank.
    1.2.3 The format of the order should encourage study and would
          normally open with information covering the following points.
          The Event—statement of the day, date and time of event and the
          anticipated attendance and whether entry will be by ticket or
          payment.
           Command—identification of the senior officers in command and
           their areas of responsibility.
         “ Personnel—a list of the names/numbers of the officers or the
           divisions who will be policing the event with a cross reference
           to an appendix detailing their duty.
           Briefing—arrangements for the verbal briefing of supervisors and
           men.
          Communications—general statem ent on the system being
          adopted, issue and distribution of personal radios.
          Emergency Evacuation—statement of evacuation policy and code
          words to be used in the event of an emergency.
          Administration—instruction on the mode of dress by male and
          female officers, code of conduct and advice on facilities available
          to officers from outwith the area for parking vehicles and
          refreshment.
          General—Divisional Commander's policy on any matter of a
          general or local nature which is relevant to the event.
          Appendices—a list of appendices which will contain detailed and
          specific instructions as well as maps and ground plans.

                                     28
                                                                                 7/89
                                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                      PART SIX




    1.2.4 The introduction to the divisional order should contain clear factual
          information which will answer the basic questions of “ w hen” ,
          “ where” , and "w h o ". The appendices will answer the more
          detailed question of "w hat duty" each officer is required to
          perform.
    1.2.5 The number of appendices will vary according to the size of the
          event and geography of the area but should be designed so that
          they may be removed selectively by the supervisors and where
          appropriate sub-divided again to individual officers for reference.
    1.2.6 A basic list of appendices would contain the following:
           (a) manpower availability
           (b) traffic control and parking
           (c) a detail of duties within stadium
           (d) a detail of duties outwith stadium
           (e) communications
           (f) support services (m ounted/dog/support unit)
           (g) evacuation procedure
           (h) Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980—Aide Memoire
           (i) plan of ground
           (j) street plan
    1.2.7 The content of the appendices are to be comprehensive and
          unequivocal to the reader or their value as a briefing document
          is diminished.
1.3 Visual Aids to Briefing
    1.3.1 The use of visual aids in briefing personnel has proved useful and
          particularly valuable where officers from outwith the area of the
          football stadium are being employed in policing the event.
    1.3.2 Large scale street maps and colour coded plans of the stadium
          indicating specific areas assist the listener at pre-match briefing
          sessions to appreciate the relevance of the instruction.
    1.3.3 Copies of these street maps and stadium plans should also form
          part of the appendices to divisional orders so that they may be
          available to supervisors for briefing of individual officers or groups.

                                      29
                                                                                    7/89
                                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                     PART SIX



    1.3.4 At football events where there will be contingents of visiting
          officers, consideration should be given to the use of photographic
          slides to illustrate evacuation procedures, problem areas,
          traffic/parking arrangements and known flash points for crowd
          disorder, within and outwith the stadium.
    1.3.5 It may be advantageous at certain venues to familiarise senior
          supervisory officers with the area and stadium and on these
          occasions a local tour followed by an instructional visit to the
          ground should be a considered option.
1.4 Verbal Briefing
    1.4.1 Written instruction embodied in a divisional order should be
          supplemented by a verbal briefing.
    1.4.2 The officer with responsibility for policing the event, or his
          nominated depute, should instruct senior supervisors during the
          week prior to the match.
   1.4.3 For the larger events, pre-match instructions, may, by virtue of
         the numbers involved, be limited to the rank of Inspector and
         above.
   1.4.4 Every effort should be made to ensure that officers who will
         actually be involved on the day of the event attend the briefing.
   1.4.5 The briefing of supervisors should take place at a police office with
         the facilities to accommodate the numbers attending and with
         equipment to display any visual aids.
   1.4.6 Where the stadium is suitable and the club are agreeable the
         briefing and familiarisation by supervisory officers may be
         combined.
   1.4.7 The supervisory officers once briefed are responsible for briefing
         the men under their charge prior to their attendance at the
         assembly point on the day of the match. Account must be taken
         of the fact that some officers will be performing duty there for
         the first time and detailed advance briefing is a crucial pre-requisite
         to effective policing.
   1.4.8 Where the logistics involved make this impracticable, the
         Divisional Commander should make accommodation available at
         a police office near to the stadium or identify an undercover area
         in or adjacent to the stadium where officers can be adequately
         briefed before taking up their duties.

                                     30
                                                                                   7/89
                                                          GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                 PART SIX



1.5 General
    1.5.1 The involvement of outside bodies m ust form part of the plans
          for briefing as the police cannot operate in isolation.
    1.5.2 The club, press, supporters organisations, travel companies and
          associations, and the Force Information Officer, should be briefed
          on the policing arrangements in the areas where the individual
          or the general public are going to be affected.
1.6 Debriefing
    1.6.1 A post match review is normally held soon after the event by the
          senior officers who attended the game. This may be formal or
          informal depending on the scale of the event, incidents of public
          concern, unexpected problems or simply the local practice of
          individual Divisional Commanders.
   1.6.2 The object is to obtain a feedback of information which would
         identify problems of difficulties in crowd behaviour, traffic
         movement, manpower deployment which would be resolved in
         planning for future events.
   1.6.3 Where a major or newsworthy incident has occurred either within
         or outwith the stadium, an immediate debriefing should be
         convened of officers with direct knowledge of the occurence.
   1.6.4 The list of areas requiring detailed analysis should be prepared
         and a questionnaire issued for completion by all officers in these
         areas.
   1.6.5 The collation and a submission on the findings of the enquiry
         should be made to the Divisional Commander for consideration
         and recommendations for future planning and briefing.




                                   31
                                                                               7/89
GUIDE TO PRACTICE
   PART SEVEN




   EMERGENCY
   PROCEDURES




      32
                    7/89
                                                            GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                  PART SEVEN




1. EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
1.1 The safety of the public inside the ground is the responsibility of the
    Club management. The standards of safety are set at the annual ground
    inspection by the Local Authority after consultation with the Police, Fire
    Service and Building Control officials.
1.2 An important aspect of safety is the preparation of a procedure for
    evacuation in the event of fire, structural collapse, bomb threat or major
    disorder. A contingency plan specific to each ground should be drawn
    up in consultation with all relevant bodies and agencies and be readily
    available, regularly reviewed and exercised as appropriate.
1.3 The role of the police with regard to evacuation is to assist the club to
    carry out their responsibilities. It is therefore important that the police
    liaise with the club in the preparation of instructions on evacuation for
    the club officials and police employed within the ground. Rehearsal
    involving police, club officials and stewards will be of benefit.
1.4 Planning
    In preparing a contingency plan for evacuation the following points
    should be covered:—
    1.4.1 Detailed plan of the exit routes from the ground with special
          emphasis on the stands.
    1.4.2 Assessment of the number of stewards required to man these exits.
    1.4.3 Division of ground into manageable areas of responsibility by
          colour coding or definition.
    1.4.4 Identification of police supervisors and club officials responsible
          for each evacuation area.
    1.4.5 Agreement that the senior police officer on duty at the ground
          will be in overall charge of evacuation.
    1.4.6 Club Official to be identified as liaison person to the senior police
          officer and to be responsible for management and direction of
          Stewards and other club personnel allocated duties in the event
          of an evacuation.
    1.4.7 Adoption, for transmission over the public address system where
          time allows, of a coded message, instructing police and staff to
          open the exit doors in preparation of evacuation.
    1.4.8 The terminology and method of transmission is to be clearly stated
          w hen there is an actual call for evacuation or where this proves
          unnecessary to stand down the police and stewards on evacuation
          points.

                                     33
                                                                                  7/89
                                                            |       PART SEVEN             |



    1.4.9 The access routes to and from the ground for emergency vehicles
          are to be identified and agreed upon by the Police, Fire and
          Ambulance Services and kept clear.
    1.4.10 A standby personnel carrier should be retained at the ground
    1.4.11 The identification of an area/room both inside«   and outside the
           stadium for use as a first aid station in the event of an incident
           occurring which generates high numbers of casualities.
    1.4.12 The identification of nearby premises which could be utilised as
           a temporary mortuary capable of receiving up to 100 bodies. The
           premises must be assessed for suitability for such a purpose (i.e.
           on one level, cool, well ventilated, with a supply of both electricity
           and water).
1.5 Im plem entation
    1.5.1 All police officers employed within the ground are to be specifically
          briefed on evacuation procedures by their supervisors immediately
          prior to taking up their general policing duty.
    1.5.2 Officers not directly detailed for duty within the ground will be
          instructed on the evacuation procedure as part of their overall
          responsibility.
    1.5.3 The club management will be responsible for instructing the
          stewards and any other club employees involved in the evacuation
          procedure.
    1.5.4 The senior police officer in charge should arrange for the club
          safety liaison official to check the exits before the commencement
          of the game and be satisfied that all doors function and are manned
          by staff, knowledgeable in their duties.
    1.5.5 In the event of an incident occurring which is likely to require
          evacuation the senior police officer on duty is to be informed.
    1.5.6 Initial fire-fighting action is the responsibility of the stewards who
          will tackle such outbreaks, if safe to do so, by means of portable
          fire extinguishers.
   1.5.7 The decision to implement the evacuation procedure will be taken
         by the senior police officer in charge.
   1.5.8 The senior officer should notify Force Control of his decision
         through the stadium/divisional control room and request other
         emergency services and additional manpower as necessary.

                                      34
                                                                                    7/89
                                                         GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                               PART SEVEN




1.5.9 The police and stewards are to be forewarned by the use of the
      prepared standard alerting message to open all exit doors.
1.5.10 In the event of an immediate emergency the supporters should
       be advised through the public address system to leave the ground.
       The message is to be clear and concise, repeated at least three times
       with measured pauses between each call.
1.5.11 The use by police officers of loudhailers to assist in the evacuation
       procedure is recommended. If possible loudhailers should be
       issued to supervisors at selected points and be available
       throughout the duration of the game. Simple and direct
       instructions are essential.
1.5.12 Police Officers and stewards should not leave the ground until
       they are able to report to the Police Control Room that their
       particular section has been cleared of supporters. Extra care will
       be required when evacuating the elderly, infirm and very young.
1.5.13 Police officers are to remain at their respective exits and ensure
       clear access to the emergency services.
1.5.14 As a general rule handicapped persons should be dissuaded from
       leaving the ground when they are likely to be caught up in the
       main exodus. It is preferable where safe that they be taken as a
       group via an open route even if this involves some delay in their
       evacuation.
1.5.15 A senior officer accompanied by the club safety liaison official
       should inspect the ground before a final decision is made that the
       ground has been cleared.
1.5.16 Many clubs have blacksmithing tools such as welding plant,
       cutters, grinders, etc., in their workshop. This should be readily
       available on a match day in a suitable vehicle such as a Land Rover
       manned by staff capable of using the plant to assist in rescue after
       such as a structural collapse.




                                 35
                                                                               7/89
PART EIGHT




 GENERAL




  36
             7/89
                                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                   PART EIGHT



1.   GENERAL
1.1 The following general principles are worthy of consideration in planning
    the policing of football events.
1.2 The police perform an important role as co-ordinators of the various
    organisations and groups involved at football games and it is essential
    that they take a positive role in the assimilation and dissemination of
    information to all the parties concered.
1.3 The public relations and operational value of contributing police related
    information and news via club magazine and programme is recognised
    and should be employed whenever possible.
1.4 At all-ticket matches there is considerable operational value in employing
    the tactic of tasking officers on duty around the perimeter of the ground
    to inspect tickets at the earliest opportunity to:
     (a) deter non-ticket holders from approaching the ground.
     (b) direct ticket holders to the appropriate entry points.
     (c) prevent delay at turnstiles caused by spectators at wrong turnstiles.
     (d) reduce possibility of imbalance in crowd distribution from over
         capacity due to access at wrong turnstiles (non-seated areas only).
     (e) identify forged tickets where they are known to be in circulation.
     (f) discourage ticket touts.
1.5 The implications of clubs selling tickets for future matches on other match
    days should be monitored particularly as to the effect on crowd
    movement, behaviour and access to the stadium.
1.6 Police require to be alert to the possibility of forged tickets circulating
    prior to high-demand matches and institute appropriate measures to deal
    with holders of forged tickets.
1.7 Occasions arise where the timing of crowd arrival prompts consideration
    being given to delaying the kick-off beyond the scheduled start time.
    This is essentially a matter for local operational decision based on all
    known factors at the time with particular emphasis on the potential for
    disorder and crowd safety both outside and inside the ground.
1.8 The need for early and positive action to prevent a stadium or section
    of a stadium exceeding the specified capacity limit is self evident. Local
    arrangements should exist in liaison with the club to monitor crowd levels
    and employ measures to divert spectators to other parts of the ground

                                      37
                                                                                  7/89
                                                            GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                  PART EIGHT




    as appropriate. In the event that capacity could be over-reached, resources
    should be deployed to give as early warning as possible, reduce queues
    to manageable size and disperse surplus patrons. Clearly the earlier this
    can be achieved the better prospect there will be of avoiding conflict by
    warning and directing approaching supporters.
1.9 Police Officers should be carefully briefed on the possibility of flares,
    smoke bombs or similar devices being carried into grounds and set off
    on the terracing or thrown onto the playing surface. They should also
    be aware that innocuous objects such as inflatables or large banners can
    introduce a danger to the crowd caused by spectators straining to see
    past or tripping over the object. Close monitoring of crowd should be
    maintained at access point and at potential trouble spots.
1.10 A standard policy should be adopted regarding spot searches to detect
     persons attempting to enter the ground in contravention of the provisions
     of Part V of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980.
1.11 The implications of any proposed course of action:
    (a) to deal with an emergency or serious situation, or
    (b) which changes, varies or cuts across arrangements operating or
        contingency plans,
    must be carefully assessed in relation to the knock-on effect on other
    parts of the plan or planning arrangements.




                                     38
                                                                                  7/89
  PART NINE




 OPERATIONAL
CONSIDERATIONS




    39
                 7/89
                                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                     PART NINE



OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
1. In addition to the many pre match planning, discussion and consultation
   arrangements which already exist a wide range of operational policing
   options are considered in the light of developing conditions.

2. The management, direction and co-ordination of resource deployment is
   governed by prevailing circumstances based on current information and
   past experience. It is not possible to set down firm guidelines or criteria
   which would be compatible with every individual event. Nor is it feasible
   to prescribe standard guidelines applicable to each stadium as the nature
   of the matches can vary considerably, calling for different policing
   methods. At best it is only possible to list some of the more important
   considerations which the officer in command might require to take into
   account, to varying degrees, in the operational situation. This list is not
   exhaustive nor definitive and should be regarded only as useful for
   reference in appropriate situations. Nothing is intended to prejudice or
   bind operational commanders whose tactical policing options must remain
   flexible to respond to new and changing or unpredictable developments.

3. Many of the following points are self-evident, long-standing practices and
   not claimed to be original, innovative or unique. The list is primarily a
   check list or catalogue of practical considerations:—
   3.1 Checking of exit gates—padlocks to be removed before crowd
       admitted.
   3.2 Mounted branch—provide invaluable crowd control support in
       congested areas and in organising discipline at queueing points.
   3.3 Ticket cordons—inner and outer cordons strategically placed can be
       successful in filtering-out non-ticket holders.
   3.4 Segregation—sterile zones may be necessary to achieve physical
       separation of rival supporters. Experience has shown that attempts
       are frequently made to overcome segregation arrangements and
       officers require to remain alert to ensure integrity of separation policy.
   3.5 Crowd distribution—early attention may be necessary to prevent
       over-concentration of supporters on terraces even when maximum
       capacity limits in that area have not been reached. Tactical deployment
       of resources, police and/or stewards, may be necessary to achieve
       safe distribution in areas and avoid overcrowding.
   3.6 Crowd safety—deliberately induced swaying or surges on open
       terraces are potentially dangerous and may require preventative
       measures. Similarly unauthorised crowd migration requires to be
       arrested prom ptly. Large banners and inflatibles can cause

                                      40
                                                                                    7/89
                                                           GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                  PART NINE




     obstructions of view generating disruption and pressure/sway to
     obtain clear view of the field of play. All passageways should be kept
     clear of obstruction to facilitate free movement of emergency units.
3.7 Access gates—where perimeter fences exist, access gates must be
    manned at all times to enable evacuation in emergency or other
    justified situations. Officers so deployed should be very vigilant in
    gate control to allow access/egress according to developments.
3.8 Prisoners—if possible, persons arrested within the crowd should be
    escorted via a discrete route to the police office.
3.9 Turnstile duties—positive action at turnstiles is essential to enforce
    the provisions of the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980. Full powers
    of the Act should be used to detect offenders. Effective discipline of
    queues imposes order and control which prevents crushing, panic
    and queue-jumping. At all ticket matches officers monitoring queues
    should make every effort to check that
     (a) persons queueing have tickets, and
    (b) tickets are appropriate to that turnstile.
3.10 The relative merits of static placement of police officers on the track
     as opposed to rotational patrolling will be viewed in the light of
     ground features and desired policing objectives.
3.11 Clearly identifiable club stewards can be used to augment police
     officers on track duty at the end of the match.
3.12C.I.D.—deployment of C.I.D. and plain clothes personnel may be
    necessary to detect specific activities, e.g. pick-pockets. In appropriate
    cases officers able to identify known or potential trouble makers can
    be effectively deployed to assist uniformed resources.
3.13 Advance visits to local licensed premises seeking their co-operation
    are recommended.




                                   41
                                                                                 7/89
APPENDIX




 42
           7/89
                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                    APPENDIX




    MEMBER CLUBS OF SCOTTISH FOOTBALL LEAGUE
          RELATED TO POLICE DIVISIONS

Club.                          Police Area.
Aberdeen FC                    Grampian Police
Pittodrie Stadium              'B' Division H.Q.
Pittodrie Street               Inverurie Road
Aberdeen AB2 1QH               Bucksburn
Tel: 0224 632328               Aberdeen
Fax: 0224 644173               Tel: 0224 712811
Celtic FC                      Strathclyde Police
Celtic Park                    'E' Division
95 Kerrydale Street            851 London Road
Glasgow G40 3RE                Glasgow
Tel: 041-556 2611              Tel: 041-554 1113
Fax: 551 8106
Dundee FC                      Tayside Police
Dens Park                      Central Division
Sandeman Street                P.O. Box 59
Dundee DD3 7JY                 West Bell Street
Tel: 0382 826104               Dundee
Fax: 0382 832284               Tel: 0382 23200
Dundee United FC               Tayside Police
Tannadice Park                 Central Division
Tannadice Street               P.O. Box 59          I*
Dundee DD3 7JW                 West Bell Street
Tel: 0382 826289               Dundee
Fax: 0382 89398                Tel: 0382 23200
Dunfermline Athletic FC        Fife Constabulary
East End Park                  Western Division
Halbeath Road                  Holyrood Place
Dunfermline KY12 7RB           Dunfermline
Tel: 0383 724295               Tel: 0383 726711
Fax: 0383 723468
Heart of Midlothian FC         Lothian and Borders Police
Tynecastle Park                'C' Division
Gorgie Road                    West End Police Station
Edinburgh EH11 2NL             Torphichen Place
Tel: 031-337 6132              Edinburgh
Fax: 031-346 0699              Tel: 031-229 2323

                          43
                                                               7/89
                                          GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                APPENDIX



Club.                      Police Area.
Hibernian FC               Lothian and Borders Police
Easter Road Stadium        'B' Division
Albion Road                Leith Police Station
Edinburgh EH7 5QG          Queen Charlotte Street
Tel: 031-661 2159          Edinburgh
Fax: 031 659 6488          Tel: 031-534 9350

Motherwell FC              Strathclyde Police
Fir Park                   T ' Division
Fir Park Street            217 Windmillhill Street
Motherwell ML1 2QN         Motherwell
Tel: 0698 61437            Tel: 0698-66144 Fax 0698-67315

Rangers FC                 Strathclyde Police
Ibrox Stadium              'G ' Division
Glasgow G51 2XD            18 Orkney Street
Tel: 041-427 5232          Glasgow
Fax: 041-427 2676          Tel: 041-445 1113

St. Mirren FC              Strathclyde Police
St. Mirren Park            'K' Division
Love Street                Mill Street
Paisley PA3 2EJ            Paisley
Tel: 041-889 2558          Tel: 041-889 1113

Airdrieonians FC           Strathclyde Police
32 Stirling Street         'N ' Division
Airdrie ML6 0AH            Whittington Street
Tel: 0236 68018            Coatbridge
Sec: 0236 55388            Tel: 0236 20155

Ayr United FC              Strathclyde Police
Somerset Park              'R' Division
Tryfield Place             1 King Street
Ayr KA8 9NB                Ayr
Tel: 0292 263435           Tel: 0292-22622

Clyde FC                   Strathclyde Police
Firhill Park               'C ' Division
90 Firhill Road            1380 Maryhill Road
Glasgow G20 7AL            Glasgow
Tel: 041-946 9000          Tel: 041-946 1113

                      44
                                                            7/89
                                             GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                       APPENDIX



Club.                         Police Area.
Clydebank FC                  Strathclyde Police
Kilbowie Park                 'B' Division
Arran Place                   50 Montrose Street
Clydebank G81 2PB             Clydebank
Tel: 041-952 2887             Tel: 041-941 1113

Falkirk FC                    Central Scotland Police
Brockville Park               'B' Division
Hope Street                   West Bridge Street
Falkirk FK1 5AX               Falkirk
Tel: 0324 24121               Tel: 0324 34212

Forfar Athletic               Tayside Police
4 Katarine Street             Eastern Division
Forfar DD8 3JZ                West High Street
Tel: 0307 63576               Forfar
                              Tel: 0307 62551

Hamilton Academical FC        Strathclyde Police
Douglas Park                  'Q ' Division
Douglas Park Lane             Campbell Street
Hamilton ML3 ODF              Hamilton
Tel: 0698 286103              Tel: 0698 286303

Kilmarnock FC                 Strathclyde Police
Rugby Park                    'U ' Division
Kilmarnock KA1 2DP            10 St. MariAock Street
Tel: 0563 25184               Kilmarnock
                              Tel: 0563 21188

Meadowbank Thistle FC         Lothian and Borders Police
52 Stewart Terrace            'B' Division
Edinburgh EH11 1UL            Leith Police Station
Tel: 031-661 5351             Queen Charlotte Street
Sec: 031-337 2442             Edinburgh
Ext. 3666                     Tel: 031-554 9350

Morton FC                     Strathclyde Police
Cappielow Park                'X' Division
Sinclair Street               160 Rue End Street
Greenock PA15 2TY             Greenock
Tel: 0475 23571               Tel: 0475 24444
Fax: 0475 81084

                         45
                                                                  7/89
                                            GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                  APPENDIX



Club.                        Police Area.
Partick Thistle FC           Strathclyde Police
Firhill Park                 'C ' Division
90 Firhill Road              1380 Maryhill Road
Glasgow G20 7AL              Glasgow
Tel: 041-946 2673            Tel: 041-946 1113

Queen of the South FC        Dumfries and Galloway
Palmerston Park              Constabulary
Terregles Street             Police H.Q.
Dumfries DG2 9BA             Loreburn Street
Tel: 0387 54853              Dumfries
                             Tel: 0387 52112

Raith Rovers FC              Fife Constabulary
Stark's Park                 Central Division
Pratt Street                 St. Bryce Dale Avenue
Kirkcaldy KYI ISA            Kirkcaldy
Tel: 0592 263514             Tel: 0592 204444

St. Johnstone FC             Tayside Police
McDiarmid Park               Western Division
Crieff Road                  Barrack Street
Perth                        Perth
Tel: 0738 26961              Tel: 0738 211418

Albion Rovers FC             Strathclyde Police
21 Academy Street            'N ' Division
Coatbridge ML5 3AW           Coatbridge
Tel: 0236 32350              Tel: 0236 20155
Sec: 0236 33438

Alloa FC                     Central Scotland Police
13 Colliers Court            Alloa Sub-Division
Tillicoultry FK13 6DR        Drysdale Street
Tel: 0259 722695             Alloa
Sec: 0786 63217              Tel: 0259 723255

Arbroath FC                  Tayside Police
Gayfield Park                Eastern Division
Arbroath DD11 1QB            West High Street
Tel: 0241 72157              Forfar
                             Tel: 0307 62551

                        46
                                                             7/89
                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                     APPENDIX



Club.                          Police Area.
Berwick Rangers FC             Northumbria Police
Shielfield Park                'A ' Division
Tweedmouth                     Church Street
Berwick-upon-Tweed TD15 2EF    Berwick-upon-T weed
Tel: 0289 307424               Tel: 0289 307111
Fax: 0289 307189
Brechin City FC                Tayside Police
"Sunny croft"                  Eastern Division
29 Dalhousie Street            West High Street
Brechin                        Forfar
Angus DD9 7BB                  Tel: 0307 62551
Tel: 03562 2856
Sec: 03562 4941
Cowdenbeath FC                 Fife Constabulary
Central Park                   Western Division
Cowdenbeath KY4 9EY            Holyrood Place
Tel: 0383 511205               Dunfermline
                               Tel: 0383 726711
Dumbarton FC                   Strathclyde Police
Boghead Park                   'L' Division
Miller Street                  Stirling Road
Dumbarton G82 2JA              Dumbarton
Tel: 0389 62569                Tel: 0389 63311
East Fife FC                   Fife Constabulary
Bayview Park                   Central Division
Methil                         St. Bryce Dale Avenue
Fife KY8 3AG                   Kirkcaldy
Tel: 0333 26323                Tel: 0592 204444
East Stirlingshire FC          Central Scotland Police
PO Box 50                      'B' Division
Firs Park                      West Bridge Street
Firs Street                    Falkirk
Falkirk FK2 7AY                Tel: 0324 34212
Tel: 0324 23583
Sec: 0236 51224
Montrose FC                    Tayside Police
50 High Street                 Eastern Division
Montrose                       West High School
Angus DD10 8JF                 Forfar
Tel: 0674 73200                Tel: 0307 62551

                          47
                                                                7/89
                                              GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                    APPENDIX



Club.                          Police Area.
Queen's Park FC                Strathclyde Police
Hampden Park                   'F' Division
Mount Florida                  86 Craigie Street
Glasgow G42 9BA                Glasgow
Tel: 041-632 1275              Tel: 041-423 1113
Stenhousemuir FC               Central Scotland Police
20 Findhorn Place              'B' Division
Hallglen                       314 Main Street
Falkirk                        Stenhousemuir
Stirlingshire FK1 2QJ          Tel: 0324 562112
Tel: 0324 562992
Sec: 0786 74605
Stirling Albion FC             Central Scotland Police
43 Chisholm Avenue             'A ' Division
Causewayhead                   Randolph Field
Stirling FK9 5QU               Stirling
Tel: 0786 50399                Tel: 0786 73161
Sec: 0786 62166
Stranraer FC                   Dumfries and Galloway
28 Springfield Crescent        Constabulary
Stranraer DG9 7QU              Stranraer Sub-Division
Tel: 0776 3271                 Portrodie
Sec: 0776 2194                 Stranraer
                               Tel: 0776 2112




                          48
                                                               7/89
                                                                               GUIDE TO PRACTICE
                                                                                          INDEX




                                Part     Para                                      Part     Para
A                                                     o
A ccess Gates                   9       3.7           Operational Considerations   9
All Ticket Matches              1       7
                                8       1.4           P
A nnual Inspection              1       2             Parking                      5        1.3
                                                      Planning—Evacuation          7        1.4
B                                                     Police Accomm odation        1        8
Briefing—Police                 6       1             Police Control Room          2        2
Briefing—Stewards               1       4.8           Police Costs                 1        6.2
British Rail                    4       1.4           Police Radio
British Transport Police        4       1.4           Policing                     1        6
Bus Com panies                  4       1.4           Pre-Match Inspection         1        2
                                                      Press                        4        1.4
C                                                     Prisoners                    1        9
Capacity Level                  8       1.8                                        9        3.8
CCTV                            2       4             Public A ddress System       2        1.1
Chief Steward                   1       4.3
Coded M essage                  7       1.4.7         R
Communications                  2       1             Recording Checks             1        3.4
Com puterised Metering System   2       2.6           Referee                      3        4
Contingency Plan                7       1.2           Routes                       5        1.2
Crowd Distribution              9       3.5
Crowd Safety                    9       3.6           S
                                                      Safety—responsibilities      7        1.1
D                                                     Sale of Tickets              8        1.5
Debriefing                      6       1.6           Scottish Ambulance Service   1        5.1
Debris                          1       3.3           Scottish Crime Squad         4        1.4
Doctors                         1       5.4           Security Advisers            3        6
                                                      Segregation                  9        3.4
E                                                     Shipping Companies           4        1.4
Emergency Procedures            7       1             Signposting                  1        3.2.4
Emergency Routes                5       1.4           Sm oke Bombs                          1.9
                                                                                   8
Evacuation                      7       1.2           Spot Searches                         1.10
                                                                                   8
Exit Gates                      9       3.1           Stadium                      1        1
Exit Routes                     1       3.2.3         St. A n drew 's Ambulance    1        5.1
F                                                     Stewarding                   1        4
Firefighting                    7       1.5.6         Supporters Organisations     3        3.1
First A id Station              1       3.2.4         T
                                1       5.7           Telephone                    2        2.4
Flares/Smoke Bombs              8       1.9           Temporary Mortuary           7        1.4.12
Football Trust                  2       4.8           Terracing                    1        3.2.1
Forged Tickets                  8                     Ticket Cordons
                                       i1A                                         9        3.3
                                8      f 1.6          Ticket Touts                 8        1.4
G                                                     Tools & Equipment            7        1 .5 .«
General Briefing                6       1.5           Track Duties                 9        3.10
                                                      Traffic                      5        1
I                                                     Training—Stewards            1        4.6
Intelligence Gathering          4       1             TREVI Liaison Officers       4        1.4
Inflatables                     8       1.9
                                                      V
K                                                     Verbal Briefing              6        1.4
Kick-off delay                  8       1.7           Video                        2        4.5
                                                      Visual Aids                  6        1.3
L
Liaison                         3                     W
Licensed Premises               9       3.13          W eapons                     1        3.3
Local Residents                 5       1.2.9         Weather                      4        1.5.9
Loudhailers                     7       1.5.11        Written Orders               6        1.2
M
M anpow er Levels               1       6.3
Media                           3       5
Medical Facilities              1       5
M edical Support Team           1       5.3
M issiles                       1       3.3
M ounted Branch                 9       3.2




                                                 49
                                                                                                      7/89
