                                                    ‘3 0 AUG 1989                   M.F. Dennett M.I.Fir&l
                                                                                    Assistant Chief Fire C
                                                                                    Director of Operation:
                     West Yorkshire                                       K         Oakroyd Hall
                                                                                    Birkenshaw
                     Fire Service                                                   West Yorkshire BD11 2DY
                                                                                    Telephone: 0 2 7 4 682311
                                                                                    Telex: 517366
                                                                                    Fax: 0 2 7 4 651315

My reference     013/1/1   MFD/JS
                                                                                                     foS     \;/
Your reference   FEP/89 35/48/88

Date             22 August 1989

 Mr M F Dennett             2250    is dealing with this matter


The Right Hon. Lord Justice Taylor                                                   '* T i
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Enquiry
Home Office                                                 |W^,. WUVw
Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                                                          Tl.           -h t t v c u j c T         ttvCo
My Lord

INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY                              osI ,


I have studied the above report in order to determine whether any of
the recommendations have a bearing on the duties and responsibilities
of the West Yorkshire Fire Service.

Those items which do come into this category are, of course, receiving
immediate attention.   However, I do feel that it is necessary to write
to you to express a professional opinion with regard to Recommendation
No 10.

There are many premises which are required by law to provide means of
escape in case of fire. The Fire Service has a responsibility to enforce
this legislation and in doing so has to take account of the number of
exits required to enable the maximum occupancy of a building to escape
in a given time.

A nationally accepted formula is used to determine the number of exits
and the size of exits to enable evacuation to take place.  It would
seem reasonable in the medium term to require the provision of such
exits in perimeter fencing to take account of the problems of over­
crowding.

Recommendation No 10, which calls for suitable and sufficient cutting
equipment to be provided could be open to very wide interpretation and
difficult application.   Barriers around football grounds are of many
different types.  Some are in the form of large cross-section steel
bars, others of mesh, and still others a combination of mesh reinforced
by substantial supports and cross members.   Cutting gear available
can range from hack-saws and bolt croppers to power operated saws, grinders
and shears.   The larger and more complicated the barrier, the greater
the cutting capacity required, and this inevitably would mean providing
equipment powered by compressed air, electricity, hydraulic motors or
a combination of these.
The Fire Service utilises such equipment on a daily basis at the many
 incidents which are attended at road accidents, lifts and other machinery
where people are trapped, so there is not only a high level of expertise
within-the Service, but also the equipment is maintained to the very
 highest standards.    It would be difficult, if not impossible, for
,ajiy other organisation to maintain such a level of expertise and reliability
 and it is, therefore, questionnable if ground stewards or police would
 be in a position to cope with a rescue operation which required the
 use of such equipment when, in the majority of football grounds, it
 will never be used.    There would also be tremendous practical difficulties
 in cutting through a perimeter fence which was under crowd pressure,
 as a point would be reached (some time before the final cuts were
 made) when the weight of people would force the fence to bend or collapse,
 possibly causing further injuries or death on the sharp ends of the
 fence which would be exposed.

In conclusion I strongly recommend that the final report requires
the provision of an adequate number of exits from all pens onto the
pitch, and that such exits are secured only by a means which can be
easily and quickly released even when under crowd pressure.

Yours sincerely


 V
     \




 M F DENNETT
 Assistant Chief Officer
 Director of Operations
