                                                    «i£_s^peio=iv.-                                                      S<J          > , . / / ■

                                                                      d t^                                       ( f j    /       /V tv v o H iu # -

                                                     ffk-.£v^v^                                                                        CM-<oC
                                                        fi)i~ -Ajs&sA
                                                        fYW- fe^-vT* A n . d ^          QU E E N A N N E’S CATE LO N D O N SW1H 9AT

                                                        ^ v r -   c   J ^ <



                                                                                                         20 August 1990

»                       _                                             G»=Ac Jcvjt=J ftla <3ecxxe_
i   W   U   >   ^   r   /   ^   n   '   d   £   ^   v    >                          ^

                                                                                     ft'lc *s?i-»vr\.a-A*ei<i.
                                                                                    (YLf— ler(^}c>,—
                                                TAYLOR REPORT:                  NEW OFFENCES



        I am writing to outline the proposals which Lord Justice Taylor
made for new criminal offences in his final report into the Hillsborough
Stadium disaster, and to seek colleagues' agreement to legislate for them
at the earliest suitable opportunity.

        Taylor recommended four new offences.  The first would outlaw the
practice of selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
the authority of the home club to do so. Taylor argued that ticket touting
led directly and indirectly to disorder at football grounds by undermining
the policy of segregating fans from rival clubs and by encouraging
ticketless fans to travel to games where they would mill around outside
grounds with potentially disorderly consequences.  It was no part of
Taylor's proposal to make ticket touting more generally an offence.   I
believe that there is a valid distinction between the activities of touts
at football matches and touts at other events.  In connection with football
it is the potential for disorder which makes touting unacceptable.   In
other cases there are no comparable consequences for public order. On the
basis that the new offence applies only to football matches, I believe it
is acceptable and that we should propose legislation to create it. The
Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) and the Crown Prosecution
Service (CPS) both support this course.

        The three other offences which Lord Justice Taylor recommended all
cover specific activities at designated sports grounds.   These are:
throwing a missile;  chanting obscene or racialist abuse;   and going onto
the pitch without reasonable excuse. These activities in themselves and
outside the context of football are not always particularly serious.
However, Taylor argued, I believe rightly and convincingly, that football
is a special case because of the unruly behaviour of a significant minority
of attenders and the provocative effect that such behaviour may have on
large numbers of other spectators.  Having accepted that principle, I
believe that all three activities should be made criminal.

        Missile throwing is already an offence under sections 4 and 5 of
the Public Order Act 1986 if there is a victim or if there is someone
within the sight or hearing of the activity who is likely to be caused




The Rt Hon Sir Geoffrey Howe QC MP
Lord President of the Council
Privy Council Office
Whitehall
London S .W .1.                                                                                                      /over. . .
harassment, alarm or distress.  But Taylor argued that adducing evidence of
a victim or someone likely to be caused harassment etc may be difficult and
felt that it should be sufficient merely to show that a missile was thrown.
Missile throwing at a football ground can certainly provoke more general
disorderly behaviour which makes it a menace which requires a criminal
sanction. ACPO and the CPS both believe that the proposed offence is
enforceable - if not by immediate arrest at the time then by arrest later
and by relying on video evidence, for which facilities now exist at all
League football grounds.

        Chanting obscene or racialist abuse may also be caught by current
legislation, such as sections 4, 5 or 18 of the Public Order Act 1986. But
Taylor suggests that the chanting at football matches often merely causes
offence, embarrassment or disgust and, as such, would not be caught by the
provisions of the 1986 Act.  In other contexts this sort of behaviour would
not be regarded as requiring criminal sanction, but again the collective
nature and public context of the behaviour at football matches make it
particularly objectionable.  Enforcement of the offence, particularly
adducing evidence in relation to individuals, will not be easy but the
police's video evidence-gathering methods should make it workable. Not to
create this offence but to accept the other two would send the wrong
message to football hooligans and also to the ethnic minorities.

        Running onto the pitch is not always a deliberately harmful
activity, but Taylor argued that it should be made unlawful partly because
its purpose could be to attack someone; partly because whatever the reason
for the encroachment it encourages others to do the same;  and partly (and
most importantly) to introduce sanctions to ensure that the lowering of the
level of perimeter fences, which was another of his recommendations on
grounds of safety, is not abused. Acceptance of this Taylor proposal would
catch exuberant running onto the pitch at the end of a game but this, too,
has the potential to lead on to disorder and I believe that it should be
prohibited. An exception would, of course, have to be made for going onto
the pitch if, for example, a person was in fear of his safety.

        W»e police have been unable to assess the demand on their resources
if the four offences were enacted but think that they would be minimal.
The resource effect on the CPS will depend on the degree of enforcement by
the police but is also unlikely to be significant.

        S believe that there is a good case for accepting these Taylor
recommendations on their own merits.  But I also see advantage in accepting
them as a further demonstration of our positive response to the Taylor
report as a whole.

        If colleagues accept the case for creating the four offences
recommended by Lord Justice Taylor, the question of handling arises. I
should like the Government to take the credit for implementation; and I
would not favour leaving this to the uncertainties of Private Members'
Bills procedures.  As to timing, the Home Affairs Select Committee is about
to begin an inquiry into policing football hooliganism.  I have to submit a
memorandum on this topic by 28 September to the Select Committee. When
Parliament returns,the football season will be in full swing and Members
will undoubtedly ask questions about the implementation of the Taylor_
offences.  Interest in this topic will remain high and I believe we should
find it difficult to defend rejection of this part of the Taylor report.

         That said, I cannot argue for including the proposals in the
Criminal Justice Bill but I would hope to secure a firm place in the
1991/92 session, perhaps in the proposed Criminal Law Bill.   I think it
would be difficult to leave legislation longer than that, and even on that
time-scale the Government could well be criticised for dragging its feet.
In order to pre-empt such criticism I would much prefer to bring
legislative proposals to Parliament at an earlier date.   This leads me to
seek policy approval and authority to use Parliamentary Counsel now in •
order that we could be ready, if an opportunity arose during the 1990/91
session, to introduce a small Bill at short notice rather than wait until
1991/92.   I would hope that we could review the situation early in 1991 to
see whether such an opportunity is likely to arise.

        I am sending copies of this letter to members of QL and H
Committees, First Parliamentary Counsel and Sir Robin Butler.




                                                     '          ,
                                      Q7'w   j   £> k C   clT




                                        APPROVED BY THE HOME SECRETARY
                                          AND SIGNED IN HIS ABSENCE
