From: M J Addison                           cc   Mr Walters
      FI Division                                Hr Yates
      Extn 3743                                  Hr Chilcot
      19 June 1989                               HMCIC
                                                 Hr Woodcock
                                                 Mr Brownlow
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 Mr Malone-Lee
                                                 Ms Edwards, LAB
                                                 Mr Sandiford
                                                 Mr Nagler
                                                 Mr Whalley
                                                 Ms Ransford

Ms Adams


HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS' POLICE-
LORD FERRERS' MEETING WITH THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY ON
20 JUNE

As requested in Miss Nicholson's note of 24 May, briefing is
attached, including a background note, line to take and speaking
notes on individual points.
Ms Ransford and I will attend the meeting together with Mr Nagler
from Finance Division 2.




                                   /k.


                                  M J ADDISON
MEETING WITH SOUTH    YORKSHIRE   ABOUT   HILLSBOROUGH   INVESTIGATION:
BACKGROUND NOTE
Background and Home Office position

Mr Nagler's submission of 8 June to the Home Secretary (copy at
Appendix 1) recommended that the costs of the Hillsborough
investigation should fall initially on South Yorkshire police and
that South Yorkshire should be offered a special payment, to help
meet the costs, on the basis of a formula used in the miners'
strike.

2.   The Home Secretary has written (copy at Appendix        2) to the
Chief Secretary seeking approval for this course and         the Chief
Secretary has agreed (copy at Appendix 3). Our aim will       therefore
beto get South Yorkshire to agree to meet the costs on       the basis
that the Home Office will reimburse a major share of the     costs via
the special payment.

Basis of special payment
3.    We would be offering a special payment because:

     a.    The expenditure was unexpected and seems likely to be on
           a scale which cannot     be met from South Yorkshire's
           resources without threatening the efficiency of the
           force.

     b.   It has been agreed that the results          of the police
           investigations would be placed at the      service of Lord
           Justice Taylor's enquiry and, as           a result, the
           investigations have in certain respects    gone beyond what
           would be necessary for South Yorkshire's   own purposes.

4.   The decision as to whether to make a special payment and the
amount of any such payment depends on the circumstances of the
individual case.   Any such payment is additional to the support
which the Government already provides through police grant (at 51%)
and block grant.

5. The offer in this case would       be based on the same formula as
was used in the miners' dispute.      Up to the product of a lp rate,
the costs are split 51/49 in the normal way. When costs rise above
the product of a lp rate (£1.3 million), special grant is paid at
39% in addition to police grant at 51%, giving total support at
90%. But there is also an absolute ceiling on the police authority
contribution of the product of a 3/4 p rate (£975,000). Thus South
Yorkshire would not under any circumstances contribute more than
approximately £975,000 to the costs. For a table, see Annex B of
Appendix 1.


6.   The latest estimate of costs from West Midlands police is that
the total investigation costs are likely to reach £4-5 million, in
which case everything above £975,000 of that would be borne by the
Home Office.   (Block grant, which has been set at a fixed sum for
the current financial year, will not be affected either way.)

South Yorkshire’s position
7.   South Yorkshire are likely to argue that the Home Office
should reimburse 100% of their costs and that we should accordingly
reimburse West Midlands directly.

8.   They are likely to accept that their Chief Constable, Mr Peter
Wright, initiated the investigation.    They may, however, suggest
that because the investigation has been put at the service of Lord
Justice Taylor, it has in effect been taken over by the Taylor
enquiry.


9.   We would accept that the investigation has been extended into
certain areas at the instigation of Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.
The proposed special payment recognises this.        But a major
investigation would have been needed by South Yorkshire in any
event, to look into policing on the day. Involvement of an outside
force, which Mr Wright quite properly thought desirable from the
outset, would always have meant that the Chief Constable would not
be involved in its day to day direction.



Hest Midlands1 position
10. As Lord Ferrers knows, West Midlands has threatened to bring
legal action against the Home Office in order to recover the costs.
West Midlands say that Mr Dear was asked to conduct the
investigation solely and entirely for Lord Justice Taylor's
benefit. That is not however borne out by HMCIC's recollection of
events (attached at Appendix 4).    As HMCIC's note indicates, the
press statement issued by Mr Wright on 16 April made it clear that
Mr Wright himself had requested an outside investigation.

11. We hope that the position can be resolved by our offer of a
special payment to South Yorkshire. If South Yorkshire will accept
that it should initially meet the bills, we can quickly set in hand
arrangements for the special payment.

12. A general line to take and        speaking   notes   on   possible
supplementary points are attached.
E.R.
   MEETING WITH SOUTH YORKSHIRE ABOUT POLICE       INVESTIGATION   INTO
   HILLSBOROUGH: LINE TO TAKE AND SPEAKING NOTES

   LINE TO TAKE

   The investigation was initiated by South Yorkshire and is dealing
   with matters which are primarily the concern of the South Yorkshire
   police.   It is therefore right in principle that the costs should
   fall initially on South Yorkshire.

   Because of the scale and scope of the investigation, we are
   satisfied that the likely costs could not be absorbed within South
   Yorkshire Police Authority's budget without serious detriment to
   the efficiency of the force.    We are therefore prepared to offer
   South Yorkshire Police Authority a special payment following the
   formula used in the miners' strike.         This means that South
   Yorkshire's total contribution to costs would be no more than the
   product of a 3/4 p rate (approximately £975,000).

   EXACTLY HOW DOES MINERS' STRIKE FORMULA WORK?
   The police authority would receive police grant on normal terms
   (51%) until the total costs reach the product of a 1 p rate (£1.3
   million). The Home Office would then contribute 90% (51% police
   grant; 39% special grant). There would be a ceiling on the maximum
   contribution by the police authority of the product of a 3/4 p rate
   (approximately £975,000). Once the authority has contributed that
   amount, the Home Office will meet all further costs.

   THE INVESTIGATION IS FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE HOME OFFICE NOT SOUTH
   YORKSHIRE
   It is our understanding that it was the Chief Constable of South
   Yorkshire who took the initiative in requesting that an outside
   force should conduct the investigation.     HM Chief Inspector of
   Constabulary then approached Mr Dear on South Yorkshire's behalf.
THE INVESTIGATION WAS INITIALLY FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE BUT IS NOW
PREDOMINANTLY FOR LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR
I accept that, as a result of the decision to make the results of
the investigation directly available to Lord Justice Taylor (which
was obviously a sensible arrangement) some aspects of it are now
being conducted directly for the Taylor enquiry. The investigation
is serving a number of purposes but it is still to a large extent
concerned with the policing of events on the day which is
predominantly the concern of South Yorkshire. Under the terms of
the proposed special payment Government will pay a major share of
the costs, which would cover any element attributable to the Taylor
enquiry.

WHAT SHOULD BE THE BASIS OF REPAYMENT TO WEST MIDLANDS?
This would be for South Yorkshire to discuss with West Midlands
initially.   Our view is that West Midlands should get additional
costs (not basic salaries but overtime, expenses for travel and
accommodation etc). We have alsosaid that consequential costs (ie
overtime worked in West Midlands to cover for the absent officers)
should be provided for.

DOES MUTUAL AID APPLY?
The help given by West Midlands to SouthYorkshire is not mutual
aid under section 14 of the Police Act 1964.       It is thus not
covered by the statutory provision on mutual aid. Nevertheless the
terms of the recent circular on mutual aid (number 38 of 1989)
could be applied as a basis for reimbursement, if both police
authorities agreed that it would be sensible.

WILL THE MUTUAL AID CIRCULAR GIVE WEST MIDLANDS ENOUGH TO COVER ITS
COSTS?
The circular provides reimbursement on an average costs basis
(including estimates of likely average amounts of direct and
consequential overtime). This was agreed with the local authority
associations and ACPO as the best way of meeting the costs involved
in large-scale aid. This may mean thatWest Midlands does not get
every penny   it thinks it has spent but it does save the authority
from having   to keep detailed records of costs which are difficult
to document   (eg consequential overtime).
' E.R.
     On the other hand, the mutual aid circular was designed for a
     different set of circumstances (where aid is given by sending in
     Police Support Units (PSUs) to deal with public order situations).
     If the two police authorities can devise different means of
     identifying the costs to be reimbursed, that would be quite
     acceptable.

     INTEREST
     Early payments should be made to stop interest accruing. The Home
     Office would not support reimbursement of interest.              An
     administration charge of 5% would be a more acceptable approach.


#
E.R.
       From: Mr Nagler                              cc     Ms Adams
             Finance Division 2                           Mr Yates
             8 June 1989                                  Mr Chilcot
             Ext 3472                                     HMCIC
                                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                           Mr Malone-Lee
                                                           Miss Edwards
                                                           Mr Addison
                                                           Mr Sandiford
                                                           Mr Whalley
                                                           Mr Archer
                                                      J    Ms Ransford
                                                           Mr Durbin

     Mr Storr

       HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
     This submission concerns the request from West Midlands Police
 '   Authority that the Home Office should meet the costs of their
     investigation into the Hillsborough tragedy. It recommends that
     the costs of that investigation should fall initially on South
     Yorkshire Police Authority, but proposes that the Home Secretary
     should seek approval from the Chief Secretary to offer South
     Yorkshire a special payment on terms similar to those which
     applied in the miners' strike. The letter needs to go as soon as
     possible in order to secure a reply in time for Lord Ferrers'
     meeting with South Yorkshire on 20 June.
     Home Secretary's undertaking on costs
     2.   The Home Secretary has already accepted, in his reply of 28
     April to a Parliamentary Question from Mr Beaumont-Dark and in
     his letters to West Midlands MPs, that the additional costs of
     the police investigation by West Midlands police officers should
     not fall on the West Midlands Police Authority. He has not given
     any specific undertaking on how the costs should be met.
     West Midlands' position

     3.   Lord Ferrers met the West Midlands Police Authority and
     Chief Constable on 25 May.    The members of the Authority argued
     that the Home Office should meet West Midlands costs directly.
     They claimed that the investigation was in effect being conducted
     for Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry. The Chief Constable said that
     the actual approach to him to conduct the investigation had come
     from HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary, and that in his view he
     had been asked to conduct it and was conducting it on behalf of
     Lord Justice Taylor, not on behalf of the Chief Constable of
     South Yorkshire, Mr Peter Wright.
     4.   Lord Ferrers explained that     it was our understanding of
     South Yorkshire's position that      the investigation had been
     initiated by Mr Wright and related   to the actions of his force,
     although it was also being placed    at the service of the Taylor
     enquiry.
i.R.
       South Yorkshire's position
       5.   Home Office officials met the Clerk of South Yorkshire
       Police Authority and an Assistant Chief Constable for South
       Yorkshire Police on 18 May.     The South Yorkshire position was
       somewhat different from West Midlands.     They accepted that Mr
       Wright had initiated the investigation, but claimed that it had
       subsequently been largely taken over by the Taylor enquiry; Mr
       Dear was reporting directly to Lord Justice Taylor.          They
       suggested that the scope of the investigation was being dictated
       primarily by the needs of the national enquiry and that the whole
       cost should be borne by central government. South Yorkshire have
       since indicated that they wish to pursue this case at a meeting
       with Lord Ferrers.
       Origin and purpose of investigation
       6.   It is fairly clear that, whatever Mr Dear's interpretation
       of events, Mr Wright was the initiator in seeking an
^      investigation by an outside force.     This is borne out by the
       terms of South Yorkshire Police's own press notice about the
       investigation (copy attached at Annex A).
       7.   Although the decision was taken early on to place the
       results of the investigation directly at the service of the
       Taylor enquiry, the main subject of the investigation concerns
       the policing of South Yorkshire.      An investigation into the
       events of the day would have been needed, irrespective of whether
       there was a public enquiry, and Mr Wright very properly decided
       that an investigation by an outside force would be desirable.
       8.   The scope of the investigation has clearly broadened because
       of the Taylor enquiry.   There are elements of the investigation
       which have been prompted by the needs of the enquiry (eg seeking
       evidence on the design of football grounds and the procedure for
       issuing safety certificates). It also appears that the taking of
       witness statements for a public enquiry would normally be
       performed by Treasury Solicitors, whereas in this case the police
       are undertaking that function by interviewing in the course of
       their investigation most of those who would be called to give
       evidence to the enquiry.
    9.   Nevertheless the investigation as a whole is primarily
    concerned with the policing of the events on the day; it would
    have been necessary to the Chief Constable for his own purposes,
    in order to provide evidence to coroners' inquests as well as to
    Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry, and in order to satisfy himself as
    to the conduct of his police force and draw any necessary lessons
    for future events, as well as to deal with any possible
    complaints against his officers (none have yet been received).
    In our view it follows that South Yorkshire should meet the costs
    of the enquiry initially. But there is a strong case for making
    a special payment to them in order to assist with meeting the
    costs.
    Costs of Investigations
    10.    The Treasurer of West^Midlands Police Authority said at the
meeting with Lord Ferrers on 25 May that costs were running at
around £2 million per month in the early stages of the
investigation (which involved some 350 officers). Having spoken
to the Deputy Treasurer of West Midlands' Police Authority we
understand that their best estimate at present for the total
costs of the investigation, which is now being scaled down, is
some £4-5 million.
Case for a special payment to South Yorkshire
11. Special payments have previously been made in cases of
exceptional and unforeseen expenditure, where the efficiency of
the force would be threatened if no assistance were given. The
Hillsborough expenditure would certainly have been unforeseen and
is well in excess of a lp rate product for the area (the
threshold which was applied in the miners' strike) which would be
£1.3 million. The costs would be between 5-6% of the Authority's
total budget of £85m and, even net of police grant, would erode
their balances, which at the end of 1988-89 stood at around £2
million.
12. If a special payment were made on miners' strike terms, the
police authority would receive police grant on normal terms (51%)
until the total costs reached the product of a lp rate (£1.3
million). The Home Office would then contribute 90% (51% police
grant; 39% special grant).     The maximum contribution for the
Police Authority would be the product of a 3/4p rate (£0.975
million) . Once it had paid that amount, the Home Office would
pay 100%. So if the total costs are £4-5 million the Home Office
would pay £3-4 million.  (Illustrative figures are shown at
Annex B .)
Discussions with Treasury

13. We have discussed this issue with the Treasury at official
level.   Their preliminary view was that the costs ought to fall
initially on South Yorkshire, but they acknowledged that there
might be a     case for a     specialgrant.   Theyqueried however
whether the   terms of the    miners'strike paymentwere applicable:
in the case of the hurricane damage in 1987, assistance was
provided to local authorities on a less generous scale. We made
the point that single service police authorities in particular
were less well-equipped than councils to absorb excessive and
unforeseen expenditure and said that we would be advising that a
payment on miners' strike lines would be appropriate.         The
Treasury were clear that, on grounds of principle, they would not
favour a payment direct to West Midlands.
Issues at stake

14. In our     view there are important issues of principle at
stake, with implications for funding of policing generally.   It
is accepted that the costs should not fall on West Midlands. But
if payments    were made directly   from central  funds to West
Midlands it would imply that the investigation was being
conducted solely at the behest of and for the benefit of central
government.  Since that is not the case - the investigation was
initiated by South Yorkshire and is dealing with matters which
are primarily the concern of South Yorkshire Police - a direct
payment could leave us open to similar claims on any occasion
when an investigation was being conducted by an outside force and
there could be said to be a national interest in the outcome.
This could apply to any incident of a major scale where possible
allegations of police misconduct were involved (eg Wapping).
15. Difficulties have already been experienced in a case
involving allegations of wrongful conviction (Guildford and
Woolwich bombings) and the lesson drawn that any approach needs
to be carefully routed via the original investigating force. In
the present case, it was South Yorkshire as the force originally
involved which made the approach to West Midlands. West Midlands
Police Authority have argued, however, that because of the
involvement of HM Inspector of Constabulary in the negotiations
with West Midlands, and because of the decision to make the
results of the investigation available to the Taylor enquiry,
South Yorkshire are not even parties to the agreement and that
therefore payment should be made direct to West Midlands. There
would be very wide implications for funding of enquiries of this
sort if we accepted that position.
Recommendations
16. We recommend that, for the reasons given in paragraphs 14
and 15 above, the costs of the Hillsborough investigation should
fall initially to South Yorkshire Police. South Yorkshire should
be offered a special payment to help meet the costs, following
the formula used in the miners' strike as described in paragraph
12 above.
17.   A draft letter to the Chief Secretary is attached.


                                      %
                                    N A NAGLER
4


•R.
                                                             ANNEX A




    The planning and the operational decisions of South Yorkshire
    Police officers will form a major aspect of the enquiry to be
    held into the events which led to the tragedy at the Sheffield
    Wednesday football ground on 15 April.
    The Chief   Constable Mr Peter Wright judges it essential that the
    gathering   and assessment of evidence in relation to these matters
    should be    carried out by officers from another Force.     He has
    therefore    asked Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West
    Midlands,   to nominate a senior officer to lead the enquiry.



C
E.R.
                                                                          Annex B



       Application of miners' strike formula for assistance to South
       Yorkshire's estimated costs for Hillsborough investigation

                                Home Office         Police Authority

       First £1.3 million         £0.663m                  £0.637m)           '
        (product of lp rate)       (51%)                    (49%) )
       < w /v   2 •l y                        yV h -3 ^    o -Z 7 o       = £0,9 7 5 m
       Next £3.38 million         £3. 042m     ---------- £o. 338m)

                                   (90%>                    (10%>     >
       Total Expenditure         £3.705m                  £0.975m
                                   (79%)                    (21%)

       When total costs reach £4.68 million, the Police Authority
       contribution reaches £0.975 million. Thereafter all additional
       costs would fall to the Home Office.

       If total expenditure reaches £5 million the Home Office would pay
       £4.025 million (80%) and the Police authority nothing more than
       the £0.975 million (20%).




       D-MAJOR.SS
                                                           FILE NUMBER

        RAFT LETTER


      ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE


        TO                                ENCLOSURES           COPIES TO BE SENT TO




            Rt Hon John Major MP                               Prime Minister
            Chief Secretary                                    S of S for Environment
            Treasury                                           Copy recipients of
                                                                submission
                                                               Mr Nagler




•           C(FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                        (FULL ADDRESSES/IF NECESSARY)

                            LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE B Y   H      .....................................
                                                               S of S
                                                                   (NAME OF SIGNATORY)




                             HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS

                             My officials have been discussing with yours the policing
                             costs of this investigation and the arrangements which we
                             would like to make, by way of a special payment, to help
                             South Yorkshire Police Authority to assist in meeting the
                             costs.


                             2.    West Midlands Police, initially at the invitation of
                             the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, is conducting an
                             investigation into the policing aspects of the
                             Hillsborough disaster. When it was decided that Lord
                             Justice Taylor's enquiry should be established, it was
                             agreed that the information obtained by the West Midlands
                             Police should be placed at the disposal of that enquiry.




            H.O. EST. 112
    s sat
                                                                                            35666 9.65 XNW
Both the West Midlands and the South Yorkshire police
authorities have now asked that the additional costs of
the police investigations should be met directly by
central government.

3.   It is clearly right that the additional costs should
not fall on West Midlands Police Authority, which has no
direct interest in the outcome of the investigation. I
have therefore given an assurance, in my replies to
Members of Parliament concerned about the matter, that
wherever the additional costs might fall, they would not
fall to the West Midlands.

4.   I believe that it is right in principle that the
costs should fall initially to South Yorkshire Police
Authority. The investigation was initiated by the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire and is concerned primarily
with matters of policing in South Yorkshire.

 5.   South Yorkshire have not yet accepted this point,
'they have argued that the investigations are being
dictated primarily by the needs of the Taylor Inquiry and
have ceased to be directed towards the needs of their
 force. There is some validity in this argument, although
I do not accept South Yorkshire's conclusion. It is
clear that as a result of the decision to make the
results of the police investigations directly available
to the Taylor enquiry, which was obviously a sensible
arrangement, there is an element in the investigation
which is, for the sake of convenience, being conducted
for the benefit of that enquiry. Police officers are
obtaining information about design and safety of sports
grounds for the enquiry, and by taking witness statements
from those who may be giving evidence for the enquiry are
effectively providing a service which would normally be
undertaken by Treasury Solicitors.

6.   The additional costs of the investigation were
initially estimated to be running at £1.7 million per
month. This covered both the direct overtime worked by
the 350 or so officers involved and the consequential
overtime worked in West Midlands to cover for their
absence. It also includes accommodation costs,
transport, subsistence and the like. There may be
further costs associated with the investigation, such as
use of computer facilities and helplines, which may add
to the costs. We understand that the investigation is
now being scaled down; even so West Midland Police
Authority's tentative estimate of the total additional
costs is around £4-5 million.

7.   Because of the scale and scope of the police
investigation, I am satisfied that the likely costs could
not be absorbed within South Yorkshire Police Authority's
budget without serious detriment to the efficiency of the
force. The costs could not have been foreseen when the
Authority set its budget and are likely to place a
serious strain upon it. The Authority's gross budget is
some £85 million and they had balances at the end of
1988-89 of around £2 million. They need to keep some of
that for other possible contingencies such as public
disorder or a criminal investigation.

8.   I would like to make South Yorkshire an early offer
of a special payment, in the hope of persuading them to
agree to meet the initial costs of the investigation and
thus relieve West Midlands, which is extremely concerned
about the drain on its own policing resources and the
absence of any agreed arrangement for reimbursing its
costs. There is a risk that matters could come to a head
at an early stage. A further complication is that the
Chief Constable of West Midlands has told us that his
understanding has always been that he was conducting the
investigation solely on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor.
This may be in part a confusion which arose because when
he was initially approached by HM Chief Inspector of
Constabulary the possibility was raised that he might be
an assessor for the Taylor enquiry as well as conducting
the investigation (although it was then decided to
separate the two roles). Whatever the reasons, it would
be very difficult to find ourselves involved in any
public dispute over the events which led up to the
investigation.

9.   We hope that the South Yorkshire Police Authority
can be persuaded to accept responsibility. I believe
that our best hope of achieving this is to make an early
offer of a special payment recognising both the financial
burden which this places on South Yorkshire and the
extent to which the investigation serves the purposes of
Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.

10. Turning to the possible terms of the special
payment, I believe that it should be based on the formula
used in the miners' strike, and subsequently in the case
of the demonstrations at RAF Molesworth, namely that for
costs above a threshold equivalent to the product of a
penny rate for the area (ie around £1.3 million), we
should meet 90% of the costs (or 39% in addition to the
usual police grant) and that we should place a ceiling on
the South Yorkshire Police Authority's overall
contribution, equivalent to a 3/4p rate product for the
area (approximately £1 million). The ceiling could be
reached if the costs were to reach around £4.7 million.

11. I believe that it would be very difficult to justify
being less generous than in the miners' dispute in this
particular instance.

12. Robin Ferrers is meeting the South Yorkshire Police
Authority on 20 June. It is imperative that we should be
able to say how the Government proposes that the costs
should be met, and how West Midlands Police Authority is
to be reimbursed, at the earliest possible date and we
certainly need to be in a position to make a clear and
reasonable offer at that meeting. I should therefore be
very grateful for an early reply.
        13. I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister and
        Nicholas Ridley.




*   C


        D-STORR.NAG
                                              p|. Ci^                 W 1
                                                         l-HM Cl C
                                                         K. (ro-tiojtk
                                                        H«
                                                        H. itrVwJK^^W          tt            \Ax^ ^ ^ j/U

                                             Q U E E N ’ A N N E 'S GATE L O N D O N SW1H 9 A T



                                                             f S Ju^ie 1989

                                                                  C ’i     /r } ,^ ^ C L -(& 7 0 P -

                                                                          ^ ,y~ $ z/ q/ / C & ^ ^
                                                                          m / - /^ c c n ^ -
                                                                         /n r -

                        j


        HILLSBOROUGH:   COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POT.TfM?


        My officials have been discussing with yours the policing costs of
this investigation and the arrangements which we would like to make, by way
of a special payment, to help the South Yorkshire police authority to meet
the costs.

        The West Midlands Police, initially at the invitation of the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, is conducting an investigation into the
policing aspects of the Hillsborough disaster.      When it was decided that
Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry should be established, it was agreed that the
information obtained by the West Midlands Police should be placed at the
disposal of that enquiry.   Both the West Midlands and the South Yorkshire
police authorities have now asked that the additional costs of the police
investigation should be met directly be central government.

        It is clearly right that the additional costs should not fall on the
West Midlands^ police authority, which has no direct interest in the outcome
of the investigation.  I have therefore given an assurance, in my replies to
Members  of Parliament    concerned  about  the matter,   that wherever the
additional costs might fall, they would not fall to the West Midlands.

        I believe that it is right in principle that the costs should fall
initially to the South Yorkshire police authority.     The investigation was
initiated by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire and is concerned
primarily with matters of policing in South Yorkshire.

        South Yorkshire have not yet accepted this point.   They have argued
that the investigations are being dictated primarily by the needs of the
Taylor enquiry and have ceased to be directed towards the needs of their
force.  There is some validity in this argument, although I do not accept
South Yorkshire's conclusion.   It is clear that as a result of the decision
to make the results of the police investigations directly available to the
Taylor enquiry, which was obviously a sensible arrangement, there is an
element in the investigation which is, for the sake of convenience, being
conducted for the benefit of that enquiry.      For example, statements were
taken from those from whom the selection of witnesses for the enquiry was
subsequently made;    substantial video evidence has been analysed by the
police for the benefit of Lord Justice Taylor;   and the police are urgently
following up at his request specific points arising on the evidence as the
enquiry progresses.
        The additional costs of the investigation were initially estimated
to be running at £1.7 million per month.       This covered both the direct
overtime worked by the 350 or so officers involved and the consequential
overtime worked in the West Midlands to cover for their absence.     It also
includes accommodation costs, transport, subsistence and the like.     There
may be further costs associated with the investigation, such as use of
computer facilities and helplines, which may add to the costs. The scale of
the police commitment is being regularly reviewed by the police and
secretariat    together.   The  investigation   is  now  being  scaled  down
substantially;    even so, the West Midlands police authority’s tentative
estimate of the total additional costs is around £4-£5 million.

        Because of the scale and scope of the police investigation, I am
satisfied that the likely costs could not be absorbed within the South
Yorkshire police authority’s budget without         serious detriment to the
efficiency of the force.   The costs could not have been foreseen when the
authority set its budget and are likely to place a serious strain upon it.
The authority’s gross   budget is some £85million, and they    had balances at
the end of 1988-89 of   around £2 million.   They need to keep some of that for
other possible   contingencies such     as public disorder      or  a  criminal
investigation.

         I would like to make South Yorkshire an early offer of a special
payment, in the hope of persuading them to agree to meet the initial costs
of the investigation and thus relieve West Midlands, which is extremely
concerned about the drain on its own policing resources and the absence of
any agreed arrangement forreimbursing      its costs.   There is a risk that
matters could come to   a head at an early stage.   A further complication is
that the Chief Constable of West Midlands (Geoffrey Dear) has told us that
his understanding has always been that he was conducting the investigation
solely on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor. This may be perhaps a confusion on
the part of Mr Dear which arose because when he was initially approached by
HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary the possibility was raised that he might
be an assessor for the Taylor enquiry as well as conducting the investigation
(although it was then decided to separate the two roles).           The Chief
Inspector has confirmed, however, that in approaching Mr Dear about the
police investigation, he made it quite clear that the initiative for the
request came from the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, a fact borne out
by the terms of the press statement issued by South Yorkshire Police on 16
April.  Whatever the reasons, it would be very difficult to find ourselves
involved in any public dispute over the events which led up to the
investigation.
                                              \
                                          \


        We hope that the South Yorkshire police authority can be persuaded
to accept responsibility.   I believe that our best hope of achieving this is
to make an early offer of a special payment recognising both the financial
burden which this places on South Yorkshire and the extent to which the
investigation serves the purposes of Lord Justice Taylor’s enquiry.
        Turning to the possible terms of the special payment, I believe that
it should be based on the formula used in the miners' strike, and later in
the case of the demonstrations at RAF Molesworth, namely that for costs above
a threshold equivalent to the product of a penny rate for the area (i.e.
around £1.3 million), we should meet 90% of the costs (or 39% in addition to
the usual police grant) and that we should place a ceiling on the South
Yorkshire police authority's overall contribution, equivalent to a 3/4p rate
product for the area (approximately £1 million).        The ceiling could be
reached if the costs were to reach around £4.7 million.

        I believe that it would be difficult to justify being less generous
than in the miners' dispute in this particular instance.

        Robin Ferrers is meeting the South Yorkshire police authority on 20
June. We need to be able to say how the Government proposes that the costs
should be met, and how the West Midlands police authority is to be
reimbursed, at the earlier possible date and he needs to make a clear and
reasonable offer at that meeting.   I should therefore be very grateful for
an early reply.

       I am copying this letter to Nicholas Ridley.
                                                         ft{¥>£jNJ0\x 3 .
cst.ps/2jm!9.6/lets
                             UNCLASSIFIED               f e ir n   ^ " Z .o   '
                                                         c. '■ ■




       T reasury C h am b ers, P arliam en t Street, SW1P 3AG



The Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT
                                            |*[ June 1989




HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
Thank you for your letter of 15 June.
I fully support your aim of persuading the South Yorkshire police
authority that the additional costs for the investigation should
fall initially to be met by them.   Any other outcome would set an
entirely unwelcome precedent.
I agree that a special payment offers the best hope of achieving
this and is justified in view of the likely scale of the costs of
the investigation in relation to the authority's budget. I also
agree that in this case it would be difficult to justify
arrangements less generous than those applied in the cases of the
miners' dispute and the demonstrations at RAF Molesworth. - I am
therefore content with the formula that you propose and for
Robin Ferrers to make an offer on this basis when he meets the
South Yorkshire police authority tomorrow.
Of course the expenditure which the special payments cover will
represent a claim on the Reserve. As such I must ask that you
make every effort to make equivalent offsetting s-avings on your
cash limited Votes.
I am copying this letter to Nicholas Ridley.




                                            fP JOHN MAJOR
                                                       h ffe u fH x   £fc-




                                            cc.   Mr Storr
                                                  Mr Yates
                                                  Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Nagler
                                                  Mr Malone Lee
                                                  Miss Edwards
                                                  Mr Sandiford
                                                  Mr Nagler
                                                  Mr Whalley
                                                  Mr Archer
                                                  Ms Ransford
                                                  Mr Durbin



Mr Addison

TTTT.T-qwrreQUGH:   COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

In your note of 7th June 1989, you asked from me as full a
recollection as I was able to make of the events which led up to
the establishment of the West Midlands Police inquiry into the
Hillsborough tragedy.
My first discussion about the tragedy with Mr Peter Wright, Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, was at around 5pm on Saturday 15th
April 1989. This followed a telephone call to my home by Philip
Mawer, Principal Private Secretary to the Home Secretary, who
sought my assistance in arranging for the Home Secretary to speak
with the Chief Constable as he had been unable to get through to
Sheffield. Very shortly afterwards I made contact by telephone
(via a circuitous route) with Mr Wright who very briefly outlined
to me the circumstances as he knew them then but we did not have
any other discussion apart from arranging for him to receive the
Home Secretary's call.
During the course of Saturday evening I had telephone
conversations about the provision of a police report with Russell
Yates, Private Secretary to the PUS and Russ Watts, Assistant
Secretary in G2.
On the morning of Sunday, 16th April 1989, again at home, I spoke
with Mr Wright, Sir Clive Whitmore and Mr Chilcot.
My discussion with Mr Wright centred on the up-date on the
situation and on action which might be taken by the Chief
Constable. Mr Wright believed that because (a) of the serious
criticisms which were being made of police competence and (b) he
was anxious that there should be seen to be an independent and
objective professional scrutiny of the policing arrangements and
actions, it was desirable for inquiries to be undertaken by
another force. I wholly endorsed the Chief Constable's
assessment. We discussed which force would best be equipped for
this task and it was mutually agreed that West Midlands Police
met this requirement. As Mr Wright had other preoccupations I
undertook to ascertain whether Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable
of West Midlands, was willing to take on the task. As the Home
Secretary was to visit Sheffield on that day (Sunday) Mr Wright
said that he would mention the independent police investigation
to him.
Shortly after this conversation with Mr Wright I spoke with Mr
Chilcot and Sir Clive Whitmore. A decision had already been
made, in principle, for a judicial inquiry to be held and it was
necessary to identify the police assessor. I was authorised to
ascertain whether Mr Dear would take on this responsibility if
this was the Home Secretary's wish.
I eventually made contact with Mr Dear at around 1pm. I asked
him whether he was willing either (a) to act as assessor to the
proposed Inquiry if requested by the Home Secretary or (b) to
carry out the investigation work which the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire had indicated to me, should Mr Wright request
him to do so. Mr Dear said that he was prepared to accept either
commitment.
Mr Wright drafted a statement about the proposed police
professional investigation and discussed this with the Home
Secretary during his visit (with the Prime Minister) to Sheffield
on Sunday 16th April. I understand the Home Secretary suggested
some minor drafting amendments.
Subsequently that day the following statement was issued by South
Yorkshire Police:
     "The planning and operational decisions of South Yorkshire
     Police officers will form a major aspect of the inquiry to
     be held into the events which led to the tragedy at the
     Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground. The Chief Constable,
     Mr Peter Wright, judges it essential that the gathering and
     assessment of evidence in relation to these matters should
     be carried out by officers from another force. He has
     therefore asked Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of the
     West Midlands Police, to nominate a senior officers to lead
     the inquiry.".
At a press conference at Police Headquarters, Sheffield on the
Sunday evening Mr Stuart Anderson, Assistant Chief Constable,
announced the invitation but declined to answer questions about
it.
The wording of the announcement clearly ruled out Mr Dear as a
potential assessor. Consequently at the meeting with the Home
Secretary at 9.45am on Monday, 17th April, it was decided that Mr
Brian Johnson, Chief Constable of Lancashire, should be invited
to act in this capacity. I was asked to secure his agreement in
time for the Home Secretary's statement in the House of Commons
in the afternoon, which I did having traced the Chief Constable
to Vienna.
Briefing material was being assembled by various divisions to
assist the Home Secretary respond to questions on his Commons
statement. I discussed the proposed comments on the professional
police investigation arranged by the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire, with Mr Wright and Mr Dear. The Chief Constable of
West Midlands was anxious that any statement made by the Home
Secretary should clearly state his responsibilities.
Subsequently Mr Chilcot was also consulted and the following was
included in the Home Secretary's brief, with the endorsement of
both Mr Wright and Mr Dear.
     "EMBARGOED UNTIL H.S. ANNOUNCEMENT
    / Mr Peter Wright, Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire
      Police, has requested that inquiries into the planning and
      operational decisions of South Yorkshire Police be
      undertaken by another force and has asked that the results
   / of their work should be given to the Inquiry. Accordingly
  / West Midlands Police will conduct these enquiries and will
 I    report them to Lord Justice Taylor.".
It is clear from the South Yorkshire Police announcement and the
comments included in the Home Secretary's brief, that the
invitations to West Midlands Police came directly from the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire.
In the days immediately after the tragedy Mr Wright did not
indicate in any way during several conversations that he wished
to avoid his responsibility for requesting the West Midlands
Police involvement. On 24th April the Chief Constable spoke with
me about the costs; his message is recorded in my note to Mr
Chilcot of that date (copy attached). Again there is no
indication that South Yorkshire Police repudiated responsibility
for the cost of the inquiries; the concern was about the level.
Being mindful of the situation which developed in the setting up
of the Guildford and Woolwich Bomb Inquiry I was most careful to
ensure that I did not make any specific request of either Chief
Constable which could be construed as a formal request or demand
by or on behalf of the Home Office. My role was that of a
facilitator and adviser.




                             HMCIC
                         12th June 1989
