                                             cc   Mr Chilcot
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
                                                  Mr Nagler FD2
                                                  Mr Whalley F6
                                                  Mr Durbin FD2
                                                  Mr Waghorn
                                                   (w/o encs)

Mr Addison

COSTS OF HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRIES

We have been asked for urgent advice and draft replies to the two
attached letters from, respectively, West Midlands and South
Yorkshire, asking for financial assistance with the costs of the
enquiry.

2.   There are two aspects to the enquiries being conducted by
West Midlands. One would be to assist South Yorkshire in looking
at any complaints about the conduct of their officers. The other
would be to look at more general issues on which the West
Midlands would report directly to Lord Justice Taylor.
3.   I do not know to what extent we can differentiate between
the two strands of the enquiry in practice. West Midlands are
suggesting that the request to conduct enquiries covering both
aspects went direct to them from the Home Secretary. I do not
know to what extent they can substantiate this claim. I tried to
discuss this with Mr Whalley but received a message from his
office that he had already spoken to you.

4.   As emerged from our consultation with counsel over the legal
proceedings being brought against us by Avon and Somerset in
respect of the Guildford and Woolwich bombings enquiries, if we
ask an "outside" police force to conduct enquiries into events
which took place in another police area (as opposed to addressing
our request to the chief officer of the area where the events
occurred and suggesting that he approach on outside force) we
create a contract for services. We are then obliged to pay
'reasonable' costs of the enquiry. West Midlands have asked for
additional costs including consequential overtime in their force
area to cover for the officers involved, which could be regarded
as reasonable.

5.   Insofar as enquiries were initiated by the Chief Constable
of South Yorkshire, his police authority would be obliged to pay
as part of the policing costs for their police area. They have
asked for a "special payment" to cover their anticipated costs of
£im.  (It is not clear if this forms part of the £lm West
Midlands are asking for).

6.   The criteria for making a "special payment" are that the
costs are both unforeseen (as they are in this case) and
excessive, such as to threaten the efficiency of the policing of
the area. We usually look at whether the anticipated costs are
likely to exceed the product of a penny rate for the area. Fin
Div 2 will be able to say what this is for South Yorkshire, but
on the face of it the costs are likely to be well below that. We
also have to seek Treasury approval. They are likely to take a
tough line eg they have just queried a proposed payment to Kent
for the Seaman's dispute where costs were well in excess of a
penny rate product.

7.   It seems we need to establish:

     a.    To what extent does the Home Office take responsibility
           for the enquiries being conducted by West Midlands.
           Can costs be apportioned separately for our part?
     b.    To the extent that we do accept responsibility we will
           need to consider budgeting provision (there is
           currently none), basis of payment (they will probably
           ask for the new mutual aid terms), and need for
           Treasury approval.

     c.    Can South Yorkshire have a 'special payment' for their
           part of the enquiry? On the face of it, this looks a
           poor candidate. Anticipated costs of £im likely to be
           well below product of a penny rate. Already get 51%
           police grant on their costs (even if these are net
           costs they are still of the order we would normally
           expect forces to absorb).

8.   I am sorry not to have been able to take this further before
my departure for Central Conference followed by leave. As West
Midlands have asked for an early reply you may want to have a
work with their clerk (as requested) before the Police Authority
meeting at 10.30am on Thursday 27 April.tf You may also wish to
discuss this issue with Mr Nagler and Mr Whalley.

9.   A note to Private Office offering interim replies is
probably desirable. Mr Waghorn can assist if necessary (and
holds our papers).




                                              P RANSFORD
                                              26 April 1989
FI Division




     1               ^   CAiJj^V             fc   1^
          Yw-Xo                                        ^
X        Ik                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE ^
                                               POLICE AU  RITY
        R .C . Johnston B .A ., I .P .F .A .                                                                       P.O. Box 37
        Clerk and Financial Officer                                        A<(ct**v\                            Regent Street
                                                 rr   ****    “
                                                                                                                         Barnsley
                                                                                                                         narnsiey
                                                      <s                 »       r —^ «c      South
                                                                                              J U U U I Yorkshire        S70 2 P 0
                                                                                                        1 U1 K M 1 1 1 C O


                                                                    <yL>   0 * 7 le fe p h o n  e  Barnsley (Q226)733222
                                                                                                   Barnsley     (0226)

        O ur R e f      RC J/VS                                     *** WW<x(fs
                                                                          atfs              Dme:24     April 1989
                                                                                      -k«e
        77iis matter is being dealt with by       Hr R C Johnston   IA<
                                                                    K* Clox?</.

                     Dear Sir Douglas
                     HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM TRAGEDY
                     TRIBUNAL OF INQUIRY
                     At a meeting of the Finance and General Purposes Committee of the Police
                     Authority last Friday, reference was made to the establishment of the
                     independent enquiry to be carried out by Lord Justice Taylor. The Committee
                     wholeheartedly welcomed the establishment of this enquiry but expressed concern
    ♦                as to how it would be financed, including particularly the investigation to be
                     carried out by the Chief Constable of the West Midlands.
                     The Committee felt that the terms of reference of the inquiry "to enquire into
                     the events and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
                     safety at sports grounds" reflected the national importance of the issues raised
                     and firmly indicated that finance should be made available by central
                     government. You have yourself made it clear that the Chief Constable of the
                     West Midlands will be reporting directly to Lord Justice Taylor.
                     Preliminary announcements on the scale of the enquiry indicate a cost well in
                     excess of £lm. Such a cost if borne locally would eliminate the Police
                     Authority’s provision for operational contingencies with a consequential threat
                     to the efficiency of the force. It would also leave the Authority completely
                     stripped of financial resources to face the uncertainties of next year’s
                     budget.
                     The Committee therefore directed me to write to you on behalf of the Authority
                     seeking your confirmation that the full cost of the Tribunal including the
                     enquiry by the Chief Constable of West Midlands will be borne by central
                     government.
                     Yours sincerely



                     :_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Officer
                     cc Mr John Chilcott, Sir Jack Layden, Chief Constable West Midlands, Clerk to
                        West Midlands Police Authority, Chief Constable South Yorkshire
            r        The Rt Hon Sir Douglas Hurd
                     Home Office
                     Queen Anne’s Gate
                     LONDON
                     SW1P 9AT
            L                                                       J
                      <.?'%>*   97   i <* I               o   *9444*         y u fw tv   n# p , w.                 <04


                                                                                                            cents AOcurz
                                                                       H r Cw.tof                             0) / ~ j u
                                                                            •             •
                                                                                                              fYir- &
                                                                                              »


WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                              SMm$ ,cf‘3
                                                                       Council House
Clerk                                                                  Dudley
A. V. ASTLING LL.M., M.Soc.Sc                                          DYl 1HF
                                                                       Telephone; Duiley 456Qpjj}

Mv Kvfewntv
            l'   AVA/AMD/RMC

Your Reference:,
                 CT/EYP/VAR1/23                                                 25th tpril, 1989

                 Dear Secretary of State,

                       Judicial Review - Hillsborough Football Tr iqedy

                      I am writing to you to seek urgent clarific ition
                 regarding the cost of the police investigations :o support
                 the Judicial Review into the Hillsborough Footba 1 Tragedy.

                      As you know the Chief Constable of the West Midlands
                 Force, Mr. G. Dear, and a large number of his of icers,
                 will be seconded to gather information for the J Jdicial
                 Review and Mr. Dear is working directly to Lord Justice
                 Taylor.

                      Offices have been set up in Sheffield, Liverpool and
                 the West Midlands and the expenditure being incurred will
                 involve additional costs (eg office accommodation, hotel
                 accommodation, travelling, subsistence, overtimej, vehicle
                 hire, telephones and equipment).                 -

                      Whilst the West Midlands is glad to assist Ln this
                 matter, the members of the Police Authority wish to be
                 assured that they will be recompensed for the loss of the
                 officers and additional costs borne by the Authority as a
                 result of the Judicial Review.

                      In view of the national importance of the J jdicial
                 Review and the fact that the West Midlands Force was
                                                                   —   asked
                                                                       --
                 to assist by the Home Office, this is clearly a {case for
                 special payment from central funds.

                      I should be most grateful for your confirms tion that
                 the cost of the seconded officers and the additi anal costs
                 incurred by the West Midlands will be reimbursed in full.

                      There is a full meeting of the Authority du|e to take
                 place this Thursday, 27 April, at 10.30 a.m. and it would
                 be very helpful if 1 could report to Members on this most
                 crucial issue which is now becoming very importah t to
                 members of the Authority.  A faxed response or t elephone
                 call clarifying the position would be sufficient in-view of
                 the short time available before the meeting.

                                              Yours,, sincerely,




                            Clerk to West Midlands Police Authorit
                 TO: Rt. Hon. Douglas Hurd PC, MP,     c.c. South Yorkshire Clerk
                     Secretary of State,                    Mr. J, Chilcot,
                     Home Office,                           Deputj Secretary,
                                                                                         A * j* J — —   r
