                                THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                        Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS                          /f   .

       DX 123242 St James’s Park        Fax: 0171 210 3066
                                                                                                   I LJy\
                                                               Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 2 1 0 ) \ J ^ y

                                E-mail: dbrummell@treasury-solicitor.gov.uk

                                        Direct Line: 0171 210 3090
D Brummell - H ead o f Litigation                                                     (   :v ;T Vv ' J

Miss Juliet Wheldon CB, QC                             Please quote:
Legal Adviser
Home Office                                           Your reference:

Queen Anne's Gate
^
                                                      ^Date:                      22^December
                                                                                          u i1999
                                                                                              nnn
London SWl




HILLSBOROUGH PUBLIC INQUIRY - PRIVATE PROSECUTION OF
                DAVID DUCKENFIELD
                        ✓

Further to my letter of 15 December, I confirm that I was called to give evidence
at Leeds Crown Court on 20 December by Mr Duckenfield's Counsel, William
Clegg QC, and was then cross-examined by Alan Jones QC for the prosecution,
largely about the procedures followed by the Hillsborough Inquiry and in relation
to one or two particular documents. The Judge, Mr Justice Hooper, also asked me
several questions about the Hillsborough Inquiry, how quickly the overall
evidential picture emerged, the question of police responsibility and the Salmon
letter which I sent to the solicitors for South Yorkshire Police on 9 May 1989.
There were no particular problems, and it was all over in about half an hour.

Mr Justice Collins was, in the event, also called (but not Peter Whitehurst) and
gave evidence yesterday.

I learnt today from Winckworth Sherwood that their application was dismissed by
the Judge yesterday. This means that the evidence given to the Hillsborough
Inquiry will be admissible for the purposes of the present prosecution. Reasons
for the decision are to follow. I will let you have a copy of the reasoned decision
as soon as it is available early in the New Year. However, it seems unlikely that
there will be any criticism as to the fairness of the procedures followed at the
Hillsborough Inquiry.

A copy of this letter goes to Stephen Parkinson.

''X s w >        ,
DAVID BRUMMELL
