MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512

Date:       14 January 1998

To:        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I attach

                  a letter (9 January) from Mr Alderman at the Police Authority about the
                  assessment of liability at the time the settlement with Sheffield Wednesday etc
                  was reached. The wording is a little awkward but I understand him to be
                  saying that the insurers reckoned at the time that the total bill would be £14
                  million, of which the police would have to pay £9.5 million.

                  The payment of £4 million by Sheffield Wednesday etc was in line with this.
                  Mr Alderman’s information does not support the Superintendent Hepworth
                  thesis that the other parties caved in and agreed to meet more than half of the
                  estimated bill when they heard Mr Burne’s evidence about the ground capacity
                  and the barriers.

                  I also spoke to Mr Alderman about the confidentiality angle arising from his
                  earlier letter (attached) as you asked. He said that the agreement that
                  Sheffield Wednesday and the City Council would pay the Police Authority
                  £4 million was and remains confidential - the agreement was reached on the
                  understanding that the sum would remain undisclosed.

                  The fact that the police authority have so far paid £13.25 million and have set
                  aside £4.5 million for future payments is not confidential in that sense. But
                  the authority have taken the view up to now that they do not want these figures
                  to be disclosed publicly because that might prejudice their position with
                  respect to future claims.

                  If you wanted to report these figures to the Home Secretary, and he wished to
                  publicise them, the Police Authority could not as I understand it stop that.
                  But the Authority have given us this information in good faith and I do not


G:\HILL SBOR\S-S\049. DOC
                think it would be right to publish it without notice. I left it with Mr
                Alderman that you have not yet decided whether to put these figures in your
                report or not - and that, if you did wish to include them, I would contact him
                again and he would get a rapid view from the Police Authority of whether they
                were content with that.


                a letter from Mr Wardrope about Eddie Spearitt (I showed you this on
                Monday afternoon, but I’m not sure whether you looked at the attachment
                about Paul Brady).


                a letter from PC Max Groome about the changes to his evidence. He says ‘/
                was called down to ... Snig H ill.... to see Detective Chief Inspector Foster ....
                I must have spent at least an hour arguing w ith... Foster over the content o f
                my ‘recollections ’.... (he) told me in no uncertain terms that i f certain
                alterations were not made, or (?deletions ?distortions) fo r that matter, then
                my statement would not be forwarded to the West Midlands Police enquiry
                and would therefore not be used in conjunction with the Coroner’s Inquest...
                So very reluctantly I agreed.... in order that my statement would not be
                 ‘spirited away ’ or otherwise disposed o f... I could not make comment on
                 ‘Command Decisions ’ and I could not make observations o f ‘opinion ’ such as
                the decision to replace... Mole with Duckenfield’.

                I have written to Mr Groome asking him to interpret the one word I cannot
                read.


                Chapters 5 and 6 of your report, as revised - Chapter 6 includes your new
                section on the crush barriers/ground capacity issue. Alterations you may
                wish to look at are marked in bold italic.


                Chapters 1, 2, 3 and 4 as they now stand. I have made all the changes you
                suggest and removed all the bold italic mark-ups except for those in the
                second part of Chapter 4 (South Yorkshire statements) which we need to have
                another look at anyway and the one in Chapter 2 (para 68) marking where we
                might say something about the videos Counsel saw.

                Aside from that I think the only other outstanding issue in these parts of the
                report is that you might want to compare what you say on Tony Edwards at
                paras 37 and 97 of Chapter 3. These repeat each other to some extent and it is
                not clear that the para 37 sequence does make clear why you didn’t want to see
                him as para 97 suggests. (As you know my (predictable!) view is that it
                would be better not to say this).


                a file (HO 397/18) which includes the Health and Safety Executive’s report
                on the state of the ground, covering everything except the strength of the

G:\HILLSBQR\S-S\049.DOC
                crush barriers. The report is dated 13 June 1989. As I said, HSE submitted a
                second report to Lord Taylor on the strength of the barriers later on, but I have
                not yet found this. There are papers on the files showing that HSE were still
                working on it in July 1989. The 13 June report says that barrier 124A was
                badly corroded in parts - in fact, corroded right though in one place.


                a summary of HSE’s work, dated 8 June 1989, which you may find useful.


                for curiosity value only, the match programme, which I have rediscovered
                during my file search (flagged on HO 397/94).




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\049.DOC
