                       MIDLAND REGIONAL CRIME SQUAD
R egion al        C o-ordinator                                     Headquarters
DET CH SUPT MJ FOSTER                                               341 Bournville Lane
                                                                    Birmingham B30 1QX
Your reference:

O ur Reference:    MJF/MH(regcol 1/hills.aud)




                                                                    17 December 1997



Mr C Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
 oom 1106
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London. SW 1H 9A T




I have now considered the documentation forwarded to me on 3 December 1997 (Audit trail and
examination by Superintendent Hepworth) and I have researched the statements forwarded on
12 December 1997.

In order to respond to you I have spoken by telephone to Mr J M Jones (retired C hief Constable
of Cheshire) and sought his view and assistance on the process agreed for the early part o f the
Hillsborough Investigation.

It might be easier if I try to put this response into numbered format as follows:

1.     There was agreement shared by South Yorkshire Police (SYP), W est Midlands Police and
       by Treasury Solicitors acting for Lord Justice Taylor (Mr Collins QC) that the recollections
       forwarded to the Judicial Inquiry by South Yorkshire Police via W est M idlands Police
       would be the 'final versions'. It was accepted that Counsel representing SYP would advise
       the Force on the removal o f expression o f opinions to keep statements factual.

2.     It needs to be understood that at this time W est Midlands Police were serving Lord Justice
       Taylor and ALL such agreements would only have been entered into after consultation with
       Treasury Solicitors and particularly Mr W halley who served Lord Justice Taylor.

3.     West Midlands Police accepted that those same statements would be used for the basis o f
       any other investigations (eg Coroner / DPP or Complaints).


                                                                                            C ont./.
/


                                                 2

4.     One primary reason for adopting this process was the constraint on time to obtain the
       necessary evidence for the set date to start the Judicial Inquiry proceedings. It would have
       been too cumbersome to use West Midlands Police Officers to take statements from SYP
       officers in those early stages.

5.     Later in the investigation (Coroners and DPP) further statements were taken in the
       traditional way and you will find them usually with a letter prefix, eg first recollection
       S I234, further statement re body identification S1234A, third one S1234B etc.

6.     West Midlands Police were not party to the 'vetting' o f the SYP statements but would have
       expected all factual evidence to be retained in the final version. We did not to my
       knowledge dip check or sample to ensure this was the case.

n      The Policy File entered onto HOLMES is, I understand from SYP, no longer viewable and
       as such I am unable to check any o f my policy decisions in this area.

8.     It is possible West Midlands Incident Room on occasions received both the original and
       vetted copies o f statements. Indeed my check in respect o f PC Brian Huckstep shows we
       received both and they have been retrieved o ff the HOLMES system as S863 and S863A.

Moving on to the sample statements forwarded to me, I have examined them using the following
process. You forwarded to me two sets o f statements / recollections for comparison. As a check,
I have searched the HOLMES system and had sent to me those officers statements. Clearly two
o f them match, but the third should not. Using two other officers, I have 'proofread' them and
identified the changes made. I have then read and considered the content o f those original
recollections and the 'extra' material. My observations are as follows:

 1.     Powell, Raymond Lloyd

        Page 3, Line 23 "The first thing" to Page 4, Line 1 and Cordon.

        I would have expected this to be left in especially where it refers to previous games and the
        forming o f the cordon.

        Comment: This was investigated and I recall the issue o f policing in previous games being
        pursued, particularly in the questioning o f Senior SYP officers.

 2.     Ramsden, Alan Andrew

 (a)    Page 6, Line 26 to end o f page (Coventry City).

        Similar to above. I would have expected this to be left in.

        Comment: As for 1. above.


                                                                                              Cont./..
    /
/
/




                                                      3

    (b)   Page 10, last paragraph and to end o f Page 11.

          This is perhaps opinion on the part o f the officer.

          Comment: The investigation teams asked these same questions.

          NOTE: In the statement o f PC Ramsden on Page 6, the final sentence was removed from
          the original recollection, ie "I also felt" until "Coventry City". It also appears to me that the
          removal o f this totally changes the next sentence which clearly refers to 1987 in the original
          recollection, but the edited version would refer the reader to 1989!

    3.    Huckstep, Brian Robert

          Comment: We had both statements.

    4.    W oodcock, John Howard

          Page 5, Line 9 to end o f page.

          I can understand this being seen as opinion and hearsay, but o f course it may have been
          valuable to the Investigation team in respect o f Inspector White and his observation if that
          were not already known. I question the objectivity here o f the person vetting. In fairness,
          a legal representative would not look at this as I would.

          Comment: The issues raised were all considered during the investigation.

    5.    Groome, M axwell Deryck Charles

    (a)   Page 2, Line 6, starting "This was" to Line 10 ending in "waste"; and Page 2, Line 24 to
          Line 26, starting "An Officer" and ending "ground".

          This is opinion.

          Comment: Not issues o f importance to the investigating team.

    (b) Page 4, Lines 8 and 9 "The control room" ending "paralysis".

          I see no reason to take this out; it may have been a factor.

          Comment: All activity o f the Control Room was investigated.

    (c)   Page 5, First full paragraph.

          Such identification issues could have been important in establishing who was where. It
          should have remained in.


                                                                                                   Corn./..
      Comment: The investigation teams examined the movement and actions o f all senior
      officers and this would not have caused a problem by being taken out.

(d)   Page 5, Line 16 (1) to Page 6, Line 1, ending "pressure".

      If correct, such specific information on policing arrangements could have been crucial in
      examining 1989 against other matches.

      Comment: This was in any event done by the investigation team and the editing out is not
      a cause for concern.

(e)   Page 6 - all o f Paragraph numbered (5).

      This could be opinion, but if de-briefs recorded these facts such information was useful.

      Comment: Such aspects were in any event looked at and examined by the investigation
      team.

(f)   Page 6, Paragraph 6, last line taken out.

      I would have said this was important as it deals with supervision, control and safety in one
      paragraph but removes the fact it did not happen in 1989.

      Comment: All aspects in relation to the command duties and activities o f Chief
      Superintendent Duckenfield were examined thoroughly.

(g)   Pages 6 and 7, Paragraphs (7), (8), (9) and (10).

      This is opinion and I can understand it being removed if the purpose is to produce a factual
      account only.

      Comment: I can say all these issues raised were considered and looked at by the
      Investigating team.

6.    W hite, Harry

(a)   Page 1 - 10 am "Short and sharp" removed.

      I can see no reason to remove this.

      Comment: We looked and examined all aspects o f all o f the briefings for the match so this
      removal made no difference.

(b)   Page marked Additional Points Arising, and to end o f Page 2, same paper.



                                                                                          Cont./..
     Some o f this is opinion and some thought provoking, but some may have been valuable,
     eg second paragraph "During etc" and referring to the tunnel and control o f crowd.

     Comment: The issues raised here were all examined by the Investigation Team.

Conclusion

Although the West Midlands Investigation Team did not have access to the majority o f original
recollection, I am confident not only from examining these sample statements, but from the
thoroughness o f the investigation, that this has not had any bearing on the evidence gathered and
presented to the Coroner, the DPP or the Police Complaints Authority.

On reflection, it seems to me the original 'vetting' was focused on producing factual « a t o n ^ s
although from the examples sent, the omissions generally centre on police officers and their
a^ is or lack o f action. I imagine this was based upon Counsel for SYP representmg the best
interests o f the Force and individuals.

As far as the Investigating Team were concerned, the objective o f the Investigation was to seek
the truth about how the disaster happened. Few officers have experienced such investigations
but ALL relevant information can be o f value, whether it is factual or opinion and much depends
on the direction given by the Senior Officers to determine the c o n t e n t o f statements^ It is exact y
 for this reason that the questionnaire was designed to offer, at Questions 53 and 54, the chance
to give views, observations and opinions.

I hope this has answered the main points for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.




 Yours sincerely




 M J Foster
 D/Chief Superintendent
 Regional Co-ordinator
                       MIDLAND REGIONAL CRIME SQUAD
R egional          C o-ordinator                                     Headquarters
DET CH SUPT MJ FOSTER                                                341 Bournville Lane
                                                                     Birmingham B30 1QX

Your reference:

O u r Reference:    MJF'M Hjregcol 1/hills.bne)




                                                                     16 December 1997


Mr C F Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 1106
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London. SW 1H9AT




Dear Mr Bo

                      Interviews with Sergeant Appleton, Sergeant M cCombie and
                                     D/Chief Superintendent Foster

Thank you for the transcripts and each o f us has considered the content and I would wish to make
the following comments:

1.         Sergeant Appleton

           Julie is happy with the content and there is nothing she wishes to add.

2.         D/Chief Superintendent Foster

           I would ask that the term "West Midlands RCS" is changed to "Midland RCS". This
           Squad serves six forces in the Region and is staffed by officers from those forces.

3.         Sergeant McCombie

           Graham feels he has not properly addressed the main issues raised in his interview with
           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and would like the enclosed statement he has made to be
           referred to as well.
                                                2

May I comment on the content o f the statement submitted to you by Graham, and specifically on
procedure. In relation to major incident room procedures, it is acceptable to reply to an original
message for action with a message. In this instance M586 from the Social Worker being replied
to by M l395 from the officer.

Incident room procedures automatically link the messages to the nominal (Mr Taylor here) and
any later search will produce ALL documentation linked to Mr Taylor.

In addition, the actions requested by Graham in Message M l395 and replied to by
Action A5206 are automatically linked and always retrievable against the nominal o f Mr Taylor.

I am satisfied Sergeant McCombie acted correctly based upon the text in the message. I would
not have expected a statement o f retraction unless the matters retracted were already in statement
format. As it happens here, the information on the Message from the Social W orker is not
specific and quite correctly and importantly, Graham has ensured the main issues raised and
retracted by Mr Taylor were recorded and entered for any later reference. Despite the 'retraction'
and no doubt because o f the medication and confusion on the part o f Mr Taylor, the officer still
raised three actions to try and confirm or otherwise the issues raised and retracted.

I am sure you appreciate what I am about to say, but I feel it is important to emphasise some
things about this aspect of the Hillsborough Investigation on behalf o f all o f the West Midlands
Officers and the 'deceased team'.

For many weeks and months they dealt with the victims' families and spent many many hours
listening and talking to help the bereaved come to terms with this disaster. Some officers
returned at night to their hotel only to display their own emotions and often shed tears openly in
an effort to cope and carry on the next day.

Those officers had to try to be professional, to separate emotions in order to progress the
investigation and had to ensure the most factual and best evidence was presented for Lord Justice
Taylor, the Coroner and the Director o f Public Prosecutions.

Despite all o f this and many other factors, to my knowledge, until now, from over 10,000 people
interviewed, the only complaints made are those you have referred to me during this Scrutiny and
they have all come very late, even to the Cook report.

Mistakes are always possible; misunderstandings likely and to please all is impossible, but I do
believe West Midlands Police Officers gave everything to ensure every possible aspect was
covered to enable the respective authorities to examine and determine why Hillsborough
happened. I find it very sad now that some o f those same officers actions are now called into
question in this way.




                                                                                            Cont./..
                                                3

After the Cook report when Julie Appleton telephoned me she was quite shocked and upset at
the content. I considered long and hard whether to respond because I knew the theme o f the
programme was wrong and assumptions incorrect. I decided not to do so, not for Julie's sake, not
to protect West Midlands Police, not to avoid being defensive, but because I believed it wrong
to continue and to raise the issues for the sake o f many o f the families that lost loved ones at
Hillsborough.

In a roundabout way I guess I am saying Hillsborough affected a great many people in different
ways and I hope Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will understand my reasons for wanting to share this
with the Hillsborough Scrutiny team.

Yours sincerely




M J Foster
D/Chief Superintendent
Regional Co-ordinator
                                             W est Midlands Police

                                               W itness Statement

                     (CJ Act 1967, s.9 MC Act 1980, s. 102, MC Rules 1981, r.70)


  Statem ent of: Graham John McCOMBIE

  Age if u n d er 18: Over 18

 O ccupation:       Detective Sergeant 8792


 This statement (consisting o f 2 page(s) each signed by me) is true to the best o f my knowledge and belief and I
 make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it
 anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.

 Dated




 On the 2nd December 1997 I gave evidence to the 'Hillsborough Scrutiny" before Lord Justice

 STUART-SMITH mainly concerning my dealings with Paul TAYLOR and Mr and Mrs HICKS.

 Having read the transcript o f my evidence I would like to add the following:

 For 17 months I was resident in Sheffield completing follow-up enquiries on behalf o f Lord

Justice TAYLOR and then the Coroner. I spoke to literally hundreds o f people, all o f whom had

a story to tell about Hillsborough. To this date I can still put names to body numbers. I can still

remember some experiences as if it were yesterday.

Without doubt I did speak to Paul TAYLOR, I remember him and I also remember Trevor and

Jenny HICKS being very upset by what he told them in his initial contact.

When I went to see Paul TAYLOR I was in possession o f his original statement, his own

recollection and the questionnaire that was completed.

I would have gone through the contents of these chronologically to make sure that everything had

been recorded properly. I then would have asked him in detail about what he had said to Mrs




                                                      Signature Witnessed by:
       HICKS. I believe I would then obviously have asked the question "Why didn't you put this in

      your original statement/recollection". I met several people at Hillsborough who wanted to tell

      you what they wish they had done, rather than what they did do. Paul TAYLOR clearly retracted

      what he had told Mrs HICKS as I have recorded it on the "Result o f Action" which I completed

      on 31 May 1989 and put back into the Incident Room. Even though he had nothing o f evidential

      value to add to his original statement, I still asked for the following to be done:

      1•       Identify TAYLOR in the crowd.

     2.      Assess his involvement.
m
     3.      Can we establish any continuity re Victoria HICKS.

     If on the 31 May 1989 Paul TAYLOR had stood by the story o f what he had told Mrs HICKS I

     would simply have recorded it in statement form and submitted it through the Incident Room.

     I have reflected on the suggestion I used the term perjury in talking to Mr TAYLOR but I do not

    believe I would have had cause to do so. It is quite common for Police Officers, when explaining

    the caption at the start o f a statement, to have to explain it to witnesses. The simple way is to use

    the term perjury because eveiyone understands it. M r TAYLOR may have had that explained

    to him by the officers taking his written statement or in going through his own recollection and

    statement again he may have asked me what it meant. I would have used the term in explanation

    but I can see no reason why I would have initiated this.

    Finally, can I emphasise that there was no reason to take a statement because it was clear to me

he retracted what he said. I would add that the written message I put back to the incident room

did include the key points Mr TAYLOR raised and retracted during my interview with him, eg:

"I got Victoria out o f the pens, I was giving her the kiss o f life and then a Policeman said ’leave

her alone, she’s gone’ without feeling her pulse" etc.

I therefore ensured that the facts were entered into the system for any later reference and if at the


Signature: •                   ..................
                                                    Signature Witnessed by:
                                                3

inquests a request had been made to find or clarify this, a normal search would have produced

the message and the link to the statements o f Paul TAYLOR. Indeed the retrieval o f the message

and actions for this scrutiny confirms this.




Signature                                      Signature Witnessed by:
