KOLARA LIMITED
6 Outram R oad, P ortsm outh, H am pshire P 0 5 IQF
(R egistered Office)
T eleph one:
0705 581025




     N. L. Morgan, Esq.,                                                                 18 De
     Secretary,
     Popplewell Committee of Inquiry,
     Ths~Home Office,
     Queen Anne's Gate,
     London. 3V.T1



     Dear Mr. Morgan,
           Mr. Crcstlvwaite of the Department of Environment Sports and Recreation Division
     has kindly suggested I should contact you about our "Water Barrier" system, for which a
     brochure is enclosed.
           The system was designed initially as a means of dealing with fires in wooden
     football stands. Its purpose was quite specifically to
               1.      provide an immediate and effective response to a fire
                       such as we saw at Bradford.
               2.      encourage/force spectators to leave the stand as
                       quicldy as possible.
               3.      open escape routes onto the pitch thereby avoiding the
                       need for people having to go to hazard areas at the back
                       of the stand, or underneath it to get to the exit doors.
               4.      provide a safe holding area for spectators on the pitch
                       thereby keeping the access roads to the stand open for
                       the emergency services.
               5.      be a simple, relatively cheap solution which could be
                       rapidly fitted and thereby provide an immediate
                       improvement in safety.
         The system is indeed cheap and, we believe, very effective. The major cost items -
    the pumps - can be hired for specific matches and, hence, these costs are carried by
    revenue.

                                                                                          continued



                               Registered in England No- 1717575   VAT No. 411 3320 19
/continued


      The principle is applicable to all large stands - Rugby, Racing circuits, Dog tracks
and the major show grounds. The stands for Wimbledon, the Royal Tournament and the
Horse of the Year show could easily be fitted with this system, and the very real dangers
from a fire or explosion under the stand greatly reduced.
      We have a working model of the system which I can easily bring along for a
demonstration if you or your Committee are interested. Possibly the best practical
demonstration of this principle occurred during the downpour at Wimbledon this year!
                                   Yours sincerely,
