                                                                               0
E.R.
   42-6.JS

   From: J L Goddard                            cc:   Mr Addison
         F8 Division                                  Mr Bolton
         Ext. 3314                                    Miss A Edwards
                                                      Mr Cogbill
           22 June 1990                               Mrs Lee
                                                      Mr Crawley, SHHD
                                                      Mr McClelland, NIO



   Miss P Edwards

   Mr Fulton

   Miss Goose

   Mr Grant




   TAYLOR REPORT


   In recommendations 70-73 of his final report on the Hillsborough
   Stadium Disaster Lord Justice Taylor makes recommendations on
   offences and penalties.       We are considering these and in
   February I sought the views of ACPO and the Crown Prosecution
   Service on them.       ACPO's reply was not received until 8 June.      I
   now attach a draft submission on which I should welcome, first,
   substantive contributions on the use of attendance centres
   (Miss Goose), the use of electronic tagging (Mr Grant), the
   legislative vehicle for making these changes (Mr Fulton) and any
   legal issues (Miss P Edwards) and, second, any other comments which
   they or copy recipients would wish to make.


   2.      The draft is written very much with the initial but firm view
   of the Home Secretary in mind.       This was that he wished to accept
   the recommendations for the creation of offences provided that
   doing so did not cause any harm.       I have referred to the drawbacks,
   as we see them, in the submission - and they seem particularly
   acute in the case of obscene or racial chanting - but if anyone
   thinks more or less should be made of them I should be glad to
   know.     ACPO's and the C PS 1s support the creation of all the
proposed offences makes it more difficult to persuade the Home
Secretary that he should not follow his initial view.


3.   The CPS think a general offence of disorderly conduct, which
cited the three specific offences in recommendation 71 as examples,
would be preferable to making 3 separate offences.     I have set out
some arguments in paragraph 8 of the draft submission against a
general offence but I am ready to be guided on the question of
which formulation would be better.


4.   In paragraph 1 of the draft submission I intend to provide an
"executive summary" which I will draft in the light of the
responses to this note.


5.   The draft submission says nothing about the position in
Scotland and N Ireland on the assumption that they will not wish to
adopt Taylor-type proposals or at least not commit themselves at
the moment.    Perhaps Mr Crawley and Mr McClelland could confirm
this.


6.   As for handling I should be grateful for Mr Fulton's advice on
the possibility of using the Criminal Justice Bill as a legislative
vehicle if Ministers accept in principle the creation of the
offences.     It may be possible to seek the necessary H and L
committee approvals at the same time and as part of a larger
package.    Home Office Ministers will probably be eager to publicise
their conclusions although strictly I doubt whether they should do
so ahead of approval in H.    As to timing of implementation, the
football season 1990/91 is now impossible, but we should be
criticised if the new measures were not in place for the 1991/92
season.


7.   Interest in these Taylor recommendations remains high.
Ministers will be looking to make an announcement before Parliament
rises for the summer.     I should therefore be glad of responses to
this note by 3 July - I am sorry for the tight timetable.
8.   If any of the recipients of this note do not have access to
the relevant portions of the final Taylor Report Ms Jago (273-2850)
is ready to provide relevant copy extracts.




                            J L GODDARD
43-6.JS                                              DRAFT OF 22.6.90


From      J L Goddard                       cc Ms Craig
          F8 Division                          Ms Spencer
          Ext 3314                             Mr Yates
                                               Mr Hammond
            July 1990                          Mr Faulkner
                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                               Mr Angel
                                               Mr Norris
                                               Mr Turney
                                               Miss P Edwards, LAB
                                               Mr Moorey
                                               Mr Cogbill
                                               Miss A Edwards, F2
                                               Mr Fulton
                                               Mr Kinney
                                               Miss Goose
                                               Mr Grant
                                               Mrs Lee
                                               Mr Nagler
                                               Mr J B Taylor
                                               Mr Crawley, SHHD
                                               Mr McClelland,NIO
                                               DE & DTI
                                               Mr J Vaughan, DoE


1. Ms Snow

2. Mr Storr



TAYLOR REPORT: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEW OFFENCES AND PENALTIES:
(i) TICKET TOUTING OFFENCE    [70]
(ii) OFFENCES IN THE GROUND    [71]
(iii) USE OF ATTENDANCE CENTRES [72]
(iv) USE OF ELECTRONIC TAGGING [73]



INTRODUCTION


This submission considers recommendations 70-73 of Lord Justice
Taylor's final report into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster and
makes recommendations on what the Government's response to them
should be.     [Very short summary setting out what those responses
are for each recommendation and making the point that ACPO and the
CPS support the creation of all the offences recommended by
Taylor.   Also making the point that a negative response to the
Taylor recommendations would be criticised by the Opposition and



that it would be difficult to sustain if next season there were
well-publicised incidents of this nature associated with serious
injury or public order consequences.]


2.    This submission now examines   each of the recommendations in
turn.


(i)   TICKET TOUTING OFFENCE [70]


Scope:    football only


3.    Taylor recommends that ticket touting at football matches
should be an offence.     He singles football out from other events
on the basis that touting leads to undesirable consequences at
football grounds not repeated elsewhere.     It encourages fans to
travel to grounds without tickets.     The fans then may cause
obstruction or, when they cannot get tickets, become disorderly;
and touting undermines the policy of segregating fans from rival
clubs.    Touting more generally raises issues of ethics or
economics rather than issues associated with public order and
safety.    Taylor suggests several ways in which touting at football
matches could be made an offence but recommends that the offence
should be "to sell tickets for and on the day of a football match
without authority from the home club to do so".


ACPO's view


4.    ACPO support the recommendation for a substantive offence and
favour Taylor's recommended formulation rather than any of his
other suggestions because it offers a straightforward offence more
easily capable of proof.     They see a need for a power of arrest
and a power of seizure if the measure is to be effective.        They do
not believe that such an offence would necessarily mean having to
devote more police resources to touts than they do at the moment.
CPS 's view


5.     The CPS endorse Taylor's view that the current law is
stretched by the police (and themselves) when dealing with touts
and believe that specific provision should be made.      They, too,
favour the recommended Taylor offence rather than any of his
alternative suggestions.      They and ACPO draw attention to the need
to make the definition of "sell" sufficiently wide and to require
written authority of the home club to sell tickets.      The CPS point
out that if the offence take place only on the day, ticket touts
who sell tickets before then could still have the effect of
undermining segregation policy.      The resource implications of the
offence for the CPS are unlikely to be significant.


6.    On the basis that a new offence should apply only to football
we think that the offence is acceptable.      Care will need to be
taken in drafting the offence and in setting a penalty which is
sufficient to deter.      Powers of arrest and seizure seem essential.
These are matters to which we will give furtherconsideration
before submitting detailed proposals to Ministers, if they agree
the offence in principle.


(ii) OFFENCES IN THE GROUND [71]


7.    Lord Justice Taylor recommended that at a designated sports
ground there should be specific offences of:


       (i)    throwing a missile;
      (ii)    chanting obscene or racialist abuse;
     (iii)    going onto a pitch without reasonable excuse.


This is slightly at variance with      Mr Justice Popplewell's report
which recommended a simple offence of disorderly conduct at a
sports ground.      His intention was to deal with the three specific
activities aimed at by Taylor's recommendations and any others
which could affect crowd safety.      Taylor recommended three
precisely defined offences on the basis that hooligans who knew
precisely what was prohibited would be more likely to be deterred
than by a more generally formulated offence.    These three offences
are recommended by Taylor because he does not believe that current
law catches adequately the activities of missile throwing,
chanting obscene or racialist abuse, or going on the pitch without
reasonable excuse.     In themselves some of the activities involved
may be no more than minor misdemeanours, and it is a matter of
judgement whether outside the context of football it seems
doubtful that the criminal law should be brought to bear on them.
However, football is a special case because of the unruly
behaviour of a significant minority of attenders and the
provocative effect that such behaviour has on the rest of the
spectators.    There is some likelihood that there will be pressure
to extend these offences, particularly that of chanting obscene or
racialist abuse, so that they apply beyond football grounds.


8.   ACPO generally favour the making of three specific offences
although within their ranks there are also some who think that the
existing law is adequate and others who think that a general
offence might be preferable to the specific three.     The CPS
favours a general offence of disorderly conduct with the three
specific activities highlighted by Taylor being examples of such
conduct.     The strength of the CPS suggestion lies in its
flexibility; its weakness is that it would provide a very low
threshold for an enormous breadth of potentially criminal
behaviour.     There seems to us to be a risk of mere exuberance
being caught by over vigorous policing.     On balance, we think that
three specific offences are preferable.


Throwing a missile


Existing law


9.   Sections 4 and 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 cover missile
throwing provided that there is a victim or that there is someone
within the sight or hearing of the activity who is likely to be
caused harassment alarm or distress.     In the case of section 4 the
definition of violence (set out in section 8 of the 1986 Act)
explicitly includes the throwing of missiles of a kind capable of
causing injury even if they do not hit or fall short.    And in
section 5 it has been found in the case of DPP v Orum that in law
a police officer is someone who can be caused harassment alarm or
distress.


10.   Taylor suggests that adducing evidence of a victim or a
person likely to be caused harassment etc may be very difficult
and believes that it should be sufficient merely to show that a
missile was thrown at a football match.


ACPO's view


11.   ACPO consider the proposed offence to be simple and
straightforward lending itself to ease of detection and proof.
They point out the obvious difficulties of extracting perpetrators
from a crowd and the possible reaction to such an attempt.     They
feel that officers would have to use their discretion on whether
immediate action was feasible. If it was not, video evidence
obtained at the match and post-match arrest would have to be used
to make sure the law was effectively applied.


CPS's view


12.   The CPS favour the proposed offence but emphasise the need
for the use of video evidence to get over the problems of taking
individuals out of crowds and proving that they were responsible.
With video equipment now available at all football league grounds
the necessary technology to make enforcement of the offence a
practical proposition is in place.


13.   The offence of throwing a missile would catch behaviour at      a
football ground which anywhere else might be regarded as
innocuous.    We would wish to exclude, by an appropriate definition
of "missile" such innocuous activities as throwing a paper     dart or
throwing a hat in the air in jubilation.   (We might use the   "...
missile ... capable of causing an injury" formulation adopted in
section 8 of the 1986 Act.)    It is however the potential at a
football ground of provoking more general disorderly activity
which makes this behaviour a menace and which Taylor believes
makes it deserve a criminal sanction.      ACPO and the CPS support
the creation of the offence and although it could well be viewed
in some quarters as a heavy-handed measure we recommend that
Ministers accept the recommendation.


Chanting obscene or racialist abuse


Existing law


14.   As with missile throwing sections 4 and 5 of the Public Order
Act might be applied against chanting obscene or racialist abuse
but again the element of a victim or someone likely to be caused
harassment etc would either be difficult to prove or be absent.
And Taylor points out it is not certain that such chanting is
likely or intended to stir up racial hatred as required by section
18 of the Public Order Act.      For the most part this chanting is,
he suggests, more likely to cause offence, embarrassment or
disgust.


ACPO's view


15.   ACPO favour creating an offence of chanting obscene or
racialist abuse while pointing up the difficulties of immediate
enforcement and the need for technical back-up in the form of
video evidence and post-match arrests.


CP S 's view


16.   The CPS believe that existing law is not adequate but that
considerable difficulties could arise in proving the proposed
offence.       It may be obvious from visual evidence that a spectator
had been shouting something but it may be hard to prove it was an
obscene or racist chant and not "'ere we go" or "God save the
Queen".    The chant will have to have been heard by the police
officer or other witness.      The CPS have grave reservations that
the witness could assuredly indicate that the person in the dock
was guilty of the offence and not simply a person in a group of
people from whom racist chanting and abuse was heard.     This is
apparently a practical difficulty with the application of the
existing law in these circumstances.


17.   Causing offence, embarrassment or disgust is somewhere below
the threshold of an offence under section 5 of the Public Order
Act 1986 which requires the causing of harassment, alarm or
distress.     In most contexts it might be regarded as a case of bad
manners rather than criminality but the collective nature of the
behaviour and the public context of a football match make the
behaviour particularly objectionable.     If Ministers decide to go
ahead with the offence it may be that pressure will increase for
similar offences other than in football grounds.     This pressure
could be resisted on the grounds that in other contexts such
behaviour is not common and will normally be caught by section 18
of the Public Order Act 1986 because it is likely or intended to
stir up racial hatred.     But this line may prove difficult to hold.


18.   The problem of effective enforcement of this offence seems
more acute than in relation to the other two.     However, it is
probably the most socially offensive of the three targeted
activities.     It would be presentationally difficult to proceed
with offences against missile throwing and pitch invasion and not
this one.     We therefore suggest acceptance of the recommendation.


Going on the pitch without reasonable excuse


Existing law


19.   Existing law may catch this activity if, for example, it is
likely to cause harassment, alarm, or distress, or if it is likely
to lead to a breach of the peace.     But Taylor suggests that at
football matches the activity itself should be criminal partly
because its purpose could be to attack someone; partly because
whatever the reason for the encroachment it encourages others to
do the same; and partly (and importantly) to introduce sanctions
to ensure that the lowering of the level of perimeter fences,
which is another of his recommendations, is not abused.
ACPO's view


20.   ACPO also favour the adoption of this offence but suggest
omitting the "reasonable excuse" defence.   We think that their
suggestion must be unacceptable because, as Taylor says, a defence
is necessary if people need to escape a hazard on the terraces by
going onto the pitch.


CPS's view


21.   The CPS foresee difficulties of enforcement but believe that
the present law is inadequate to cope with the activity.    They
seem to think that running on at the end of a game may not be the
target of the offence but in some circumstances that seems to us
to be likely to be as bad as running on at the start or during a
match.   They see no difficulty in proof although they expect a
large number of "reasonable excuses" to be put forward.


22.   The offence would, as Taylor recognises, make unlawful the
practice of youngsters running onto the pitch at the end of the
game to congratulate players or simply from ioie de vivre.     He
seems to accept that it is a price that has to be paid for the
greater good.   We suppport this view and suggest that Ministers
should accept the recommendation.


General considerations relating to offences in the ground


23.   The offences themselves are straightforward but there are
risks that enforcement problems could make them ineffective.        We
are slightly worried that if, for example, a large number of
spectators took it into their heads to undertake any of the
activities en masse the police would be seen at the time to be
powerless. But given ACPO and the CPS support for the Taylor
proposals we may be over-sceptical.


24.   ACPO are unable to assess the demand on their resources if
these offences are implemented but think they may make no greater
demands.        The resource effect on the CPS will depend on the degree
of enforcement by the police.


25.     The gravity of the offences will be unlikely to justify a
custodial sentence but both the police and CPS believe there
should be associated powers of arrest.          These are matters to which
we will give further consideration and make recommendations to
Ministers if they decide in principle to proceed with legislation.


(iii)     USE OF ATTENDANCE CENTRES
                  [C1 contribution]


(ii)      USE OF ELECTRONIC TAGGING
                  [C2 contribution]


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


[26.]           Ministers are invited to agree that in accordance with
Lord Taylor's recommendations each of the following activities
should be made an offence:


        (a)     selling tickets for and on the day of a match without
                authority from the house club to do so. (paras 3-6)


        (b)     at a designated sports ground


        (i)     throwing a missile;


        (ii) chanting obscene or racialist abuse; and


        (iii)     going on the pitch without reasonable excuse
                (paras 7-26).


[C1 contribution on attendance centres]



[C2 contribution on electronic tagging]
HANDLING


27.   If Ministers agree to the creation of the four offences we
shall need to seek policy approval in H Committee and look for a
legislative vehicle.   The Criminal Justice Bill would be
particularly convenient.   If Ministers are content for this Bill
to be used we will submit the necessary drafts for H and L
Committees.




                            J L GODDARD
