From: Paul Pugh                                cc:    Sir Richard W ilson
           Head o f Operational                       Mr Boys Smith
           Policing Policy Unit                       Mr Halliday
           Room 529                                   M iss Loudon
           Queen A nne’s Gate                         M iss Weston
           Tel: 0171-273-3141                         Mr R Evans
           8 May 1997                                 Mr Granatt
                                                      Mr P Edmundson
                                                      Mr Warner
                                                      Mr Owen




1. Mr Michael

2. Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue

In December a Granada television dramatisation of the Hillsborough disaster
claimed that there were grounds for reopening the inquiry into the disaster. Since
then further claims have been made by the Hillsborough Family Support Group,
supported by local MPs and others. This submission assesses the case for a new
public inquiry; and considers whether you should make and announce a decision.

Timing

2.    There is no firm deadline for your decision, but the outcome is awaited with
keen interest by those involved.

Summary and Recommendation

3.    After the Granada programme we asked Richard Wells, Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, to provide a full report on the claims made in the
programme. We have examined that report and the transcripts supplied by South
Yorkshire Police, watched the video film which Granada suggested might be new
evidence, and examined the video tapes produced by the Hillsborough Family
Support Group. Our assessment is that there are no grounds for establishing a new
public inquiry. The material has also been considered by the DPP, and by the
Attorney General’s Office. None of those who have examined it consider that there is
evidence to justify a new public inquiry, a reopening of the inquest, or the
prosecution of individuals. But a decision not to reopen the inquiry would be a
severe blow to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, who believe firmly that they
have been the victims of a miscarriage of justice. You may therefore wish to
consider whether the recent representations should be further considered by officials
or independently examined. This is further discussed in paragraphs 28 and 29.


::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
Background

4.     The Hillsborough disaster happened on 15 April 1989; 95 people died as a
result of overcrowding and crushing. There have been four separate investigations
or reviews of what happened: a public inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor; the
coroner’s inquest into each of the deaths; an investigation into police conduct
supervised by the Police Complaints Authority; and a judicial review of the verdict of
the inquest.

5.     The Taylor Inquiry was set up by the then Home Secretary immediately after
the disaster. The terms of reference were to inquire into the events and to make
recommendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports events.
The Inquiry took oral evidence from 174 witnesses at public hearings during May
and June 1989 and received some 71 hours of video evidence from different
sources. Lord Justice Taylor published an interim report in August 1989 which set
out the causes of the disaster. He found that there were a number of causes:

           (i)        The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding was the failure to cut
                      off access to the central pens which were already too full.

           (ii)       They were already too full because no safe maximum capacities had
                      been laid down, no attempt was made to control entry to individual
                      pens numerically, and there was no effective visual monitoring of
                      crowd density.

           (iii)      When an influx from gate C entered pen 3, the layout of the barriers
                      there afforded less protection than they should have done and the
                      barrier collapsed.

           (iv)       The need to open gate C was because of dangerous congestion at the
                      turnstiles. That occurred because, as both the club and police should
                      have realised, the turnstile area could not cope easily with the numbers
                       unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The police had
                      failed to draw up plans about how they would control large numbers
                      should they arrive in a short period.

           (v)        The presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too much
                      aggravated the problem, as did the Sheffield Wednesday football
                      club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.

6.     He did not attribute all blame to a single cause or person, but put a significant
portion of the blame for the disaster at the door of the police: ‘... the main reason for
the disaster was the failure of police control.’ (paragraph 278, interim report).

7.     He made 43 immediate recommendations. His final report in January 1990
made a further 76 recommendations. The developments which have taken place
since then in safety at sports grounds and in the policing of football matches have
been based largely on those recommendations.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90230# 1
                                                                                             2
8.      The second investigation was the inquest into the deaths conducted by the
coroner for the western district of South Yorkshire. The purpose of an inquest, as
determined by the Coroner’s Rules, is to establish the identity of the deceased; the
place of death; the time and date of death; and how the deceased came by their
deaths. The inquest jury examining the evidence found that the cause of death for
the Hillsborough victims was accidental death.

9.      The third investigation was conducted by West Midlands Police, supervised
by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
criminal proceedings. The investigation also considered whether any police officer
should be subject to disciplinary proceedings. That investigation involved the taking
of over 5000 statements, and scrutiny of all the material which had previously been
examined. The evidence was sent to the DPP, who concluded that no person
should be subject to criminal proceedings. The Police Complaints Authority decided
that the senior officers in charge on the day, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary charges for neglect of duty.
 Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health in advance of a disciplinary ruling. The
PCA later announced that disciplinary proceedings against Murray would be
withdrawn because the retirement of Duckenfield meant that what, in effect, was a
joint allegation of neglect of duty could not be fairly heard in the absence of the more
senior officer. Murray later left the police service.

 10.     The fourth investigation was a judicial review of the coroner’s
 proceedings. An application was made on the grounds that the coroner wrongly
 failed to direct the jury about the verdict of lack of care or accidental death due to or
 aggravated by lack of care relating to the negligence of the police which caused the
 disaster; that the coroner wrongly excluded evidence of lack of care by the
 emergency services, including the police, and wrongly insisted on a cut off point of
 3.15pm for the evidence, given that there was evidence that at least one of the
victims was alive after 3.15pm; and that pressure has been put on two witnesses to
 retract their evidence about those signs of life. Having considered the conduct of
the inquest, the divisional court ruled that none of the procedural or technical points
 raised justified the court’s intervention. In particular, the divisional court found that
the cut off point of 3.15pm was reasonable, and that the coroner’s directions to the
jury were impeccable.

Recent allegations

11.     The programme “Hillsborough” was a drama documentary which followed
three families through the disaster. A press release supporting the programme
claimed that it uncovered new evidence and identified ten unresolved questions. The
programme was followed by an adjournment debate, instigated by Peter Kilfoyle, on
17 December.        Mr Howard in response said that he would consider all the
representations and that ‘.... I must emphasise the fact that I would not take a
decision to re-open the inquiry lightly. I must be convinced that it would be in the
public interest to do so. The charge has been made - it is one that I will consider
carefully - that there has been a cover up, an attempt to pervert the course of justice.
I shall also consider whether there is any new evidence, and if so, whether that
evidence is of such significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or the
Coroner, either the outcome of the Taylor inquiry or the verdict of the jury would


::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                        3
have been different.’ (Hansard, cols. 861-2).The programme makers, the bereaved
families, local MPs, David Sheppard, the Bishop of Liverpool, and the Daily Mirror
have since been among those calling for the inquiry to be reopened. The issue has
generated 48 Ministers’ cases and 125 letters from the public, all but one of which
have been in favour of a fresh inquiry, plus about 700 printed cards supporting the
request.

12.   There have been three broad categories of evidence put forward in recent
months:

• ten allegedly “unresolved questions” identified in the Granada programme;

• other issues arising from the programme;

• further allegations put forward by the Hillsborough Family Support Group and the
  opinion which they have obtained from Alun Jones QC, that in his view “these
  new pieces of evidence call for a full police or public inquiry”.


The ten “unresolved questions”

13.    The chief constable has provided a detailed response to each question and
pointed to the recommendations that Taylor made in respect of each of the
questions. This is at Annex A - we have not included the supporting transcripts but
these are available. In examining this material we have not attempted to consider
whether the Taylor inquiry reached the “right” conclusion - nor have we pursued
every possible point of detail. We have sought to establish whether the Taylor
inquiry considered the questions raised; and whether the evidence put forward in
recent months was available at the time of the Taylor inquiry. We are satisfied that
none of the evidence raised is new and that all ten questions were addressed at the
time of the Taylor inquiry. In eight cases not only did the Taylor inquiry consider the
questions but made specific recommendations as a result.

Other allegations

14.      Unravelling the other allegations is more difficult. In the Granada press
release they took the form of loosely connected questions which suggested, though
did not overtly assert, that there had been a police cover-up. We also met members
of the Hillsborough Family Support Group in order to clarify their concerns; it
became clear that whilst their allegations were similar to those implied by Granada
they took a more extreme form. The families firmly believe that there was a
conspiracy by South Yorkshire Police, West Midlands Police, who conducted the
investigation into the disaster, and the Coroner, to minimise the role of the police in
the disaster. The families feel that, as a result of this conspiracy, evidence was
deliberately withheld from the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest, and that in the case of
the inquest, this led to the jury returning a verdict of accidental death when a more
fitting verdict would have been death due to lack or care, or even unlawful killing.

15.    The police were reluctant to accept any blame in the months after the
disaster, and were criticised by Taylor for that, although they have since accepted


::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                      4
their responsibility. We have seen, however, a continuing degree of defensiveness
from some South Yorkshire officers. It is possible to understand why the families
have come to the view that they have.

16.    There are two main strands to the case put forward by the Hillsborough
families and by Granada: first questions surrounding the video tapes; and secondly
the questions surrounding medical testimony - although the latter are more directly
relevant to calls for a new inquest rather than a fresh inquiry. Detailed consideration
of specific points is at Annex B. The Chief Constable ‘s assessment is at Annex C.
The opinion obtained by the Family Support Group from Mr Alun Jones QC is at
Annex D.

The “missing” video tapes

17.    Many of the allegations are focused around the video tapes recorded by
South Yorkshire Police. These have been subject to a number of
misunderstandings. The families have not yet seen the police video recordings in
their entirety; if these had been made available at the outset some of the concerns
which are now being expressed might have not have arisen.

 18.    There is confusion about two events. One set of tapes was stolen on the night
of the disaster; Richard Wells explains in his letter that in addition to the police
control centre within the ground, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had a video
 recording facility in a separate recording suite; this was under the supervision of the
Club and the police had no control of its operation. During the night of the disaster
two video tapes went missing from that particular room; the discovery of the theft
was recorded as a crime and West Midlands Police made enquiries to trace the
person responsible but were unsuccessful. These tapes are still missing. One of the
tapes would have shown a brick wall but the other would have shown the turnstiles
at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. Neither would have given a view of the
terracing. The Hillsborough Family Support Group believe that the tapes were
probably stolen by the police in the belief that they showed material which the police
believed to be damaging. South Yorkshire have told us that the police did not have a
key to the room and that they considered one motive for the theft could have been
that the tapes could have shown irregularities in the way that admissions were
handled at the turnstiles that could have implicated club employees. These missing
tapes have been confused by some commentators, though not the families, with the
video tapes held by South Yorkshire Police.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                      5
The police videos

19.    Granada suggested in their press release that the tapes held by South
Yorkshire Police might represent new material which had not been seen by the
Taylor inquiry. South Yorkshire have supplied these tapes and we can confirm that
for the most part they are of no consequence showing general views of the stadium
and surroundings. In the final half hour before the disaster occurred the recording is
almost entirely taken up with the turmoil outside the turnstiles. It does not show the
gross overcrowding in the central pens and does not prove therefore that the police
knew the extent of the overcrowding. In this respect the tapes cannot be said to
represent new evidence. Far from proving the culpability of the police, by showing
the extent of the chaos outside the ground, they could even be said to demonstrate
how it was that Duckenfield came to lose sight of what was happening elsewhere.

20.     The Hillsborough Family Support Group have a more sophisticated allegation
concerning the video material. They claim that it was withheld because it showed
that one of the police cameras - number 5 - was working when the police asserted
in evidence to Taylor and to the inquest that it was not. The significance of this
camera was that it could have been used to zoom in on the central pens to show the
extent of the distress experienced by the fans. It is clear that the video evidence,
including a detailed transcript of its contents, was made available to Taylor. The
inquest jury saw an edited version - the way this was handled has in itself given rise
to allegations which are discussed in Annex B.

21.     The extent to which the police claim camera 5 was not working is partly a
matter of interpretation. The families believe that PC Bichard, the police video
operator, misled the inquiry and the inquest, but our reading of the transcripts
suggests that he claimed the camera was not working very well; this continues to be
the police view.    This is a point on which our assessment differs from that put
forward by the police; we do not see any evidence that pictures from camera 5 were
any less clear than those from any of the other cameras. But we do not believe that
this divergence of view is significant.

Medical evidence and the inquest verdict

22.     The question of a fresh inquest is in law a matter for the Attorney General.
Under the Coroners’ Act 1988 the Attorney’s consent is required for an application to
the courts to order a fresh inquest. The families have also appealed to the Attorney
General to recommend a new inquest, proffering the testimony of Dr Ed Walker. He
claimed in an article in H ospital D octor that he tended Philip Hammond whom he
says was alive after 3.15. Dr Walker gave a statement at the time of the disaster. In
it, Dr Walker said of a boy whom now he believes to be Philip Hammond:

           “Whilst I and another doctor were treating Lee, the second victim arrived. He
           was o f a similar age (around 12-14 years) with blond hair. He was also in
           Cardiopulmonary /arrest. I intubated him and noticed evidence o f gross
           inhalation o f stomach contents. He also had marked gaseous abdominal
           distension possibly indicating that he had has mouth to mouth resuscitation at
           some time.


;:odma\meridio\edrm#90230#!
                                                                                       6
            I also established venous access and gave appropriate drugs. This boy was
            also established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but his pupils were fixed and
            dilated throughout, and I believe he has since died. ”

The statement, though arguably slightly ambiguous because it is not entirely clear
whether there was any heart beat when the boy arrived in casualty, did not appear at
the time to contradict the findings of the Home Office pathologist that the victims
were effectively dead by 3.15. Dr Walker was not called to give evidence to the
inquest because the consultant in charge, Dr James Wardrobe, presented a
composite picture.

23.     Although the Attorney is bound to consider any fresh applications for a new
inquest, evidence that some of the deceased may have survived beyond 3.15 has
not been considered sufficient grounds to reopen the inquests in the past. In the
judicial review of the coroner’s decision in November 1993, Lord Justice McCowan
found that in respect of one of the victims there was “a realistic probability" he was
alive after 3.15. but nevertheless concluded:

            “ I have discovered no good reason for ordering a new inquest or for merely
            quashing the existing verdict.

            If I had found such a reason and had to exercise my discretion the following
            matters would have weighed with me. What would be the purpose o f a fresh
            inquest? To get a verdict criticising the police. Such criticism has already
            been firmly levelled by the Taylor Report. The police have admitted fault and
            paid compensation. To get a verdict criticising the emergency services? I see
            no evidence to justify such criticism, and in any event it would be irrelevant if
            all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination o f the last
            minutes o f their lives. I doubt that anything more would be learned, but the
            process would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers o f witnesses
            and lasting if not for 96 days, for not far short. Moreover, irrespective of
            whose f a u l t , if anyone’s, it is , the fact is that four and a half years have
            already passed since the tragedy occurred. As to the alternative suggestion of
            a mere quashing o f the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would
            regard that as absolutely valueless".

24.       We believe that overturning the inquest verdict is what the families most
desire. We met Mr Trevor Hicks, who lost two teenage daughters, and Mr Philip
 Hammond who lost his fourteen year old son in the disaster. They agreed that
Taylor had done a good job, though they maintained that there were aspects of the
inquiry which needed to be looked at again. But they told us that they considered the
in q u e st v e rd ict to be a gross miscarriage of justice. They strongly criticised the
coroner’s selection of witnesses as well as the cut off time of 3.15 after which he
would not hear evidence. Their hope is that a fresh inquest might produce a finding
of death through “lack of care” or “unlawful killing”. It appears therefore that their call
for a fresh inquiry is not so much an end in itself but a means by which they hope
that the Attorney would consent to an application to reopen the inquest, or failing
that, a means by which the police might be held more directly accountable. If there



::odma\meridio\edrm#90230# 1
                                                                                            7
were to be a change in the verdict it is likely that there would be renewed pressure
from the families on the Director of Public Prosecutions to bring criminal charges.

Criminal charges

25.     The question of prosecution was considered by the DPP in 1989 but he
announced in September 1990 that the decision had been made not to prosecute
anyone in respect of the disaster. The CPS Code of Practice sets out the
circumstances when decisions to prosecute can be reconsidered. This includes
cases where there is new evidence, but the CPS stress that there needs to be a high
threshold in such cases because of the principle of finality - that people should be
able to rely on their decisions. Although new evidence could trigger a prosecution,
the CPS have found no evidence in the recent representations of any wrongdoing
that would in their view justify criminal charges. The most they believe that they have
found is that PC Bichard regarded the quality of the video recordings less
favourably than the Sheffield Wednesday video technician, Mr Houldsworth. A
report is currently under consideration by the DPP herself; the firm recommendation
is that the criminal investigations should not be re-opened.

Police disciplinary charges

26.    A further cause for bitterness among the families is that no disciplinary
charges were upheld against any members of the police. In addition to Duckenfield
and Murray, all other officers involved in the case have left the force 'with the
exception of PC Bichard who worked the video camera. Though it might be argued
that Bichard’s testimony may have demonstrated a gloss favourable to the police
position, his conduct, in our view, falls far short of being involved in a cover-up of the
kind suggested by the families.

Conclusion

27.    Our assessment is that there is no evidence to suggest that it would be in the
public interest to establish a new public inquiry.

28.    We recognise, however, that there is no likelihood that the families will
accept a Home Office assessment that there is no new evidence; they would see
such a decision as a further indication of the establishment sticking up for its own.
We have considered how to demonstrate objectivity and fairness. One option would
be to secure an independent assessment of all the material which has been
submitted in recent months. You may wish to consider asking a respected barrister
or member of the judiciary to carry out an independent assessment of the evidence
that has been compiled. This could be a limited exercise; but he or she could look
once more at the evidence that the families wish to have examined and consider
written representations. That would only go half way towards the full public re­
examination of events which the families want, so would not fully meet their
concerns.

29.    A further disadvantage is that it would keep the families’ hopes alive without
real justification. I would feel happier about an independent external review if I felt
that there were anything in the representations which, if substantiated, might


;:odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                         8
suggest that it would be in the public interest to convene a further public inquiry or
that such an inquiry might achieve more than the previous investigations. But we
have seen no such evidence. On balance, I would advise you to announce a
decision now that you do not intend to establish a new inquiry.

Handling

30.    You may want to discuss the issues. Whatever decision you reach we will
need to prepare carefully for the handling of an announcement, and we will put up a
further submission at the appropriate time discussing the handling in detail. We will
need to consider who will need to be informed and how this might best be done;
there are a number of separate interests involved: Parliament, the media, the
Hillsborough Family Support Group who have asked for prior warning of the
announcement, and the families who have made direct representations. We will
also need to take account of the separate roles of the DPP and the Attorney in
considering the grounds for criminal proceedings or a fresh inquest. Their distinct
statutory responsibilities mean that they may want to announce their decisions
separately.




                                    PAUL PUGH




::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                    9
                                                                             ANNEX B

Questions raised by Granada and the families

The police suggested that one of the cameras was not working ( presumably
to dissuade the inquiry from watching the tape) while the video technician Mr
Houldsworth testified that he had repaired the fault on the camera trained on
the Leppings Lane end of the pitch and it was working perfectly.

This is seen to be a crucial issue by the families. Mr Houldsworth has sworn an
affidavit to this effect. On the day of the match there were five cameras scanning
the ground linked up to five monitors. These monitors did not each record the
material they displayed; the recording took place on two further video recording
machines, which were linked to monitors and took place automatically unless the
officer controlling the video made a decision to record. PC Bichard who controlled
the videoing procedure explained in his testimony that one of the cameras had not
been working well but added “ the quality has been improved. It was not up to the
mark but it was a lot better than it had been . We were getting pictures that is the
best way o f describing it.” Therefore it is not true to say that the Taylor inquiry was
led to believe that the pictures from the camera were so defective that they were not
worth viewing.

In cross examination during the inquest PC Bichard maintained his view that the
camera was defective and that whist it could zoom in it was not possible to
distinguish facial expressions. However, we have examined the video tapes and
cannot distinguish any material difference in the quality of the recording which came
from camera 5 to that coming from the other cameras. This does not prove that
there was not a quality difference discernible to the police in the control box on the
day. It could be argued though that PC Bichard was putting a gloss on the evidence
in a way which he felt would be helpful to the police position. In that he was not
alone. Lord Justice Taylor commented adversely on the way that officers had been
defensive and evasive.

The inquest jury and the inquiry only had the police account of what could be
seen from the police control box on that day and the capabilities of the video
system. The faulty camera was never challenged.

South Yorkshire have sent us the two video tapes that were the product of their
recording as explained above. For most of the tape the recorded material shows a
sequence of 25 second shots from each of the five cameras. PC Bichard testified to
the Taylor inquiry that he was instructed by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield to
record the activity at the turnstiles which is where Duckenfield considered at the time
that the trouble was taking place. The video footage from 14.35 until about 15.00 is
mainly of this area. Later parts of the footage cover what was happening inside the
ground. A full schedule of the video footage and the tapes themselves were
available to the Taylor inquiry. The schedule would have been available to lawyers
representing the families at the time of the inquest.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                      10
South Yorkshire have been unable to ascertain whether the Taylor inquiry looked at
these tapes. The inquiry instead considered a compilation tape which was made by
West Midlands Police and contained the most relevant footage of the disaster taken
from a variety of sources, including material from the BBC, from the underwater
search team who had hand held camcorders as well as from the police monitoring
equipment.

The compilation tape, which was seen by Taylor inquiry, showed the overcrowding
in the central pens. The question of whether the camera could have zoomed in on
the crowd is a detail which does not appear to have been an issue to the Taylor
inquiry. The line of questioning pursued by the inquiry was rather that, whatever the
police claimed they had or had not seen, they should have anticipated the problem
of overcrowding. This is shown in the transcripts, for example, of Lord Justice
Taylor’s questioning of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield:

           “.   Mr Duckenfield, the trouble is we have got photographs. We have seen
           videos and it really is not any use you saying that. It is plain, is [it] not that by
           2.50 the two wing pens at the Leppings Lane end were pretty empty, whereas
           the two centre pens, if you won’t have them full, were getting on for being full.
           A. Yes sir.

            Q. You agree with that? It must therefore have been very important to ensure
            that there was no further crowding o f pens 3 and 4. A. That there were not
            more than the number to fit in comfortably be allowed into those pens?

           Q. Yes, and another 100 or so even on your perception would have put those
           pens at full. A. You are quoting numbers sir. I would say they were
           approaching being full.

            Q. Yes. Therefore they had reached on your view a critical stage in crowd
            control. There was going to come a time shortly when somebody would have
            to cut off the inflow into those pens. A. Yes sir. ”


The report was heavily critical of the police in the detail of the lack of planning and of
the decisions made at the time. It attributed to the police the major responsibility for
the disaster:

           “It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given
           excellent service to the public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively
           and successfully at a large number o f football games...Unfortunately their
           policing on 15 April broke down in ways already described and although here
           were other causes the main reason for the disaster was the failure o f police
           control.

           In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must
           report that for the most part the quality o f their evidence was in inverse
           proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables who as
           witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. By contrast with some notable
           exceptions the senior officers were defensive and evasive. Their feelings of


::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                             11
           grief and sorrow were obvious and genuine . No doubt those feelings were
           intensified by the knowledge that such a disaster had occurred under their
           management . But neither their handling o f problems on the day nor their
           account o f it in evidence showed the qualities o f leadership to be expected o f
           their rank. ”

Video tape shown to the inquest jury was badly duplicated and blurred so that
it wrongly appeared that individuals could not be identified.

This seems to have been an unfortunate misunderstanding. The Hillsborough Family
Support Group asked South Yorkshire Police for a copy of the material from camera
5 which was shown to the inquest jury. We have seen a copy of the tape that was
provided. This was indeed badly duplicated and blurred but South Yorkshire Police
say that the copy which was supplied to the jury which they still have was not badly
duplicated and blurred. Because of the degree of mistrust the families feel, they did
not question whether the poor quality of the video was for their copy alone but
assumed that this was what the jury had seen. South Yorkshire are sending us a
fresh copy of the version of the video which was seen by the inquest jury.

The compilation tape made by West Midlands deliberately included poor
material from camera no 5.

This allegation does not appear to hold water. The compilation tape was designed to
explain the disaster to the inquiry and in our judgement does so extremely
effectively. It does not appear to be attempting to cover anything up. The tape
covers the run-up to the disaster; the situation looks dangerous; there is evidence of
overcrowding. The most likely reason that material from camera 5 was not used is
that the BBC material was so much better. We do not see any evidence that
particularly poor material from camera 5 was included in the compilation tape.


Mr Houldsworth’s evidence was deliberately suppressed.

One of the questions which has been raised in connection with the renewed calls for
an inquiry was why Mr Houldsworth was not called to give evidence to the Taylor
inquiry. His statement would have been available to the Treasury Counsel who was
acting on behalf of Lord Taylor. The interim reports explains:

           “The witnesses called were only a small fraction o f those from whom
           statements were or could have been taken. Nevertheless , I am satisfied that
           they were sufficient in number and in reliability to enable me to make the
           necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from
           presenting an interim report in the required time and would not have added
           significantly to the relevant evidence. ”

The suggestion that police were involved in a cover-up

The central implication of the Granada programme is that the police were, and
continue to be, involved in a cover up about their conduct and the extent of the



::odma\meridio\edrm#90230# 1
                                                                                         12
negligence. This allegation is forcibly made by the Hillsborough Family Support
Group and appears in Alun Jones opinion in which he says:

           “One o f the most striking aspects o f this history is the way in which evidence
           presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to exculpate the South
           Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious questions arise
           as to the process by which evidence was selected by the West Midlands
           Police who assisted the coroner. ”

This ignores the crucial point that the purpose of an inquest is not to apportion
blame but to meet the statutory responsibility to determine the answer to three
limited questions - who the deceased was and when and where he met his death.

 It is certainly true that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield attempted to minimise the
extent of his responsibility in his testimony to the inquiry. But he was manifestly
unsuccessful in these attempts: criticism was not averted either about his
involvement or that of South Yorkshire Police as a whole. In the interim report Lord
Justice Taylor wrote:

           “It is a matter o f regret that at the hearing and in their submissions the South
           Yorkshire Police were not prepared to concede they were in any respect at
           fault in what occurred. Mr Duckenfield under pressure o f cross examination
           apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But that
           apart the police case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk and to
           blame the Club for failing to monitor the pens. It was argued that the fatal
           crush was not cause by the influx through gate C but was due to barrier 124a
           being defective. Such an unrealistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to
           whether lessons have been learnt. It would have been more seemly and
           encouraging for the future if responsibility had been faced”.

Houldsworth’s evidence contradicts that of the police in other respects.

PC Bichard claimed in evidence that the police recording of the CCTV cameras was
inadvertently changed to time lapse mode (producing a series of pictures rather than
continual motion) probably by him catching the machine with his knee when moving
positions within the control box. Mr Houldsworth stated that it was impossible to
switch recording modes when the machine is already running and that the relevant
buttons are so tiny that they are unlikely to be caught accidentally. It is hard, though,
to see any particular significance to this evidence, since the mode was changed
before the crucial events occurred and the machine continued to record the relevant
images.

Bichard is also said to have claimed that the pictures shown to the inquest jury were
‘greatly enhanced’ compared to those available to the police on the day.
Houldsworth indicates that the police monitors were 14 inches in size rather than the
12 inches claimed by Bichard and that the monitors were capable of showing the
same information as shown on the larger screens used at the inquest.           Again,
despite Houldsworth’s contradiction of Bichard’s evidence, it is impossible to attach
any significance to what amounts to a difference of opinion.



::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                         13
West Midlands Police were invited to conduct the investigation despite the fact
that force was subject to serious allegations involving the Serious Crime
Squad and Superintendent Beechey, said to be Deputy Head of the Serious
Crime Squad, was appointed as one of the investigation team.

The decision to call in West Midlands Police was taken by the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire Police, with the approval of the Police Complaints Authority and
Lord Justice Taylor. In his Interim Report, Taylor comments:

           “It was therefore decided that the investigation o f the disaster and the
           gathering o f evidence for this Inquiry should be conducted by an independent
           police force. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable o f West Midlands
           Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me;
           he appointed Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge
           o f the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both o f them”.

The PCA, who supervised the investigation, subsequently expressed its satisfaction
with the conduct of the investigation.

The responsibility for selecting the other officers on the investigation team would
have rested with Mr Jones. We understand from West Midlands Police that Mr
Beechey never, in fact, served on the Serious Crime Squad although his position
may have meant that he had certain supervisory responsibilities encompassing the
Squad. At the time of the Hillsborough tragedy, allegations had been publicised
about the Serious Crime Squad but it was not until 14 August 1989 that the Chief
Constable disbanded the squad and invited West Yorkshire Police to investigate the
allegations against it.

Other allegations raised by the Hillsborough Family Support Group included:

           • allegations that the coroner improperly relied on guidance from
             Superintendent Beechey of the West Midlands Police in his conduct
             of the inquest;

           • that the coroner chose to hear discredited evidence of drunken
             Liverpool supporters; and

           • that there has been no proper inquiry into the aftermath of the
             disaster. The Taylor inquiry considered the causes of the disaster and
             the inquest dealt with events up to the 3.15 cut-off point. The actions
             and decisions taken beyond that point, it is argued therefore, have not
             been publicly examined.

An inquest is an investigation of the facts by the coroner, and he is informed as to the
inquiries he should make by the information he obtains from relevant persons,
including the police. It is entirely a matter for the coroner to decide what evidence and
witnesses should be heard.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90230#l
                                                                                       14
Although the focus of the Taylor inquiry was on the causes of the disaster, its terms
of reference were ‘to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground
on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd control
and safety at sports events’. As such it was able to consider fully the actions of the
police and other emergency services at the ground throughout the relevant period.
Sections of the interim report dealt with what happened to deal with the disaster
after it occurred and the response of the emergency services.




::odma\meridio\edrm#90230# 1
                                                                                   15
