                                                                                                            \o )
                                  THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATIO'                                                           < r‘T ^ |C
                                                                LIMITED                                                                      i«* ***
                                                                                                                                                 ^
                                                                Founded 1863

                                                 Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                               President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                                                                                                     »fx-
                                                                                                                                five    i   h -
                                                   Chairman: K . S t . I . W i s e m a n

        Chief Executive:                                                                            Phone: 0171-402 7151/0171 262 4542
     R. H. G. K e l l y f c i s                                                                          Facsimile: 0171-402 0486




                                         16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW                                  >     '     ^    r

                         r h g k /p h /0 1 7                   Your Ref:                                         ^              :   *

                                                                                                           I               r r

          29 June 1998                                                                                      *V '       t
                                                                        "k;    '
                                                   A
          Rt Hon Jack Straw MP                 ^           ,                  4.       a,,.
                                                                                       .V                                       %

          Secretary of State
                                                                                                            P 'V '
          Home Office                                  -
                                               1
          50 Queen Anne's Gate
          London SW1
                                                                       ’

                                                                                   t
          Dear Secretary of State

          Hillsborough Representations

          I am enclosing for your information a copy of the response to David Mellor’s letter of
          9 June 1998, in which he asked specifically for the comments of The Football
          Association.

          Yours sincerely




ff        Chief Executive

          Dictated by Mr Kelly and signed in his absence




                   Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW. Incorporated in London. Registration Number 77797
                               THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                           LIMITED
                                                            Founded 1863

                                             Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                           President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                               Chairman: K . S t . J. W i s e m a n

   Chief Executive:                                                                             Phone: 0171-402 7151/0171 262 4542
R . H. G . K e l l y f c i s                                                                         Facsimile: 0171-402 0486




                                  16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW

   Our Ref:       rhgk/ph/016                             Your Ref:




 22 June 1998

 Rt Hon David Mellor PC, QC
 Chairman, Football Task Force
 Walkden House
 10 Melton Street
 London NW1 2EB


 Dear David

 Hillsborough Representations

 Thank you for your letter of 9 June, enclosing your letter to the Home Secretary.

 I am responding, as you request, to point four of your letter, but I have also taken the
 opportunity to add a few comments about other points which you raise.

Regarding point four, on which you have asked specifically for our views, there can be no
doubt, as you state, that the removal of perimeter fences has helped in the improvement of
the environment for spectators at football grounds in England.

It should be acknowledged, however, that their removal has led to other problems in relation
to the security of players and officials, leading to incidents such as those, for example, which
we witnessed last season at Barnsley and Everton. Whilst we should wish to see the removal
of remaining fences and the retention of fence-free stadia in the interests of safety, this has
to be kept under constant review to ensure that this is appropriate for crowd security in
England. This balance is at the heart of stadium management.

This is particularly pertinent when considering the rest of Europe and elsewhere. The UEFA
Guidance, quite rightly in our view, leaves the discretion to its member associations to apply
it as they deem appropriate in their country. Players’ and officials’ safety is vitally important
and more restraint may be required than is the case in England currently.




              Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW. Incorporated in London. Registration Number 77797
In any event, issues of crowd safety and security have to be seen in the context o f stadium
layout and design and general policing and stewarding policy. UEFA are making more and
more strides to ensure proper safety and security arrangements in all stadia. They have to be
encouraged to do this as quickly as possible, whilst taking into account practical constraints.

I would like to take the opportunity to address two other points in your letter.

First, as you state, I was certainly willing to speak to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s inquiry. On
reflection, however, I am convinced that any input which I might now provide, some nine
years after Hillsborough, would not constitute “new evidence”. I feel sure that the inquiry
would have called me at the time if it had felt it necessary to do so.

Second, it is our understanding that the legal issues arising from the Hillsborough safety
certificate have already been considered thoroughly during Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry.

I hope this input is helpful and remain available to answer any further questions which you
might have.

Kind regards

Yours sincerely




Chief Executive


cc.    Rt Hon Jack Straw MP, Secretary of State, Home Office
       Rt Hon Chris Smith MP, Secretary of State, Department for Culture, Media & Sport
       Tony Banks MP, Minister for Sport
