                                                   H   ome   O   ffic e

                                                  QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                   LO N DO N SWIH 9AT



Our Ref:   FEP/90 35/48/1
           ENT/80 477/19/1
                                                   2 9 JiN 1S90




In my reply of 14 December to your question about crowd safety
at the Middlesbrough v Leeds United match on 9 December last I
undertook to write to you about the incident which led to some
spectators sustaining minor injuries.

The incident occurred at around 3.30 pm when the pressure
caused by two crowd surges on the terraces in that section of
the ground allocated to Leeds supporters resulted in some of
the spectators at the front being pushed against the perimeter
fence.  The immediate reaction of police officers on the pitch
side of the perimeter fence was to pull out, over the fence,
those spectators at the front, especially children, so as to
release them from the pressure. At the same time the police
and stewards also moved into the crowd to help reduce that
pressure and to remove those people affected by it. The side
gates to the section were also opened to allow, by controlled
movement, spectators onto the pitch via adjacent "sterile"
zones.  These gates were manned by both police and stewards.

The incident itself lasted about two minutes.   Those injured
were treated initially on the( perimeter track.  The match was
held up for 17 minutes.  Fourteen spectators were taken to the
First Aid Room:  five (including three children) were taken to
hospital, two were treated for abdomen or chest injuries, one
for a lacerated hand, one for a swollen ankle and arm and one
for a minor sprain.  One ten year old was detained in hospital
for observation but discharged the following day.




                             /in common




Derek Fatchett Esq MP
In common with other football league grounds, normal crowd
control arrangements at the Middlesbrough ground include the
segregation of supporters. The relevant part of the ground
allocated to away supporters at Ayresome Park is the
South East Corner which at the time of the match was
authorised to hold 2108 spectators.  This figure reflected the
15% reduction recommended by the Hillsborough Inquiry in its
Interim Report.  As expected, the whole of the ticket
allocation had been taken up but a further 150 or so
Leeds United supporters had managed to obtain tickets for the
"home" terraces.  The presence of "away" supporters in this
part of the ground gave rise to concern that there could be
trouble between the rival fans.  The police concluded that
they would have to be relocated - either to the South East
Corner or to the North East Corner of the ground which,
because it is not intended to be used at all, contains no
amenities or facilities for spectators.  When the crowd surge
took place about 70 supporters had been moved, in stages, to
the South East Corner to which 2089 spectators were recorded
as having already been admitted.

Although this incident is not comparable with the tragedy at
Hillsborough it is nevertheless very disturbing to learn of an
incident of this kind so soon after Hillsborough.  A police
report and police video were sent to the Hillsborough Inquiry.
The Middlesbrough Football Club, the police and the local
authority have all taken the incident very seriously.   Clearly
the crowd control and safety arrangements at the ground did
not work as well as they should have done.  As you would
expect, those arrangements have been reviewed.  Further
measures have been taken in addition to those required to
implement the recommendations of the Inquiry's Interim Report.

Firstly, spikes on top of the perimeter fence (which caused
some laceration injuries to spectators lifted over the fence)
have been removed.  Consultants are being appointed by
Cleveland County Council.  Subject to their advice, additional
or extended crush barriers are to be installed and an exit
gate provided in the perimeter fence.  In the meantime the
spectator capacity of that section of the ground has been
reduced to 1000.

The police have decided that for future all ticket matches,
away supporters admitted to the home section of the ground
will not be relocated.  To help prevent such a breach of the




                  /segregation arrangements,
segregation arrangements, a requirement for spectators to have
club membership is to be extended to all parts of the ground
occupied by the home supporters.  Finally, Middlesbrough
Football Club are, I am told, resolved to introduce a phased
programme of work over the next two years with the object of
providing an all seater stadium.

I am arranging for a copy of this letter to be placed in the
Library of the House.  I am also arranging for copies to be
sent to the Chief Executive of the Cleveland Country Council,
the Chief Constable of the Cleveland Constabulary, and the
Secretary of Middlesbrough Football Club so that they are
aware of your interest and concern.




                         JOHN PATTEN
0
&
