                                                                                                                                     2 Park Lane
H a m m o n d S u d d a rd s                                                                                                         Leeds
                                                                                                                                     LS31ES
            S O L IC IT O R S                                                                                                        Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                                                     DX No. 26441
                                                                                                                                     Fax (0113)284 7001


 The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 The Hillsborough Scrutiny
 Room n 06
 50 Queen Anne’s Gate                                                                         I
 London
 SW1H 9AT



 Our Ref:                                                           Your Ref:                                                        Date:
 PCM.SB.MMI. 1-103                                                                                                                   20 January 1998


 Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith

 I am most grateful to you for the opportunity to comment on the section of your draft report dealing
 with my firm’s vetting of South Yorkshire Police officers’ statements before their submission to the
 West Midlands Police. I should say that I have consulted Mr. Michael Burton QC and the
 submissions which follow are based on his advice.

 By way of background I understand that there is no criticism of the fact that these statements were
 vetted. It is accepted by you that the Inquiry team, including Lord Taylor, were well aware that the
 statements were being vetted by solicitors and in some cases altered (para 12 draft report), that other
 parties to the Inquiry had statements vetted, or in some cases drafted, by solicitors (para 13) and that
 the removal of certain matters cannot be the subject of criticism (para 8).

 Given that it is accepted that vetting by solicitors was appropriate then the question arises as to the
 basis upon which any criticism can be made as to the manner in which it was carried out. The
 drafting or vetting of witness statements is a very uncharted area, in which I believe there are no
 reported decisions or authoritative conclusions, and this was all the more so the case in 1989, the
 time when my conduct falls to be judged. I would respectfully submit that any criticism of the actual
 vetting process ought to be made (if at all) by reference to appropriate Rules or guidelines for the
 preparation of statements.

  Whilst there are and were no specific rules promulgated by the Law Society, the Bar Council has
  helpfully produced, but only in 1997, guidance for members of the Bar when instructed to prepare or
  settle a witness statement for use in civil proceedings. I attach a copy for reference.

  I would readily accept that no lesser standards should apply to solicitors than to members of the Bar
  and respectfully submit that this is the Guidance which should form the basis for any judgment as to
  whether material was wrongly edited out of the self-taken statements of the officers. However, I
  would respectfully point out that as my own conduct is thus being tested by a retrospective
  Offices also at:
  7 Devonshire Square              Trinity Court                      Pennine House                  Suite 688 Lloyd’s                        Avenue Louise 250
  London                           16 John Dalton Street              39-45 W ell Street             One Lime Street                          1050 Brussels
  EC 2M 4Y H                       Manchester                         Bradford                       London                                   Belgium
  Telephone (0171) 655 1000         M60 8HS                           BD1 5NU                        EC.3M7HA                                 Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
  Fax(0171) 655 1001                Telephone (0161) 830 5000         Telephone (01274) 734700       Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399           Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
                                    Fax (0161) 830 5001               Fax (01274) 307239             Fax (0171) 621 1217

  A list o f Partners can be viewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                 2
                                                                                  20 January 1998
                                                    The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                        The Hillsborough Scrutiny

application of the Guidance and at a time when no such assistance was available, that it should not
be readily the subject of criticism.

Without wishing to put a gloss on the Guidance, I submit that the principles to be derived from it for
the purpose of considering the validity or otherwise of the editing process are as follows:

      (1)     The statement must accurately reflect a witness’s evidence, but exclude inadmissible
               hearsay, comment and argument.

      (2)     It should be succinct, exclude irrelevant material and unnecessary elaboration, and
               should not serve as a commentary on documents.

      (3)     It should contain all the witness’s evidence in chief: it should not be edited so that it
               no longer fairly reflects the answers which the witness would be expected to give in
               response to viva voce examination in chief

      (4)     No material should be excluded which might render the statement anything other than
              the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, e.g. by leaving in fact A while
               excluding fact B in such a way as to render untrue or misleading anything which
               remains in the statement

      (5)     The exclusion of unfavourable material, other than in such manner as to amount to a
              failure to comply with guideline 4, is a matter of judgment.

      (6)     It is permitted and appropriate to draw to a witness’ attention that what he proposes
               to say appears in conflict with other evidence, or may be found by a court difficult to
               accept, but if the witness maintains the evidence, then the guidelines in 1-5 above
               apply.

The context of the vetting was of course the convening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry and the request for
the provision of statements. However:

      (1)      The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire had no operational responsibility for
               investigating the events at Hillsborough. This had been passed to the West Midlands
               Police.

      (2)      There were at the time clear indications that there would be major civil proceedings
               arising out of the disaster and calls for, at least, disciplinary action against police
               officers. A Salmon letter had been delivered detailing a number of criticisms to be
               made of the police at the Inquiry. The first civil proceedings had been issued and
               served within a week of the disaster and one member of the public had made an
               attempt to persuade Sheffield Justices to issue warrants for the arrest of the Chief
               Constable and the directors of the football club on a charge of manslaughter. The
               application was refused but only after a formal hearing.
                                                                                                   3
                                                                                    20 January 1998
                                                      The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                          The Hillsborough Scrutiny

It was clear that any statement submitted to the Inquiry would be available in any subsequent
proceedings. In the circumstances I respectfully submit that there was a duty on the part of my firm
to consider these statements carefully and critically in the light of the principles referred to above, as
the statements, once served, would be bound to be used and available in and for the purpose of all
such proceedings.

I respectfully submit that in the light of the principles, and notwithstanding the one case where I do
believe that I may have made an error of judgment, the specific alterations or reconsiderations
suggested to the statements should not be subject to criticism. I propose to deal below with each of
the suggested alterations referred to in your draft report and also to those referred to by Chief
Superintendent Foster. The exception is the alteration in respect of PC Huckstepp. I have no record
of advising in relation to this officer’s statement (to which there is no reference in any of the letters,
copies of which you have seen) and I do not believe that I did so.

 Before dealing with those statements, I would wish briefly to refer to the one respect in which, in
your draft report, you make a criticism which does not relate to a specific statement, namely in para
15. I do not know if in forming your view of the legal advisers (who of course included Counsel as
well as solicitors) you have considered the question of any advice given to the client in relation to its
conduct of, and approach towards, the hearing, but without such consideration the comment seems
to me somewhat unfair.

I turn to the individual statements (for ease of reference I have taken the chronological order in
which the statements were vetted, by reference to my letters and the individual numbering there
used):-

(1)     Inspector White -10.5.89 - No 2.1

        The “Additional points arising” which I suggested should be removed amount to comment
        within item 1 of the Guidance as summarised above. Moreover it would not have been
        material covered by examination in chief (item 3).

(2)     PS Crawford -10.5.89 - No 2.2

        I respectfully submit that the suggestion of review of the comment about manpower was
        entirely justified. The comparative manpower available as between the 1988 and 1989
        semifinals and its deployment was a matter of record through the operational orders which
        had been made available to the Inquiry. The officer’s impressions could not add anything to
        these documents. In my submission this was both comment (iteml) and irrelevant (item 2). I
        am not as happy about the suggestion to review the reference to the serial at the centre
        tunnel. I would accept that this may have been either an error of judgment or simply an error,
        the latter being a possibility if I had mistakenly thought (as I may have done) that this was
        another witness mixing up the practice at League games with that at a semifinal (see (6)
        below and what in due course became the findings of Lord Taylor at paras 170 and 171 of
        his Interim Report). Even in this case I would point out that my recommendation was for the
        evidence to be reviewed and thus not necessarily altered. If I had added a comment of the
        type to be found at 1.12 (PC Parkin) in the same fax then I believe this would have been
                                                                                         4
                                                                          20 January 1998
                                            The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                The Hillsborough Scrutiny

satisfactory within item 6 of the Guidance but I accept that that comment was not expressly
added in this case as it could have been.

PC Walpole - 15.5 89- 10.2

I respectfully submit that what PC Walpole did not hear and the significance if any of that
non event can only have been a matter of comment covered by item 1 of the guidance or
irrelevant within item 2.. It was common ground at the Inquiry and found as a fact by Lord
Taylor (Interim Report paras 53 and 303) that radio communications on the day were both
difficult to make out and unreliable.

PC Groome- 15.5.89- 10.6

The reference to Control Room paralysis was plainly comment. PC Groome was not in the
Control box and again reached his conclusions on the basis of what he did not hear. Likewise
the reference to supervisory Officers on pp 4/5. One or more BBC cameras were
continuously focused on the pitch from the time that the game was stopped. There was no
room for argument as to who was or was not on the pitch. In relation to the other points
which are referred to by C/S Foster I think it fair to reproduce what is said in my letter of
advice:

“ The numbered paras o f comment beginning on page 5, are helpfulfrom our point o f view,
but not appropriate fo r inclusion in a statement o ffa ct ”

I respectfully submit that this was the correct approach in accordance with the Guidance.

This is a statement in respect of which in your draft report there was no criticism, but I
address it because comment is made upon it by C/S Foster.

PC Brookes - 15.5.89 - 10.10

I submit that his comments are a mixture of comment and argument, rightly excluded under
the item 1 of the Guidance. Further, his reference to “the sliding doors at the back of the
tunnel” indicated a lack of direct knowledge of what he was talking about: the doors at the
end of the tunnel were hinged and could never be safely closed whilst there were spectators
in Pens 3 and 4 because they swung inwards towards the pens and if closed, would render
emergency evacuation impossible.

C/I C reaser-23.5.89-20.8

The point which arose with this statement occurred a number of times. It had been explained
to me, I think correctly, that the practice of consecutive filling of pens was adopted at
League games where it was necessary to accommodate both visiting and SWFC supporters
in the Leppings Lane Terrace. This was done for reasons of segregation rather than safety:
the central pens could be left empty to allow a gap and a police presence between the rival
                                                                                         5
                                                                          20 January 1998
                                            The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                The Hillsborough Scrutiny

supporters. It was my belief that to leave this passage without comment was to risk raising a
red herring. My actual advice was:

“...I fe e l that the comment about the packing o f the pens on page 4 should either be
expanded to include detail o f when (in his experience) this had been done, or the entire
section dealing with this should be deleted. ”

I did not express a view as to which alternative was preferable nor was I consulted about the
course adopted.

PC Woodcock - 30.5.89 - 24.28

As there is no criticism of the changes from yourself or C/S Foster I would respectfully
submit that there is no need for any reference to be made to this statement, nor any response
for me to make.

PC Ramsden - 2.6.89 - 26.12

This statement does not appear in your draft report but only in C/S Foster’s letter. I believe
that the reference to the 1987 semifinal amounts to comment (iteml). Moreover it would not
have formed part of this witness’ evidence in chief (item3). As to C/S Foster’s note I am not
sure that his interpretation is correct, but in any event I did suggest in my letter that the
following sentences also amounted to comment, and if they had been removed the possibility
of error would not have arisen. Whether these sentences were left in because the officer
disagreed with my view or whether this was an oversight I do not know, for, as with all the
statements, after sending the letters I neither dealt with nor saw them again before they were
served.

I submit that the remaining deletions are plainly comment.

PC Eustis - 5.6.89 - 26.45

Although I accept that the statement about 1988 is factual there had been little or no
suggestion at the Inquiry that conditions at the 1988 semifinal had been as described by this
officer. It should be noted that by the time this statement was vetted the fans had already
given evidence to the Inquiry and conditions at the 1988 game had not been a significant
issue. In my submission it was properly excluded both as irrelevant (item 2) and as material
which would not form part of examination in chief (item 3).

PC Powell - 14.6.89-30.1

In relation to the police numbers this was a matter of record for the reasons stated in respect
of PS Crawford at (2) above. So far as the “cordon” was concerned this was phrased as
comment but more importantly it was not at all clear where the cordon is supposed to have
been. This would not have formed part of evidence in chief (item 3).
                                                                                                  6
                                                                                   20 January 1998
                                                     The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                         The Hillsborough Scrutiny

It is obviously a matter of considerable concern to me and my firm that you should have formed
provisional critical views of my performance in relation to the vetting of the statements and I very
much hope that what I say in this response will cause you to re-consider those views. However, I
would in any event respectfully submit the following:-

       (1)    If my conduct is to be criticised it must in justice be so criticised by being set against,
               and if appropriate found wanting against, a specified rule, regulation, requirement or
               standard. I do not believe I am suggested to have been in breach of contract or
               breach of duty to my client, and so I assume it is against a professional standard that I
              would have offended. As I have indicated, I hope and believe you will not consider
               that I have contravened any rule or fallen below any standard of conduct as a
               solicitor, but if such be in your view the case, I believe it to be only fair that you tell
               me in what respect I have in your view breached or fallen below such rule or
               standard, so that I can meet the case and so that if criticism is deservedly made
               against me, its nature can be fully understood by myself and others.

       (2)    I believe you will accept that it is inevitable that there will be a great deal of media
               and other reaction to your report and thus attention paid to any criticism of me and
               my firm. It is for that reason also that not only do I hope that you will be able to feel
               that no such criticism is justified, but also that if it be justified, the nature of the
               relevant breach can be specifically identified.

       (3)    I do believe that it is only by spelling out the rule or standard against which my
               conduct is being judged that it can be clearly concluded whether or not my conduct
               should be criticised or whether, for example if there were any error, it be an error of
               judgment.

        I would respectfully request that in reaching your final conclusions the following three points
        would also be of material significance:-

        (1)   On the basis of your provisional findings there is adverse comment to be made in
               relation to a maximum of seven out of over 400 statements which I considered.
               These statements were dealt with under intense pressure initially whilst preparations
               were being made for the Taylor Inquiry and thereafter whilst the Inquiry was
               underway. It was not a matter for delegation because of the need to try and maintain
               a consistent approach. If it is your finding that there were errors I would request that
               your report makes clear that they ought to be viewed in that context.

        (2)   On the basis of your draft findings (paras 16 and 17) no alteration to any statement
               made the slightest difference to the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry or any subsequent
               decision of the DPP or those looking into matters of police discipline. Again if there
               is a finding that errors were made I would request that any such finding be placed
               clearly in that context.

        (3)    In each of these cases the product of the vetting process was not a deletion or change
                made by me, but advice given in the letters, copies of which you have seen: such
                                                                                                  7
                                                                                   20 January 1998
                                                     The Right Honourable Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
                                                                         The Hillsborough Scrutiny

               advice, as can be seen from those letters, often invited review or in some cases
               offered the option of deletion or expansion and in many cases was not followed, no
               doubt after consideration of it. From that point of view also I would ask you to
               conclude that there has been no contravention of the principles underlying the
               Guidance.

I do hope that you will feel that if there are statements in respect of which no complaint is to be
made they can, like the other 390 or so, be simply omitted from your report; and I of course
particularly further hope that in the light of this response you will feel able to say that my conduct
should not be the subject of complaint. But if, after due consideration you still feel as you express in
para 14 of the draft report, I would invite you to consider whether that in your view amounts to an
error of judgment or to a specific allegation of breach of the (subsequently introduced) Guidance or
otherwise, and if so in what respect, namely so that I and others can understand what if any
complaint is being made against me; in either event I would ask you to give me notice so that I can
make further submissions in respect of any such specific findings.

Yours sincerely



P C METCALF




                                                                                mmi.001-0103.letl.2001.pcm. doc
: **   ■   .v. ■   ■'        . ./■> ’


                             P R E P A R IN G W IT N E S S ST A T E M E N T S FO R
                                      U S E IN CIVIL P R O C E E D I N G S
                                                      D E A L IN G S W ITH W IT N E S S E S

                                             GUIDANCE FOB MEMBERS O F THE BAR

                   Introduction.

                   1.         The purpose of this paper, which has the approval of the Professional Standards Committee of the General
                              Council of the Bar, is to offer guidance to member’s of the Bar instructed to prepare or settle a witness
                              statement and as to dealings with witnesses. Guidance already exists for practice in sdme Courts, notably
                              paragraph 3.7 of the Chancery Guide, Part XIV of the Guide to Commercial Court Practice and the Notes
                              to RSC Order 38 Rule 2A in the White Book, to which attention Is drawn. The intention is that this paper
                              should be consistent with that guidance.

  m                2.          This guidance is not applicable to criminal proceedings.         Attention is drawn to Annex H to the Code of
  ^                            Conduct.



                   Witness statements

                   3.          The cardinal principle that needs to be kept in mind when drafting or settling a witness statement is that,
                               when the maker enters the witness box, he or she will swear or affirm that the evidence to be given will be
                               the truth, the whale truth and nothing but the truth. In rtiost civil trials almost the first question in chief (and
                               not infrequently the last) will be to ask the witness to confirm, to the best of his belief, the accuracy of the
                               witness statement. It is therefore critical that the statement is one that accurately reflects, to the best of
                               Counsel’s ability, the witness's evidence.

                    4.          Witnesses often misunderstand the function of those drafting and settling witness statements.            The
                                function of Counsel is to understand the relevant evidence that a witness can give and to assist the witness
                                to express that evidence in writing. It is important it is made clear to the witness (by reminder to the
                                professional client or the witness, if seen by Counsel) that the statement once approved is the witness's
                                statement. Ultimately K is the witness’s responsibility to ensure that the evidence he gives is truthful. It is
       A                        good practice to remind witnesses expressly of this from time to time, especially where Counsel is putting
                                forward a particular piece of drafting for the witness* consideration (which is expressly permitted by the
                                 proviso to Rule 606 of the Code of Conduct).

                        5.        It is not Counsel's duty to vet the accuracy of a witness’s evidence1. W e all may doubt the veracity of our
                                  clients and witnesses occasionally. Counsel is, of course, entitled and it may often be appropriate to draw
                                  to the witness's attention other evidence which appears to conflict with what the witness is saying and is
                                  entitled to indicate that a Court may find a particular piece of evidence difficult to accept. But If the witness
                                  maintains the evidence, it should be recorded in the witness statement. If K is decided to call the witness,
                                  it will be for the Court to judge the correctness of the witness’s evidence.

                        6.         It follows that the statement:

                                   (i)   Must accurately reflect the witness’s evidence. Rule 606(d) of the Code of Conduct stales:

                                               “ A practising barrister must not devise facts which will assist in advancing his lay client's case
                                               and must not draft any ... affidavit [or] witness statem ent... containing:
                                                (d)   in the case of an affidavit or witness statement any statement of fact other than the
                                                      evidence which in substance according to his instructions the barrister reasonably
                                                      believes the witness would give if the evidence contained in the affidavit or witness
                                                      statement were being given viva voce-,
                             Provided that nothing in this paragraph shall prevent a barrister drafting a [n ja ffid a v it or witness
                             statement containing specific facts matters or contentions included by the barrister subject to the lay
                             client’s confirmation as to their accuracy.”

         (ii)          Must not contain any statement which Counsel knows the witness does not believe to be true. Nor should
                       the witness be placed under any pressure to provide other than a truthful account of his evidence.

         (iii)         Must contain all the evidence which a witness could reasonably be expected to give in answer to those *           ;s:
                       questions which would be asked of him in examination in chief. The witness statement should no! h e ,;-
                       drafted or edited so that 'it no longer fairly reflects the answers which the witness would
                       in response to viva voce examination-lrvchief in accordance with the witness s oath or affirmation.
                       Although it is not the function of a witness statement to answer such questions as might be put in cross-
                       examination, great care should be exercised when excluding any material which is thought to be unhelpful
                       to the party calling the witness and no material should be excluded which might render the statement
                        anything other than the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth. While it is permissible to confine
                        the scope of exam ination-in-chief to part only of the evidence which a witness could give, th a t is always 1
                        subject to Counsel’s overriding duty to assist the Court in the administration of justice and not to decewe
                        or knowingly or recklessly to mislead the Court (Rule 202 of the Code of Conduct). Consequently, it would
                        be improper to exclude material whose omission would render untrue or misleading anything .which
                        remains in the statement, tt would also be Improper to include fact A while excluding faqt fl, if evidence-
                        in-chief containing fact A but excluding fact 8 could not have been given consistently wfrr the w itn e s s ^
                         prom ise To MB the truth, the whole trUth and nothing but the truth. W hether it is wise aridln the d « e r *
                         interest in any given case to exclude unfavourable material which can properly b e excluded is a matter of
                         judgment.

          (iv)           Save lor formal matters and uncontrovereial facts, should be expressed as far as reasonably Practical in
                         the witness’s own words. This is especially important when the statement is dealing with the critical
                         factual issues in the case - e.g. the accident or the disputed conversation. Thus the statement should
                         reflect the witness’s own description of events. It should not be drafted or edited so as to massage.or
                         obscure the Witness’ real evidence.

           (v)           Must be confined to admissible evidence that the witness can give, including permissible hearsay.
                         Inadmissible hearsay, comment and argument should be excluded.

            (vi)         Should be succinct and exclude irrelevant material. Unnecessary elaboration is to be avoided H 'snot
                         the function of witness statements to serve as a commentaiy on the documents in the trial bundles. Nor
                         are they intended to Serve as another form of written argument.

7           Sometimes it becomes apparent, after a witness statement has been served, that the witness's reoolledipn I j s
            altered This may happen When the witness sees how another witness puts the facte in a witness s ta te m ®
            served by another party. Where Counsel learns that the witness has had a material change of ,recoOac*ion this
            should be recorded in an additional witness statement to be served on the other parties. W here this is m *
            possible because ft occurs veiy shortly before the witness is to be called, the other part.es should be informed
                                          in chief before the truth of its contents is established. It would ^ ^ r o p e r o r the
            other side to be kept in the dark as to a material change in the witness’s evidence especially when settlement
                negotiations are taking place.



    Formalities

    8.           A witness statement:

                 (i)      Should be expressed in the first person;

                 fin      Must state the full name of the witness and, unless there is a good reason for omitting rt, the B e s s ’s
                 °°       r e s S e iS address or, where the statement is made in a professional, business or other occupation^
                            capacity, the address at which, he works, the position held and the name of the firm or employer. W
                            there is said to be a reason for omitting the witness’s address, the reason should be given.

                 (iii)     Must state the witness's occupation (if any);
     ftv)   Must state if the witness is a party to the proceedings or has a connection with any party - e.g. is an
            employee Or a relative;    j

     (v)    Should be in chronological sequence divided into consecutively numbered paragraphs;

     (vi)   Must include a statement by the witness that the contents are true to the best of his/her knowledge and

            be,ief:
     (vii) Except for good reason (which must be stated) must be signed by the witness;

     (viii) Must be dated.



Dealings with Witnesses
Counsel seeing witnesses2.

9.   The old rules preventing Counsel from seeing a witness, other than the client, have been progressively related
     over recent years. The current position in civil proceedings can be summarised as foliows:

     (i)     There is no longer any rule which prevents a barrister from having contact with any witness. Indeed, in
&           taking witness statements and generally, it is the responsibility of a barrister, especially when the witness
™           is nervous, vulnerable or apparently the victim of criminal or similar conduct, to ensure'ihat those facing
             unfamiliar court procedures are put as much at ease as possible.

     (ii)   Although there is no longer any rule which prevents a barrister from having contact with witnesses, a
            barrister should exercise his discretion and consider very carefully whether and to what extent duch
            contact is appropriate, bearing in mind in particular that it is not the barrister’s function (but that of his
            professional client) to investigate and collect evidence.

     (Hi)   The guiding principle must be the obligation of Counsel to promote and protect his lay client’s best
            interests so far as that is consistent with the law and with Counsel’s overriding duty to the Court (Code of
            Conduct paragraphs 202, 203). Often it will be in the client’s best interests that Counsel should meet
            witnesses whose evidence will be of critical importance in the case, so as to be able to foim a view as to
            the credibility of their evidence and to advise the lay client properly;

     (iv)    A barrister should be alert to the risks that any discussion of the substance of a case with a witness may
             lead to suspicions of coaching, and thus tend to diminish the value of the witness’s evidence in the eyes
             of tiie court, or may place a barrister in a position of professional embarrassment, for example, if he
             thereby becomes himself a witness in the case. These dangers are most likely to occur If such distusSior)
             takes place:

             (a)      before the barrister has been supplied with a proof of the witness's evidence; or

             (b)      in the absence of the barrister's professional client or his representative.

      (v)    Rule 607 of the Code of Conduct provides that a barrister must not rehearse practise or coach a witness
             in relation to his evidence or the way in which he should give it. This does not prevent Counsel giving
             general advice to a witness about giving evidence e.g. speak up, speak slowly, answer the question, keep
             answers as short as possible, ask if a question is not understood, say if you cannot remember and do hot
             guess or speculate. Ndr is there any objection to testing a witness's recollection robustfy to ascertain the
             quality of his evidence or to discussing the issues that may arise in cross-examination. By Contrast, mock
             cross-examinations or rehearsals of particular lines of questioning that Counsel proposes to-follow are hot'
             permitted. What should be borne In mind is that there is a distinction, when interviewing a witness,
             between questioning him closely in order to enable him to present his evidence fully and accurately dr.in
             order to test the reliability of his evidence (which is permissible) and questioning him with a view to
             encouraging the witness to alter, massage or obscure his real recollection (which is not). THe distinction
             was neatly drawn by Judge Francis Finch in In Re EtdridgeP in 1880. where he said:

                      "While a discreet and prudent attorney may very properly ascertain from witnesses In advance of
                    the trial what they in fact do know and the extent and limitations of their memory, as guide for his
                    own examinations, he has no right legal or moral, to go further. His duty is to extract the facts from
                    the witness, not to pour them into him; to learn what the witness does know, not to teach him what
                    he ought to know.”

             At the risk of stating the obvious, this is a difficult area calling for the exercise of careful judgment.

     (vi)    A barrister should also be alert to the fact that, even in the absence of any wish or Intention to do so,
             authority figures do subconsciously influence lay witnesses. Discussion of the substance of the dase
             may unwittingly contaminate the witness's evidence.

     (vii)   There is particular danger where such discussions:

             (a)    take place in the presence of more than one witness of fact; or

             (b)    involve the disclosure to one witness of fact of the factual evidence of another witness.

             These practices have been strongly deprecated by the courts as tending inevitably to encourage the’
             rehearsal or coaching of witnesses and to increase the risk of fabrication or contamination of evidence:
             R. v. A rif{\ 993) May 26; Smith New Court Securities Ltdv. Scrimgeour Vickers (Asset Management) Lltf
             [1994] 1 W LR 1271.

     (viii) That is not to suggest that it is always inappropriate to disclose one witness’s evidence to another. If
            conflicting witness statements have been obtained from1different witnesses or served by the other side, ■
            it is almost inevitable that a witness’s attention must be drawn to discrepancies between statements.
            Discretion is. however, required, especially where the evidence of independent Witnesses Is involved.

     (ix)    Whilst ihere is no rule that any longer prevents a barrister from taking a witness statement in civil cases,
             there is a distinction between the settling of a witness statement and taking a witness statement. Save
             in exceptional circumstances, it is not appropriate fo ra barrister who has taken witness Statements, as
             opposed to settling witness Statements prepared by others, to act as Counsel In that case because it'
             risks undermining the independence of the barrister as an advocate. Exceptional circumstances would
             include:

             (a)    The witness is a minor one;

             (b)     Counsel has no choice but to take the proof and this is the only practical course in the interests
                     of justice - this would apply, for instance, where a witness appears unexpectedly at Court and
                     there is no one else competent to take the statement;                                            ^

              (c)    Counsel is a junior member of a team of Counsel and will not be examining the witness.

              The Cab Rank rule does not require a barrister to agree to undertake the task of taking witness
              statements.

      (x)     A barrister should be prepared to exchange common courtesies with the other side's witnesses.
              However, a barrister should only discuss the substance of the case or any evidence with the other side.’s
              witnesses in rare and exceptional circumstances and then only with the prior knowledge of -his
              opponent.




'   If para 3.6(7) of the Chancery Guide suggests otherwise, the PSC respectfully disagrees.
2 This is largely taken from Annex H as recently amended by the Bar Council and approved by the Lord Chancellor's
  A dvisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct and the designated judges.
3   New York Court ofAppeals; 3 7 N Y 161, 171
