 From: M J Pyne                                            cc   Mr O’Brien
       O perational Policing                                    Mr Boys Smith
       Policy Unit                                              Mr Pugh
       Room 528, QAG                                            Mr Edmundson
       » 273 2433                                               Mr Granatt
     10 July 1997                                               Mr Warner
                                                                Mr Owen

 M r Michael

 HILLSBOROUGH: CORRESPONDENCE FROM THE ASSISTANT CH IEF
 CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE

Issue


How to respond to a letter from Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire, to Ms Quin about the calls for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.
Mr Daines also suggests a meeting to discuss the matter further.

Timing

2.      Routine.

Recommendation

3.    That you reply along the lines o f the attached draft, declining his offer of a
meeting.

Consideration

4.     Mr Daines was stationed in Gateshead from 1991-94, and would have met Ms
Quin in an official capacity during that time.

5.    Subsequent to Mr Daines’ letter, the Home Secretary announced the
independent scrutiny into the disaster to be carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
We can expect Mr Daines to be fully up to date with developments. The
announcement o f the scrutiny renders his request for a meeting unnecessary at this
time.

Handling

        There are no additional handling considerations.




                                      M JPY N E
Thank you for your letter o f 15 May to Joyce Quin about the calls for a new inquiry
into the Hillsborough disaster. This issue falls within my remit at the Home Office
and I am, therefore, replying.


As you will be aware, the Home Secretary announced on 30 June that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith is to conduct an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there exists
any new and significant evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough football
stadium which was not previously available.


I am grateful for your offer to meet and discuss the events at Hillsborough. At the
moment, however, you will understand that these are issues for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to consider in his scrutiny.
                                                                                             a sA
                  S o u th Yorkshire
                  POLICE                                             Ian Daines,          BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
                                                                              Assistant Chief Constable
                  JUSTICE      with    COURAGE

                                                                                                                    y-r-
                                                          IV P-
                                                                -<■} <■                                   ,-V ^ ‘
                                                          Qr,
                                                                                                                  Or A-
    Ms Joyce Quin                                                                Ref: ACC(L&T)/NMH
    MP for G ateshead E ast and W ashington West
    Constituency Offices 1A                                                     (15 May 1997
    Collingwood S treet
    Felling
    GATESHEAD
                                                                                           HMOC
    NE10 9NA
                                                (-tar—                    W                                 .




*   D ear Joyce                                           ^■K      12
                                                                                  n
                                                                                  /
                                                                     Yc
    Congratulatipns on your appointm ent as M inister o fS ta ie with special responsibility for
    Prisons, Probation and Europe. You will recall we hacl a num ber of interesting
    conversations about topics of the day when I was stationed a t Felling and later
    G ateshead (1991-1994). Obviously both of our careers have developed since then and I
    am now enjoying m yself immensely in South Yorkshire.

    Since I came to South Yorkshire in July 1996 I have been struck by the extent to which
    the Hillsborough tragedy of April 1989 is still an issue. There are calls for a fresh
    enquiry into the events th a t led to the deaths of 96 people. I attach a Press Release th a t
    I made la st week on the occasion of a pop concert in Liverpool which was organised to
    raise funds to press for a fresh enquiry. The South Yorkshire Police Service’s view is
    sum m arised in th a t Press Release. I appreciate th a t this issue is not specifically w ithin
©   your portfolio b u t I would welcome the chance to discuss these issues w ith you and/or
    your m inisterial colleagues. The Chief Constable, Richard Wells, will be contacting the
    Home Secretary in a sim ilar vein

    If I can be of any assistance in providing a policing perspective on any of the topics in
    which you are now engaged, please do not hesitate to contact me.

    Yours sincerely




    Ian Daines
    A ssistant Chief Constable




                  Police Headquarters
                  Snig Hill
                                                                                      Direct line: 0114 2523405
                  Sheffield S3 8LY
                  Tel: 0114 276 8522 Fax: 0114 252 3243
                  POLICE
                  JUSTICE        with    COURAGE




 ON AN "IF ASKED" BASIS                                                                           9 May 1997


               South Yorkshire Police reaction re: “ Hillsborough Justice C oncert”


Assistant Chief Constable Ian Daines has given the following reaction to tomorrow’s
concert to raise funds for the Hillsborough Family Support Group:
          \.
“South Yorkshire Police have, for many years, accepted our part of the blame for what
went wrong on the day of the tragedy. The Chief Constable has personally apologised
for our errors and has repeated that on many occasions.                                                            I


“The inquest and Lord Justice Taylor’s enquiry into the disaster looked in detail at what
went wrong and apportioned blame accordingly.                         Since then, we believe that no new
evidence         has    come      to    light.    However,      the    Crown      Prosecution       Service      are
independently evaluating claims that new evidence has been brought forward and they
will be issuing their own statement on their findings in the near future. Until they make
their announcement, it would be inappropriate for us to comment, in detail about such
claims.


“Each time the memory of the events of 15 April 1989 is revived - whether by a
television drama, by press articles or events such as tomorrow’s concert - it has the
effect of retraumatising all of the people who were involved on that day. W hether they
want to or not, they are forced to remember things they may have wished to put behind
them.”


end.




                 P re ss & Public R elations Dept.,                    FOR F URT HE R I NFORMATI ON CONTACT
                 Police H e a d q u a r t e r s ,                        Gillian Radcliffe, Head of Press & PR
                 S n i g H i l l , S h e f f i e l d S3 8 LY.
                 Te le ph o n e : 0742 768522                          T E L E P H O N E ^ 8150
