   CENTRE FOR STUDIES IN CRIME AND SOCIAL JUSTICE


           EDGE HILL UNIVERSITY COLLEGE




INDEPENDENT SCRUTINY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
      CONDUCTED BY LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH




           Preliminary Submission inc Attachments




        Professor Phil Scraton PhD, MA, AdvDipEd, BA
                   The Hillsborough Project


                              and


                        Centre Director
         Centre for Studies in Crime and Social Justice
                  Edge Hill University College
              ORMKSIRK, Lancashire L39 4QP


                Tel:
                Fax:
                Em:
Background

The Hillsborough Project was established in 1989 as an independent research study
into aspects of the disaster’s aftermath. Initially its remit focused on the conduct of
and relationship between the three main inquiries [Home Office; Police; Coroner] and
on the intensive and extended media coverage. Important here were not only
questions of the adequacy or appropriateness of the inquiries, and the form that they
took, but also the implications of the media coverage for the legal processes and their
outcomes. Soon after the Project’s work began bereaved families and survivors of the
disaster made contact. From that point the bereaved and survivors have been
interviewed thus providing the research with unique insights into the formal
procedures which have marked the long-term aftermath.

The early stages of the Project were supported by grants from the Liverpool City
Council although the research retained its independence; its direction, emphases,
analysis and publication being solely a matter for the Project team. The continuing
work of the Project has been supported internally at Edge Hill University College.
From 1995 more expansive research into disasters and their aftermaths has been
supported by a Home Office grant. The Hillsborough Project published its First
Report, Hillsborough and After: The Liverpool Experience, in 1990. This Report
provided an early evaluation of the Home Office Inquiry, a critical review of the
initial media coverage and, for the first time, told the story of the immediate
aftermath.

The Second Report, No Last Rights: The Denial o f Justice and the Promotion o f Myth
in the Aftermath o f the Hillsborough Disaster, was published in 1995. It included a
close account and analysis of the ‘mini-inquests’, the ‘generic’ inquests and the
judicial review, as well as extensive research into the longer-term role of the media. It
made over ninety recommendations. Subsequent research widened the scope of
disasters studied and has been completed. It was presented to the Home Office in July
 1997: Beyond Disaster: Identifying and Resolving Inter-Agency Conflict in the
Immediate Aftermath o f Disasters.

Initial Submission

It is apparent from the terms of reference governing the independent scrutiny, and
issued by the Home Secretary on 30 June 1997, that the focus is tightly drawn with
regard to evidence which might exist but had not been made available to previous
inquiries. Further, it seems that the potential for a public inquiry or for “other action
which should be taken in the public interest” is circumscribed by the presentation of
evidence not previously available. Because of restrictions on the disclosure of
evidence, however, together with the hidden dynamics surrounding selectivity
(particularly concerning the Home Office Inquiry and the Inquests), it is not a
straightforward task to establish the status of evidence as ‘new’. After eight years and
five months many bereaved families are only now receiving evidence (statements and
photographic) which is ‘new’ to them. As with other evidence accessed by the
Hillsborough Project, some of this evidence is contradictory, conflicting, contestable
or raises doubts about accounts previously given and in the public domain.
«




    All along the Hillsborough Project’s research has demonstrated that the issue is not
    simply one of ‘new’ or additional evidence, but also concerns the ‘quality’ and
    availability of existing evidence. The Project has raised vital questions of adequacy
    and appropriateness concerning the inquiries, their conduct, their limitations and their
    relationships. Particularly significant here is the question of ‘independence’, given
    that all three inquiries were served and serviced by the same investigating police
    force. Further, it has become clear that with no right of disclosure of statements taken
    in the course of the investigations, bereaved families and their lawyers were deprived
    of the means to examine their potential significance. The evidence which came into
    the public domain, through Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry or through the inquests, was
    selective and the criteria used in the process of selection have never been disclosed.

    Lord Justice Taylor found that the “real cause” of the disaster “was overcrowding”
    and that the “main reason” was “the failure of police control” [Interim Report: paras
    311 and 278]. Significantly, Lord Justice Taylor also apportioned lesser responsibility
    to other agencies involved. This apportionment was reflected in the in camera
    compensation settlements. However, to the lay person, the admission of liability in
    negligence by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire sits uneasily alongside the
    eventual verdicts of accidental death, the ‘insufficiency’ of evidence to prosecute and
    the failure, for whatever subsequent reasons, of the South Yorkshire Police to initiate
    disciplinary proceedings.

    The concerns of the Hillsborough Project go beyond these issues. Criticisms of the
    role and performance of the South Yorkshire Police before and on the day, about the
    condition and safety of the Leppings Lane end of the ground (the outside concourse
    approach to the turnstiles; the turnstiles; the tunnel; the pens on the terraces) and
    about the management of the crowd (the failure to police the approach effectively; the
    lack of organisation outside the ground; the flawed crowd management inside; the ad
    hoc rescue and evacuation procedures) have been compounded by the conduct of the
    investigations into the disaster, the decisions neither to prosecute nor to discipline
    senior officers, the limitations of the Home Office Inquiry and the inadequacy of the
    inquests.

    From the published research, and that which has emerged since the publication of No
    Last Rights, the case for a further public inquiry is compelling. It is felt that a limited
    criminal investigation, however appropriate, or a review of the inquests and their
    verdicts, however legitimate and necessary, would be too restricted in scope. A full,
    systematic inquiry should include full disclosure of all statements and of the processes
    adopted and the criteria employed in the taking of statements and their selection for
    use at the Home Office Inquiry and the Inquests. It should consider events prior to the
    disaster, its context and its circumstances. It should pay particular attention to the
    failure to anticipate or recognise the unfolding disaster and to the adequacy of the
    rescue and evacuation response. It should consider the medical attention provided
    after 3.15 pm on the pitch, in the concourse areas, in the gymnasium and at the
    hospitals. It should provide as full an account as possible of the precise circumstances
    in which each person died and provide the bereaved with the opportunity to have their
    previously unanswered questions addressed and to cross-examine evidence directly
    concerned with the deaths of their loved ones. It should consider the treatment of the


                                                2
bereaved and survivors in the immediate aftermath. It should examine the conduct of,
and procedures adopted by, the police-led investigations. It should inquire into the
criteria used in the selection of witnesses and the prioritising of their evidence. It
should address the serious anomalies of the Inquests.

While some of these issues are evident from the research already published, others
have arisen from more recent work yet to be published. Specific concerns are:

•      the circumstances in which the previous match commander was relieved of his
       duties and the appropriateness of the decision to replace him with a senior
       officer inexperienced in such duties given the high profile and complex nature
       of the fixture

•      the inconsistencies in police evidence to the Taylor Inquiry and to the inquests,
        raising the possibility that certain officers made, at best, inaccurate
        assumptions concerning their actions

•      the procedures adopted by investigating officers in the taking of statements,
       particularly from police officers, and the process through which some of these
        statements were eventually constructed

•      the lack of disclosure of statements and the criteria used in the selection of
       witnesses

•      the decision not to call Roger Houldsworth (video technician) to the Taylor
        Inquiry or to the inquests and the questions which have emerged over video
        evidence

•      the range of claims that witnesses were subjected to pressure in giving their
        statements

•      a review of the evidence relating to the ‘late’ arrival of Liverpool supporters at
       the stadium particularly focusing on their delayed arrival in Sheffield, the
       police briefings and their escort to the stadium

•      consideration of the police operational order concerning crowd control and
       monitoring of public houses and its relationship to police evidence, presented
       under oath at the inquests, of widespread unruly and drunken behaviour

•      examination of the overwhelming evidence that many who died were alive at
       3.15 pm and that the Coroner’s imposition of the 3.15 ‘cut-off on evidence
       led to the circumstances in which they died not being considered at the
       inquests

•      the reliability of ‘expert’ medical evidence, particularly the apparent conflation
        of traumatic asphyxia and crush asphyxia, its significance on the Coroner’s
        3.15 pm cut-off ruling and its implications for the eventual verdicts



                                           3
*
    t



        •      the implications, consequences and appropriateness of the decision taken by
               the Coroner or the South Yorkshire Police (or both) to take blood alcohol
               levels of the deceased, including children

        •      the unprecedented use of ‘mini-inquests’ and the use of West Midlands Police
                investigators’ summaries which effectively denied the bereaved the
                opportunity to cross-examine statements concerning the circumstances in
                which their loved ones died

        •      the Coroner’s direction that an accidental death verdict could encompass
                “carelessness, negligence, to a greater or lesser extent” (Inquest Transcripts 21
                March 1991 p63) and its significance in moving the jury towards such a
                verdict

        •      the appropriateness of accidental death verdicts, however permissive their
                scope of definition, when set against successive judgments and informed
                opinions concerning police liability

        •      clarification of the concept of ‘insufficiency’ of evidence used in the DPP’s
               decision not to prosecute senior officers and its relationship to the later-
               disclosed PCA decision that such officers should face disciplinary charges

        These specific issues demonstrate the extent of the problems associated with the
        investigation of the Hillsborough disaster and raise serious questions over systemic
        obstacles to full and open inquiry. The only conclusion to be drawn is that unless
        these issues are fully addressed the bereaved, the survivors and many of those
        involved with rescue and evacuation on the day, will continue to endure the
        uncertainties, myths and untruths which have dominated the aftermath.

        This represents a preliminary submission. It is by no means exhaustive and many
        families have their own concerns which are specific to the deaths of their loved ones,
        the quality of evidence received and recent anomalies emerging from current
        disclosures of evidence. In terms of the issues raised in this submission detailed
        accounts can be given. One concern, however, is that some of the verbal evidence
        which has been crucial to the research might prove difficult to bring before the
        Independent Scrutiny.




                                                   4
