                                                                                      /VU,
                                          •i                           H o m e O ffice
                                                                      QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                      L O N D O N SWIH 9 AT




                 42 2J£                      Hi      fru*..


                C J Anderton Esq CBE CStJ QPM CBIM                        273 2746
                Chief Constable
                Greater Manchester Police
                PO Box 22 (S West PDO)
                Chester House
                Boyer Street
                MANCHESTER Ml 6 ORE                             T6 February 1990




                                 r

                LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT


                On 29 January the Home Secretary made a statement in the House
                about the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into
                the tragedy at the Hillsborough Stadium on .15 April 1989. In
                his statement the Home Secretary referred to a schedule placed
                -in the Library of the House setting out the Government's
                response to each of the xecommendations set out in Chapters 3,
                4 and 5 of the report- . I -enclose a-copy of the-schedule.

          The purpose of this letter:is to &sk you. formally to luring the
r
          xecommendations and-the Government‘s-xesponse to them to the
S'T? < attention .of;aCPO. :i^faiaye,aio^oubt^ithat -ACPO will wish to               ;
---v' ■ . encourage .chief officexs to proceed :           ^ uickly to take any
          necessary action to implement the xecommendations dixected at
          the police sexvice. Many of the recommendations substantially
     -.J-.,;.
          xepeat those -made in the intexim.xeport to which the police
          service m a d e a n o t a b l y p r o m p t andpositive xesponse for which
          the Home Secxetary was grateful.

                There are a number of xecommendations to which I wish to make
                particular reference.

                Recommendation 11 revises to some extent intexim
                xecommendation 4. It is now made cleax that the agreement
                setting out the club's and the police's respective functions
                as to crowd safety and control is seen as a statement of
                intent, mot a binding contract. JPaxagraph214 of the xeport
                says explicitly/ *'I am content that [the document] can be
                subject to alteration without breach of contract should
                circumstances so demand." I hope that the re-formulation of
                this crucial recommendation will ease the problems that I know



    t19 FEB 90
were seen to arise from the wording of the interim
recommendation.
Recommendations IS and 20, dealing with the closure and
manning of gates provide greater flexibility than did the
earlier interim recommendations (9 and 10). It will now be at
local discretion whether the perimeter gates are left fully
open, partially open or closed but unlocked. Also for local
decision, by the Police Commander, will be whether the manning
of a perimeter gate should be by a police officer or a
steward. This new flexibility is no doubt desirable for
operational reasons but it does underline the need for a clear
agreement about such matters to be embodied in the statement
of intent agreed between the police and the club.
Turning to the batch of recommendations (44-58) covering
police planning .and communications, these will no doubt all
receive careful consideration, but I pick out three which are
of particular concern to the Home Office.
■.Recommendation 52 dealing with the training of present and
 future Police Commanders is a key one in this group. I
presume that your own sub-committee and the Training Committee
have an interest here. I understand that the Police Staff
College at Bramshill is planning to hold during 1990 a
 conference which will have as its theme the operational
management of football matches. Within the Police Department
 Gay Catto will be.following up this recommendation with you or
whoever you .advise her-is the appropriate contact.

-Recommendation:53 deals with charging for police services.
-'James Addison will; be following up the Government's response
;to this recommendation through liis normal -contacts with the
i^Tice^eii^ce.jam d.rpca^^
Recommendation 5 5 'for the provision of a dedicated command
 channel seems to be crucial to effective police control. *The
-Home Office has therefore: made extra channels available for
fuse "at^events including a channel for command purposes.
 Information -about these channels has recently been circulated
 to forces.
/Recommendations 59-r63 cover co-ordination of the emergency
 services.    simply wish to reiterate the Government's
 response that those concerned will be urged to comply with the
 one recommendation (61) which was not in the interim report.

 There -are two more general matters which call .for some
 comment-"=»Tirstlyj^recommendation 42, directed at clubs, calls
-for a significantvchange in the recruitment, training and
 eventual quality of stewarding. There are obviouis
 repercussions here for the call on police resources. The Home
 Secretary made this connection in his response ‘to a question
          following his statement when he said, "I therefore wholly
          applaud Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation that stewards
          should be trained so that fewer police officers are required
          at grounds".

         Second, Taylor's xecommendations (70-73) for some new offences
         and penalties call for careful study. The Home Secretary has
         said that he will be examining these recommendations as a
         matter of urgency. John Goddard will shortly be writing to
         you separately about this but I can say now that we shall want
         to take careful account of ACPO's views on the enforceability
         and resource implications for the police of implementing these
         recommendations.

          If you think it would be helpful to discuss .any of the matters
          raised in this letter or any other issues arising from the
          Taylor report I should be glad to arrange a meeting here with
          those concerned. We shall, of course, be reporting back to
         ^Ministers on the response by the police service to Taylor in
         Jdue course and a meeting with you at that stage, perhaps after
          Easter, would provide a convenient opportunity for you to
          bring us up to date. In the meantime, we will be meeting at
          the NFIU Steering Committee on 26 February, and you might like
          a preliminary informal word then.        _ .




•r,:i.                                          ,S W BOYS. SMITH , .
                                               :'P° l i ^ ;'D eP a rtm e n tv K |^ ^ ^ ^ ^ '
5. : ’                   ..




    Tice Hr Chilcot
i i.'      Mr Hammond                                             I , . - '.   *• • •
      ~ — -HMCIC    .                                                              —    • •


   --      Mr Addison
i : ; M r Goddard
           Mrs Keisz        .
       #7*Hr-s Catto             -S.*-   - ■
           Mr Cane • ~ ~ •• :•
         * Miss Goose
           Mr Cogbill
