                                                                     2 5 JUl 1589
                                  RESTRICTED

                                                               cc Mr    Clayton LAB
                                                                   Mr   Osborne LAB
                                                            < ^ 1/ Mr   Goddard F8
                                                              JPJ- Mr   Bolton G2
                                                                   Mr   Mould G1

Mr Turney   (^o.c.’J


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT


As you know, when we receive Lord Justice Taylor•s interim report
we shall have to consider and act upon it very rapidly indeed.
So far as possible we must think in advance about what we
shall need to d o .

2.   Given the nature of the disaster at Hillsborough, it. would
not be surprising if Lord Justice Taylor were to recommend that


                             3 3 tlrf^ tsraW i!a fa rt^ ^ ® B e f o r e ,,ss p lc lS fo rs


      Such a recffnmendAtion_ w ouldpresent the GoveriMentT‘            '~a*a":some
 f ,not all I f f l ^ ^ uthjaritiesta n d g F o m i ’
                                                    S^qpera’tors; with*the
Sward., dilemma of deciding whetti^c*to^go ahead with matches"’or'"'
;o" postpone/cancel...matches .once, the new season starts' until
jract ical arrangements for implementing the recommendation are
paSscuively in. place.,......- ,                                     ......

4.   A s •a basis for considering among ourselves how Ministers
should respond to such a recommendation I attach:

     (i) a draft passage on pens for inclusion in a submission
     to Ministers about the interim report (this is too long but
     will do as a basis for discussion);

     (ii) a draft circular to local authorities (and ground
     operators) asking them to comply with the recommendations in
     the interim report;

     (iii) a draft letter to the local authority associations and
     the football authorities about a proposal to give statutory
     force to a recommendation on pens.

4.   I should be grateful if the legal advisers would give some
thought now to the making of an Order as proposed in the drafts.
I would also welcome their views urgently on whether we could:

     (a) reasonably give the associations and the football
     authorities only one week to send any comments on the
     proposed Order, and

                                   RESTRICTED
                           RESTRICTED


     (b)  reasonably reduce/eliminate the usual 21 days which an
     Order has to lie on the table before coming into force.

5.   Mr Clayton/Mr Osborne may find it helpful to have a meeting
with us in the next day or two.    (Mr Turney is absent this week
except on Thursday when he is attending a special meeting of the
Central Fire Brigades Advisory Council*J

6.   This note and the attached drafts are based on the
assumption that Ministers will want to publish the interim report
and give their first firm thoughts on it within a matter of days
of its receipt (this could be by Friday, 4 Augu st ).


                                        R R G WATTS

G1 Division
24 July 1989




                           RESTRICTED
                                      RESTRICTED

Draft 24.7,89


DRAFT CIRCULAR
        (to local authorities)


Dear Sir


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975

INTERIM REPORT OF INQUIRY INTO HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER


I attach a copy of the interim report by Lord Justice Taylor on

the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on 15 April.

The report is being published today and further copies may^be

obtained from HMSO.



2.     A copy of this circular and of the interim report is being

sent direct to the management of all designated football grounds.



3.          '   ■: .         .iM|irges!O.PcalIau^
     iagemerits7^'t'o'rev^C-im^diately_their, arrangements for safety"'
                                                                          ?


|           h          *t:he^rit^Ti«!«*ff
                                        Sg'6rC!5fand to comply with its
       '*
        ■                         •.Vis-?''*3 s   *
                                                  ■
                                                  —1 '
recommendations.



4.     The Home Secretary proposes to give statutory force to

recommendation .......          (safe capacity of pens) by making an Order

under Section 18 (1A) of the 1975 Act (as amended).                  A copy of

the draft Order is attached.                  The Home Secretary is now urgently

consulting the local authority associations and the football

authorities about this proposed Order with a view to the Order

being made and brought into force at the earliest possible

                                       RESTRICTED
                                       RESTRICTED

moment, so that it is in force shortly before or after the start

of the new football season on 19 August.                     A further circular

will be sent to local authorities (and football ground

management) when a final decision has been taken, in the light of

the consultations, on whether to make the Order                     as proposed.



5.      In the meantime local authorities and ground operators are

urged to abide voluntarily by the terms of the draft Order.

     e r , if made, will require local authorities to include in a

           certificate a specified maximum capacity for each discrete

area (each sectionr'and” if"the section is sub-divided each sub

division or pen) of the ground and a requiremnent to have in

place, before any. spectatorsare admitted to the,area,

              its,.»,for ...ensuring that the., maximum ,is._.not exceeded.

      al"' authorities should be prepared to use their prohibition

j l ^ ^ e =ap o ^ r :'’*'if/the arrangements are..not. ready1by the' time of the
                     ~ '■ ''    '■    s       '
                                              ■■             .
     :st match.,:.at...,;the....ground^in ...thenew ...season^'"-




                                          RESTRICTED
                                RESTRICTED

Draft 24.7.89
                                                                        i




DRAFT LETTER TO LOCAL AUTHORITY ASSOCIATIONS AND FOOTBALL

AUTHORITIES
              ACC   AHA   ADC LBA ALA     Football Association

              Football League

Dear Sir




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUND ACT 1975

INTERIM REPORT OF INQUIRY INTO HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                ^




I attach a copy of the interim report by Lord Justice Taylor on

the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on 15 April.

The report is being published today and further copies may be

 obtained from HMSO.       I also attach a copy of a Home Office

 circular which which has been sent today to local authorities and

 to the management of designated football grounds.
                                                                 -1


 2   .   You will see from paragraph 4 of the circular"that the Home

 Secretary proposes to give statutory force to recommendation....

 (safe capacity of pens) by making an Order under Section 1 8 (1A)

 of the 1975 Act, as amended.           A copy of the draft Order

 is attached.



 3.      The Home Secretary would be grateful for any comments you

 may have on the proposed Order by 7 days from the date of this


                                 RESTRICTED
                            RESTRICTED

letter.   In the absence of comments by that time the Home

Secretary will assume that you are content with the proposal to

make the Order.



4.   The Home Secretary regrets that on this occasion it is not

practicable to give a longer period in which to send comments and

he regrets the inconvenience in considering the proposal which

this will cause, .   But he takes he view that, in the interests

of the safety of spectators at designated matches when the new

season starts on 19 August he should, subject to consideration of

the comments you may send, make the Order very quickly.




                            RESTRICTED
                                             RESTRICTED

  Draft; 24.7.89
                                                                                  t

  HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT

  Draft section for inclusion in submission to Home Secretary


  SAFE CAPACITY OF PENS




  1.           [The Inquiry's main interim finding is that before the start

  of the next football season (on 19 August) there should at each

  designated football ground be arrangements in place which will

  ensure that no more than the permitted maximum number of

  spectators is allowed in any pen (ie in each discrete fenced area

  of a section of a ground which is fed by a particular group of

  turnstiles).                  The Inquiry also recommends that the question of

  who locally should exercise responsibility for ensuring this

  should be settled unambiguously.]                 The following considerations

„ n e e d to be taken into account before deciding; howeto^respond to ,
   .   .   .    .   .   .



  this central recommendation:-
                                                                             f


                (a)         Responsibility for safety arrangements, rests (under the

               Health and Safety legislation) with the ground operator.

               Whatever the Inquiry recommends^           legal responsibility should

               continue to rest with the operator; but where the operator

               wants the police to devise and implement arrangements to

               meet this responsibility on its behalf and the police are

               prepared to do this, the division of responsibility for

               implementation should be spelled out in writing between the

               Chief Constable and the ground operator.            Nevertheless the

                                             RESTRICTED
                              RESTRICTED

     latter, as the person legally responsible,      must satisfy

     himself that the police who are acting on his behalf are

     doing so successfully.



      (b)   [The interim report says that at Hillsborough, where the

     police had in practice taken o n t h e responsibility,   the

     police failed to prevent a pen from becoming over-populated

     both before the accident and by allowing extra spectators to

     go into the pen after an exterior gate into the ground was

     opened to relieve the crush outside.]



      (c)   It will take time for the ground operator and the

     police at each designated football ground to reach written

     agreement on whether the operator should be directly

     responsible for the practical arrangements for ensuring

     control of pen population, or whether the police should do

     this on his behalf.       I t i s likely to take longer to get

     assuredly effective practical arrangements in place - the         v

     physical layout of the ground/pens may make it very

     difficult to implement.



2.   If therefore the    Government were to take the view that this

recommendation should    be implemented,   it may not be possible at

all grounds to make the necessary arrangements before the start

of the next football seasion.      The corollary of this is that,

where this proves to be the case, either league games would have

to be postponed/cancelled or spectators would have to be excluded


                              RESTRICTED
                              RESTRICTED

from any pen where          arrangements for ensuring that the

maximum capacity is not exceeded are not in place and working.

This issue is likely quickly to become a matter of high public

interest and controversy.



Is there an alternative?



3.   We have considered whether there is an alternative which

would enable matcl»*s to be held and spectators admitted to what

are n e r p e n s in advance of ensuring that proper arrangements are

made [in accordance with the interim report's recommendation].



4.   An alternative might conceivably be to remove the pen radial

(side)   fences, ie to allow spectators to be admitted to a pen if

the radial fences are removed and the population of the section

of the ground in which the pen is situated is effectively
                                                          *
controlled by its own particular set of turnstiles.

                                                              ' f


5.   But such an alternative is not really practicable.       The pen

radial fences were put up in the first place to help the police

control a large section of a ground, and the police might be

opposed to their sudden removal.       Local authorities would need

to ensure that there were good arrangements in force which

prevented the population of the section of the ground being

exceeded.      Moreover, within a section there is often an area

which is favoured    (eg behind the goal posts) and therefore liable

to crowd pressure even though other parts of the section are


                               RESTED: CTED
                               RESTRICTED

sparsely populated;     on the other hand, there would be space to

allow people to spread out in the event of crowd pressure

building up in the favoured area.



6.   Our view is that we should not recommend local authorities

and ground operators to go down the path of removing pen radial

fences;    rather they need to face up directly to the issues

raised by the interim report's recommendation.



Options    ■



7.   The main options for the Government's response to the

recommendation about the safe capacity of pens are therefore as
           %
follows:




     circular a d v i s i n g t h e m to give^immediate attention to the

     recommendation.    This could however be regarded as simply

     passing the buck, since the Government would not be facing

     up to the awkward question whether new season matches should

     be postponed/cancelled until effective arrangements are in

     place for ensuring that the maximum capacity of each pen is

     not exceeded.




                               RESTKECTED
                        RESTRICTED

Option fii^

Again, to bring the recommendation to the attention of local

authorities and ground operators by means of Home Office,

circular, but to go on to recommend firmly that they should

give immediate effect to the recomendation,     ie that the

local authority should alter the safety certificate to

specify the maximum population of each pen and to require

effective arrangements to be in place to ensure that the

maximum is not exceeded before the ground operator allows

spectators into the pens.     We would say that in the

Government’s opinion if this were to mean that at a

particular ground the necessary arrangements could not be in

place in time   (eg because of an inability to count

accurately)' the local authority should be prepared to use

its prohibition notice powers to impose either a total ban

on the use of the pens in question or a severe reduction in

their maximum capacity and that of the section of the ground

in which the pens are situated.      However, this option could

be criticised because it contains no more than exhortation,

leaving difficult decisions to individual local authorities.




The Home Secretary could, by Order under Section         1A) of

the 1975 Act (as amended by the 1987 A c t ) , require local

authorities to specify in the safety certificate (a) the

maximum number of spectators to be allowed into each sub

division of the ground (whether a pen or a section) and (b)


                        RESTRICTED
                        RESTRICTED

that the necessary arrangements for ensuring that the
                                       t y n J u io 'V   of   J

maximum capacity is not exceeded in any^/sub division are in

place before any spectators are admitted to those parts of

the ground.   rEither1 The Order would go on to say that

matches should not be held at designated football grounds

until this was implemented.      f0R1 The Order could not go

on to say that matches should not be held at designated

grounds until this was implemented; but the Home Office

circular would make clear to local authorities that this was

the implication of the Order-   This would oblige local

authorities to revise the safety certificate forthwith and,

until this had been implemented, to prevent matches being

played by the use of their prohibition notice powers.                 This

option [would] however leave the Home Secretary open to

challenge by judicial review that he was being unreasonable

in respect of any ground where no accident has ever happened

and the club would suffer financial loss.                Moreover, since

the interim report may not be Lord Justice Taylor's last

word on the subject,   conceivably we might need to change the

Order some months later:   we would not normally want to

insist upon a course of action by using order making powers

where there was a possibility of having to change our minds

a short while ahead.




                        RESTRICTED
                            RESTRICTED

Assessment



8.   We think that Ministers will want to give as firm and direct

a response as they can to such a crucial recommendation and will

therefore want to reject options   (i) and (ii) in.favour of

option (iii).



9.   The Home Secretary is required by section 18(4) of the 1975

Act to consult relevant interests before making an order under

option (iii).    We would normally allow at least a month for such

consultations.   In view of the impending start of the new "'"

football season and the safety considerations, we could we

believe reasonably cut this to one week.   If the order were made

one week after that, it would not normally come into force under

parliamentary procedures until 21 days later;    but exceptionally^

because of the safety considerations, this [could be reduced or

entirely- eliminated on notification to Parliament].    With the

best will in the world, however,   it is unlikely that the order

could be in force by 19 August.    If therefore Ministers choose

option (iii) we shall need to tell local authorites at the

earliest possible moment that an order is being made and that

they would do well to abide voluntarily by its terms from the

start of the season notwithstanding that it will not come into

force until after 19 August.




                            RESTRZECTED
                           RESTRICTED

that the necessary arrangements for ensuring that the
                                                    of   j


maximum capacity is not exceeded in any^/sub division are in

place before a n y s p e c t a t o r s are admitted to those parts of

the ground.     rEither! The Order would go on to say that

matches should not be held at designated football grounds

until this was implemented*.        TORI The Order could not go

on to say that matches should not be held at designated

grounds until this was implemented? but the Home Office

circular would make clear to local authorities that this was

the implication of the Order.        This would oblige local

authorities to revise the safety certificate forthwith and,

until this had been implemented, to prevent matches being

played by the use of their prohibition notice powers.             This

option [would] however leave the Home Secretary open to

challenge by judicial review that he was being unreasonable

in respect of any ground where no accident has ever happened

and the club would suffer financial loss.          Moreover,: since

the interim report may not be Lord Justice Taylor's last

word on the subject, conceivably we might need to change the

Order some months later:       we would not normally want to

insist upon a course of action by using order making powers

where there was a possibility of having to change our minds

a short while ahead. -,■




                           RESTRICTED
