                                                                                    £ 2*1
                                                                                    DRAFT 3
                                                                          18 February 1998 10:13



                         HOME SECRETARY’S STATEMENT ON
                                                           /


                                HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                            WEDNESDAY, 18 FEBRUARY 1998



 With permission Madam Speaker, I would like ,o make a statement about the
 Hillsborough Stadium disaster.


 2      Few events in recent years have touched the lives of so many people. The fa™;);-
 and friends of the 96 Liverpool fens who died on 15 April 1989 have suffered
ig g p r a b ly . The whole nation was profoundly disturbed by what occurred that day
            • is now almost nine years since,hat fatefulday.many of the families and others
              evidence was available which wSuld c k ^ f c i these ev en ts.'^ Home
             was determined to do aH I could to establish if that was indeed the case.


       On coming into office in May I gave this question intense consideration, and on
30June 1997,1 announced to the House that the Attorney General and I had decided to
appoint Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, a senior t o d Justice of the Court of Afpeal to conduct
an independent scrutiny of this matter. His terms of reference were:


       To ascertain whether any evidence easts relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
      Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


      (a)     to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


      (b)     to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for the puipose
              of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or
s

                      (c)    to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
                             disciplinary matters;


                            and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available
                            is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State for
                            the Home Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b)
                            and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously considered by
                            them which may be relevant to their respective duties;           and to advise
                            whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
                            interest.


                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted his report, which I am publishing



       5
                  His scmtiny is the latest in a series of lengthy and detailed examinations of the
            lengyn this case. The public inquiry led by die late Lord Justice Taylor considered
              ^       causes of the dmster and made wide-ranging reco'mmendations Aout crowd
            ol and safety at sports events. These have had a profound effect on both crowd safety
      at football grounds and on the policing of football m3f r U


                  The deaths which occurred were also the subject of inquests which were
      by the Coroner for the Western District of South Yorkshire in two parts in April and May
      1990 and between November 1990 and karch 1991. T h £ involved over 80 days of public
     hearing. A further investigation was conducted by the West Midlands police, supervised
     by the Police Complaints Authority, to establish whether there were any grounds for
     criminal or disciplinary proceedings, ^"investigation involved the taking of more than
     5000 statements. At a later stage in November 1993, there was a judicial review of the
     coroner’s proceedings,                upheld the inquest verdict of accidental death and the
    conduct of those proceedings. We have now had this further detailed scrutiny by a senior
    Lord Justice of Appeal.




    Statement:hills
                                                        2
        . 7             The main causes of the disaster have long been clear. They were identified by
            Lord Taylor in his interim report in August 1989. He did not attribute all the blame to a
          single cause or person, but in paragraph 278 he made it dear that “the main reason for the
          disaster was the failure of police control”. The South Yorkshire police have in turn
          accepted the main share of responsibility for the disaster. Sheffield Wednesday Football
          Club and the Local Authority were also criticised by Lord Taylor.


         8            With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that over the course of time some
         new information may become available. But that does not necessarily mean that the
         outcome of any previous inquiries would have been different had this information been
\   **r ava*kbk w ^at is crudal is not just whether the information is new, but also whether it is
        of such significance - to use the phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new
     i, inquiry.


        9          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith^nsidered in great detail all the evidence which h as£ £ T
    JV ,pUt t0 Wm- This “ dwkd all the relevant evidence presented to the earlier inquiries and
        jnqueSt- ^ ^as looked equaUy rigorously at all the information presented to him, by
        individuals and offiaal bodies including those representing the families of those who died,
        and others who have acted in support of them.              He has produced a thorough and
      / comprehensive report. His dear condusion, however, is that there is no basis on which
       there should be a further public inquiry. He also finds no basis for a renewed application
       to quash the verdict of the inquest, or any material which should be put before the
       Director of Public Prosecutions or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to
       reconsider the decisions they have already taken. He condudes that none of the evidence
       which he was asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence which was
       available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.


       10        I,   the Attorney General and the DPP have considered Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
       report very carefully. We have no reason to believe that his condusions are wrong. This
       will, I know, be deeply disappointing for the families of those who died at Hillsborough
       and many who have campaigned on their behalf.




      Statement:hills
                                                        3
        11
               I fully understand that those who lost loved ones at Hillsborough may feel betrayed
 ^ by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and for the state of the
    ground on that day. I hope and believe that the changes which resulted from the Taylor
    Inquiry should mean that such a disaster will never be-repeated.


    12        But there is another sense in which the system has failed the Hillsborough families.
   As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of his report,


              “I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has personally been held
              to account either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent
              of losing their job”.


   13        There are-serious shortcomings in the police disciplinary system. The Home
  Affairs Committee produced a report earlier this year which makes recommendations for
  change.         I will be responding fully to that report soon.       But what happened after
  Hillsborough is a prime example of why we have to improve the current                     ’


  14         Lord M ^ ^ - S m i t h also comments on the coroner’s proceedings after a major
 disaster, which has been subject to a public inquiry. He endorses the recommendation of a
 Home Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests, published in March 1997, that the
 role of the coroner after such a public inquiry should be limited.


             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith higUigks in his report the exceptionally difficult task
 which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest. It placed an unreasonable and, I
  I ,    |                       (C -w Y v c

 think, unnecessary burden on-him when the Taylor Report had covered substantially the
 same ground. Certainly I am clear that Hillsborough proved that t h e 'i y ^ in its present
form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this k in d ^ IfT o h ^ s t had been
necessary, the Taylor inquiry, which all have accepted as an excellent report, would then
have remained unchallenged as the last word on the causes of the disaster.




Statemant:hills
                                                  4
 # 16        I therefore agree in principle with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s recommendations
   th at there should rarely be the need for an inquest following a judicial inquiry into a major
; ^disaster.


   17        When I established the scrutiny I said that I would do my best to ensure that the
   evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was published. Most of the main
   material which he has considered is contained in the Appendices to his report. Much of
   the other evidence which he considered is already in the public domain, consisting of
  transcripts of public hearings or material considered by the Taylor Inquiry. I am arranging
  for other material considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to be placed in the Library of
  the House.


  18        All Honourable Members will have the most profound sympathy with the families
  and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. We can scarcely begin to comprehend
  what they have suffered. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in his report:


            “ I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them,
           especially since they have had their hopes raised that something more could be
           done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look
           dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of
           the evidence which had previously been considered”.


  19       I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions must consider
 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report in the same light. I recognise that it will be difficult and
 painful for the families of those who died to accept the conclusions of this report. But
 having established this rigorous judicial scrutiny I must accept its conclusions.




Statem«nt:hills
                                                5
