MEMORANDUM


From: C F BONE
      Room 1106
      0171 273 2512


Date:        21 October 1997

To:     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




I attach material just in from the Support Group, the police and Professor Scraton.



Support Group

2.      Miss Adlington’s letter o f 13 October - with a separate note from Julian Knowles - is
their response to your letter of 13 October (attached). To summarise (using your question
numbers) -

        1.        The material about forms o f judicial enquiry is in the note from Raymond
                  Buildings (A). This does not seem very informative.

        2.        There is Duckenfield and Murray material from the Inquest in the same place.
                  Again this does not amount to much. There is some more at (B), from
                  Murray at Taylor’s Inquiry - but this is not relevant to your question.

        3.        They have sent a copy o f the April 1997 press release (C) but not the January
                  one. That is promised later.

        4.        Nothing new on Roberts (but see Miss Adlington’s note).

        5.        Signed statements from McDermott (D) and Williams (E - with his medical
                  records). There is a recent signed statement from Paul Taylor (F), with his
                  original statement (page 1 o f that is missing but is in Appendix 19 o f the
                  Group’s original submission). There is a statement from Flack (G).

         6.       Flack again, I think (G).

         7.       The Group cannot identify any passages in the Inquest transcripts where Dr
                  Popper tells people that he would go into matters after 3.15. Miss Adlington
                   puts forward some rather feeble argument instead (end o f her letter). She has
                   also sent recent statements from ambulancemen Tony Edwards and Howes
                  (H,I).


 G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\023.DOC
Police


3.    The 16 October letter tells us about the ‘coaching’ o f officers. I am not sure that I go
along with calling what is described here ‘coaching’ and this account begs the question o f
whether something else was going on as well.

4.    We may hear more about this from Scraton on Friday (see below) but it may also be
worth pursuing with Inspector Calvert. Calvert was at Hillsborough on the day and it was he
who started the ‘coaching’ issue rolling by frightening Mr Wells with stories about it when he
was showing him round Hillsborough in the summer.,

5.       The 17 October letter covers the statements you asked for.


Pro fessor Scraton

 5.     This letter o f 20 October is I think all we are going to get from Scraton before we see
him on Friday. He has not, as once promised, supplied a signed (or even unsigned) statement
from his former police officer informant, nor is there any guarantee that he will actually have
this person with him. If he (or she) turns up the likelihood is that they will be talking about
the changes to police statements. This is territory with which we are familiar and I will be
surprised if we learn anything radically new about it on Friday (though there might be some
interesting chapter and verse).

7.       The rest o f Scraton’s letter covers old ground.




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\023.DOC
