40-3.JS


From:       J L Goddard              cc   Mr Pugh
            F8 Division                   Mr Narey
            Ext. 3314                     Mr Regan
                                          Mr Burns     )without
             22 March 1991                Mr Angel     )encs
                                          Mr Boys Smith)
                                          Mr Clayton
                                          Mr Cogbill
                                          Miss ®oose
                                          Mr Hopley
                                          Miss Pugh
                                          Mr Dent
                                          Mr Russell, SHHD
                                          Mr Kerpel
                                          Mr Grantham



Ms Spencer


SIR JOHN WHEELER MP'S FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL

Mr Lloyd is to discuss the Government amendments to Sir John
Wheeler's Bill at a meeting with Sir John at 10.30 am on 25
March.    Mr Clayton, Mr Hopley, Miss Pugh and I will be on call
from 10.00 am to give oral briefing to Mr Lloyd.


2.      I attach for Mr Lloyd's approval Notes on Clauses of the
Wheeler Bill, which need to be passed to Mr Dent on 25 March
as soon as they have been cleared.


3.      I also attach notes on the Government amendments which
will need to be tabled in Mr Lloyd's name on 25 March.       These
amendments will bring Sir John Wheeler's Bill into line with
the Government Bill, which had been prepared in accordance
with Ministerial policy and which the Government planned to
introduce as soon as a legislative opportunity arose, in so
far as this can be done within the scope of the Wheeler Bill.


4.      The scope of the Wheeler bill allows us to bring in
amendments to create three of the four new offences
recommended by Lord Justice Taylor in his final report on the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.     These three cover, at a
E.R.
       football match, throwing missiles, obscene or racialist
   chanting and going onto the pitch.      The fourth offence,
       touting tickets for a football match on the day of the match,
   which was included in the Government Bill, has been found by
       the House authorities to fall outside the scope of the Wheeler
   Bill.


       5.   In accordance with Ministerially agreed policy there are
   also Government amendments to remove Scotland from the scope
   of the Bill and to prevent an attendance centre order being
   available as a penalty for an offender over the age of 21.


   6.       By way of background briefing I attach a copy of chapter
   9, Offences in the Ground,     from the final Taylor Report.




                                          J L GODDARD
68-3.RB-DISC

FOOTBALL OFFENCES BILL
NOTES ON CLAUSES
INTRODUCTION


The Football (Offences) Bill introduces statutory measures to
regulate behaviour at association football matches as recommended
by Lord Justice Taylor in his final report into the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster.   The legislation is designed to tackle specific
forms of undesirable conduct which occur at football matches - the
throwing of missiles; chanting obscene or racialist abuse; and
going on the pitch without good reason.   Taylor recommended that
specific offences would have a greater deterrent than a general
offence of disorderly conduct at football grounds and would make
clear precisely what behaviour is not acceptable.


The Report of the Home Affairs Committee on Policing Football
Hooliganism, published on 1 February 1991, recommended that there
should be no delay in bringing the offences onto the statute book.
Sir John Wheeler introduced for this purpose, on 1 February as a
Private Member's Bill, the Football (Offences) Bill.
FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL

HOUSE OF COMMONS


NOTES ON CLAUSES




Clause 1


Clause 1 determines the scope of the Bill and defines certain
terms used in it.


Subsection (1) defines "football match" for the purposes of
the Bill.   It limits its application to those association
football matches in England and Wales which are designated by
order made by the Secretary of State under section 1 of the
Football Spectators Act 1989.   Football matches in Scotland
are defined as matches designated by an order made by
Secretary of State for the purpose of this legislation.


Subsection (2) provides for the Secretary of State to
designate football matches in Scotland for the purposes of the
Bill, by reference to described matches, or to descriptions of
grounds on which a match is to be played, or the area where it
is to take place.


Subsection (3) defines "racial abuse" as abuse on racial
grounds as defined by the Race Relations Act 1976.    Under
section 3(1) of the 1976 Act,   "racial grounds" means any of
the following grounds: colour, race, nationality or ethnic or
national origin.
CLAUSE 2

Clause 2 establishes an offence of throwing a missile.    Any
person who, while a spectator at a football match (as defined
by clause 1(1)), throws a missile will be guilty of an offence
whether or not he intended to injure any person or to damage
property.


The new offence is based on Taylor's recommendation.     He was
concerned that in some circumstances the existing offences
under the Public Order Act 1986 might not cover the throwing
of missiles at football matches because of the way in which
those offences are framed.


Taylor concluded that the act of throwing a missile should
constitute an offence without the need to show that the
missile was directed at a particular person or that anyone was
likely to be alarmed or distressed thereby.
CLAUSE 3


Clause 3 creates a new offence of uttering obscene or
racialist abuse.   Any person who, while a spectator at a
football match (as defined by clause 1(1)), shouts, chants or
similarly utters obscene or racialist abuse is guilty of an
offence.


This offence is intended to criminalise the chanting of
obscene or racialist abuse that takes place at football
matches.   Racialist abuse is defined in Clause 1(3) of the
Bill.   The shouting of racialist abuse at football matches
unless it is conduct that is intended or likely to stir up
racial hatred, would not constitute an offence under section
18(1)(a) of the Public Order Act 1986.   Nevertheless,   such
behaviour is highly offensive and provocative conduct which,
in the context of a crowded football ground could have serious
consequences for public order and crowd safety.
CLAUSE 4

Clause 4 provides a new offence of pitch invasion.     Any person
who, while a spectator at a football match (as defined in
clause 1(1)), goes onto the playing area or the ground
immediately surrounding the playing area where spectators are
not authorised is guilty of an offence unless he does so with
good reason or reasonable excuse.


Taylor recognised that football spectators running onto the
pitch "often provokes and is a prelude to disorder".


Taylor recommended that, for the safety of spectators, the
level of fences should be lowered and that spikes and
overhanging sections should be removed.   He considered that if
the physical deterrent were removed it would "be prudent to
have a criminal sanction" against running onto the pitch.     The
Clause provides a general defence that the person had good
reason or reasonable excuse to be on the pitch.
CLAUSE 5


Clause 5 provides that the new offences in the Bill will be
"relevant offences" for the purposes of the Football
Spectators Act 1989.


Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989 empowers the
courts to restrict the travel to designated football matches
abroad of those convicted of "relevant offences" in cases
where it would help to prevent or reduce violence or disorder
at those matches.


Under section 15(1) of the 1989 Act the courts may impose a
restriction order on a person convicted of a relevant offence
in this country at times when certain matches are to take
place outside England and Wales.   Restriction orders have the
effect of requiring those to whom they apply to report to a
police station in England or Wales at the time of the foreign
match.


The "relevant offences" for this purpose are listed in
Schedule 1 of the 1989 Act and clause 5 amends that Schedule
to include the new offences provided in this Bill.
CLAUSE 6


Clause 6 provides penalties for the purposes of the Bill.


Subsection (1 ) provides that the offences under clauses 2, 3 and 4
can only be tried summarily and attract a maximum sentences of a
fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale (currently £400).


Subsection (2) provides that the courts may make a attendance
centre order under section 17 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982
instead of or in addition to imposing a fine under subsection (1).


The subsection empowers that the courts to make attendance centre
orders for anyone convicted of the offences in clauses 2 to 4 in
the Bill, not withstanding the provisions of the Criminal Justice
Act 1982 which precludes the use of attendance centre orders for
anyone over 21 years and prevents the imposition of an order
(except in special circumstances) on a person who has previously
received a custodial sentence.
CLAUSE 7


Clause 7 sets down the short title, "The Football (Offences)
Act 1991", and provides that the Act will extend to England,
Scotland and Wales.




                                                               4»
78-3.RB-disc

FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL

COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS

Mr Peter Lloyd

Leave out Clause 1

To move the following new Clause -

'(1)  in this Act a "designated football match" means an
association football match designated, or of a description
designated, for the purposes of this Act by order of the
Secretary of State.

Any such order shall be made by statutory instrument which
shall be subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of
either House of Parliament.

(2) References in this Act to things done at a designated
football match include anything done at the ground -

     (a) within the period beginning two hours before the
     start of the match or (if earlier) two hours before the
     time at which it is advertised to start and ending one
     hour after the end of the match; or

     (b) where the match is advertised to start at a
     particular time on a particular day but does not take
     place on that day, within the period beginning two hours
     before and ending one hour after the advertised starting
     t i m e .'.

GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT


Purpose and effect


Amendment 1 deletes the existing Clause 1 in its entirety and
Amendment 2 replaces it by the text of the amendment.   It
provides for the Secretary of State to designate football
matches for the purposes of the Bill.   It provides that orders
made shall be subject to annulment by resolution of either
House.   It also defines the places and times at which the Act
will be operative.
Speaking note


This legislation is intended to implement Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations on offences inside football grounds.
The Government believes that the creation of these offences is
both necessary and desirable to tackle the problems of
football hooliganism.     The Bill has our full support and
provides a welcome opportunity to implement recommendations
for new offences made by Lord Justice Taylor.


The new clause provides for the Secretary of State to
designate football matches for the purposes of the Bill, by
reference to a particular match, or a description of match.
Designation would be by Order subject to the negative
resolution procedure.     The amendment defines the time limits
within which an offence may be committed to include the period
before the match when spectators are arriving, and afterwards
as they leave the terraces.


However this amendment limits the legislation to England and
Wales.     My Rt hon friend the Secretary of State for Scotland
believes that the flexibility of the common law in Scotland
allows it to be applied to a wide range of behaviour,
including the conduct which these provisions are designed to
cat c h.


I beg to move.
74-3.RB-DISC

FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL

COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS

Mr Peter Lloyd

Leave out Clause 2.

To move the following new Clause -

"It is an offence for a person at a designated football match
to throw anything at or towards -

     (a)  the playing area, or any area adjacent to the
     playing area to which spectators are not admitted, or

     (b)  any area in which spectators or other persons are or
     may be present,

without lawful authority or lawful excuse (which shall be for
him to prove)."


GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT


Purpose and effect


Amendment 3 deletes the existing Clause 2 in its entirety and
Amendment 4 replaces it by the text of the amendment.     It is
intended to tighten up the Clause to prevent any possible
loop-hole: the offence will apply to "persons" rather than
"spectators" as it might be argued that someone intent on
making trouble was not effectively a spectator.   It also
broadens "missile" to "anything thrown" to avoid definitional
problems.   The amendment also introduces a general defence of
lawful authority or lawful excuse.


Speaking note


Mr Latham, as we have said before, the Government fully
endorses the creation of this new offence.   The amendment that
the Government has brought forward is intended to ensure that
there is no loop-hole in the drafting of this clause.   We
entirely agree with the intentions of both the hon member for
Westminster North and Lord Justice Taylor that the proposed
offence should be wide enough to cover objects thrown at a
football match, whether or not the intention was to injure
persons or damage property.   We consider that the offence
should cover anything thrown so as to include those items,
such as coins, or bags of urine, which are thrown at football
matches but which may not be regarded in legal definition as a
weapon or missile.


The amendment also introduces the defence of "lawful authority
or lawful excuse".   This has the effect of excluding from
prosecution acts which would generally be regarded as either
required or helpful, for example throwing the match ball back
onto the field.


I beg to move.
75-3.RB-DISC


FOOTBALL OFFENCES BILL

COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS


Mr Peter Lloyd

Leave out Clause 3

To move the following new Clause -

(1)   "It is an offence to take part at a designated football
      match in chanting of an indecent or racialist nature.

(2)   For this purpose -

      (a) chanting means the repeated uttering of any sound in
      concert with one or more others; and

      (b) of a racialist nature means consisting of or
      including matter which is threatening, abusive or
      insulting to a person by reason of his colour, race,
      nationality (including citizenship) or ethnic or national
      origins".


GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT


Purpose and effect


Amendment 5 deletes the entire clause and Amendment 6
replaces it with the text in the amendment.     The effect is to
make more precise the definition of chanting.     It also defines
the offence as "taking part in" chanting.     The effect of this
is to exclude single shouts or chanting alone; in the context
of a football crowd, more than one person would need to be
involved to constitute a nuisance sufficient to be prosecuted.
It defines the nature of the conduct which it is intended to
prohibit namely, chanting of racialist nature that is
threatening, abusive or insulting and chanting that is
indecent rather than obscene, which has legal meaning which
would place the threshold for this offence too high.
Speaking note


Clause 3 creates a new offence of uttering obscene or
racialist abuse.   The Government amendment is intended to
catch the sort of repeated shouting of an offensive nature by
members of the crowd.   This is often directed at players from
ethnic minorities and is sadly prevalent at football matches
in England and Wales.   Lord Justice Taylor suggested that
obscene chanting should also be prohibited because it too
could lead to confrontation or disorder.   We agree, but the
word "obscene" has a very strict definition in law and it is
unlikely that it would cover the sort of lewd and offensive
behaviour that is exhibited at football matches.   This conduct
is best defined as indecent.


I beg to move.
76-3.RB-DISC

FOOTBALL OFFENCES BILL

COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS


Mr Peter Lloyd

Leave out Clause 4

To move the following new Clause -

"It is an offence for a person at a designated football match
to go onto the playing area, or any area adjacent to the
playing area to which spectators are not generally admitted,
without lawful authority or lawful excuse (which shall be for
him to prove)".


GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT


Purpose and effect


Amendment 7 deletes Clause 4 entirely and amendment 8 replaces
it with the text of the amendment.    The effect is in line with
other Government amendments and provides a more precise
definition of invading the pitch.


Speaking note


The amendment that the Government is bringing forward is
intended to provide a more precise definition of the offence
of going onto the playing area.     Its broad intent is the same
as that of the original clause moved by Sir John Wheeler.
Lord Justice Taylor recommended that, given that fences were
being lowered in the interest of crowd safety, going onto the
pitch should be made a criminal offence, even though in some
cases invasions were born of joie de vivre.     We agree.   It is
a regrettable fact that all pitch invasions, however well-
intentioned, can lead to disorder and confrontation between
rival fans and the police.   The defence built into the
amendment ensures that people will be able to go onto the
pitch quite legitimately when there is a hazard or emergency
in the spectator area and they need to escape.


I beg to move.
42-3.JS

FOOTBALL OFFENCES BILL
COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS



Mr Peter Lloyd

     Leave out Clause 5

     Leave out Clause 6

     To move the following new Clause -

     "(1) In section 24(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence
     Act 1984 (arrestable offences), after paragraph (d)
     insert -

          "(e) any offence under the Football (Offences) Act
          1991

     (2) A person guilty of an offence under this Act is
     liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
     level 3 on the standard scale.

     (3) In Schedule 1 to the Football Spectators Act 1989
     (relevant offences for purposes of restriction orders, &
     c.), after paragraph (1) insert -

          "(m) any offence under the Football (Offences) Act
          1991



GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT


Purpose and effect


Amendment 9 would have the effect of removing clause 5, which
would be reinstated as Subsection (3) of a new clause
(Government amendment 11).


Amendment 10 would delete clause 6(2) of the Bill.    Clause 6
provides the penalties for offences under the Bill.
Subsection (1) provides for a maximum fine of level 3 on the
standard scale (currently £400, but being increased to £1,000
by the Criminal Justice Bill).     Subsection (2) would allow a
person convicted of an offence under the Bill to be given an
attendance centre order, if this would help prevent violence
or disorder at football matches.    The amendment would mean
such orders were not available for offences under the Bill,
and limit the penalty to a level 3 fine.    This is because, for
the reasons set out in the speaking note, the Government does
not believe that offenders under the Bill should be liable to
attendance centre orders.


Amendment 11 has the effect of moving a new clause to add the
offences created by the Bill to those in section 24(2) of the
Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and to prescribe
penalties.


Subsection (1) adds the offences created by the Bill to those
in section 24(2) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.
This has the effect of giving police powers of summary arrest
and search.


Subsection (2) provides that offences created by the Bill
shall be triable summarily only.     Persons convicted shall be
liable to a fine not exceeding level 3 on the standard scale,
currently £400 but to be raised to £1000 under the Criminal
Justice Bill.   This is the same provision as under the Bill
but is required to be reinstated as the previous Government
amendment (10) removes clause 6 of the Bill.


Subsection (3) adds the offences created by the Bill to those
listed in schedule 1 to thfe Football Spectators Act 1989.
This has the effect of making those convicted of an offence
created by the Bill liable to a restriction order.     Again,
this is a technical amendment reinstating a provision deleted
by Government amendment 10.
Speaking note


Amendment 9 is simply a technical amendment; the provision
would be reinstated by Government amendment 11, which would
cause the Bill to be better drafted.


Clause 6(2) of the Bill would allow courts to make attendance
centre orders for people convicted of offences under the Bill,
where such orders would help prevent violence and disorder at
football matches.     The Government has sympathy with the
underlying purpose of this provision, but does not agree that
attendance centre orders should be available for the offences
the Bill creates.


It may be helpful if I say something about attendance centres
and how they operate.     Attendance centre orders are currently
available only for people under 21.     Their purpose is to
deprive the young people of some of their free time and
encourage them to make better use of their time.     They are
open on Saturday afternoons normally, every other week, for 2
or 3 hours.     The staff are all volunteers and employed by the
Home Office.    Many of them are serving or retired police
officers.     Each centre offers a programme of activities
normally including some physical education and instruction in
a useful activity, such as first aid or basic DIY skills.
Most centres are based in school premises.


It will be apparent from what I have said that the attendance
centre order caters for a particular type of young person.        In
the Government's view, offenders being dealt with under the
Bill are unlikely to make them successful clients of
attendance centres.     Attendance centres cater for the young.
They are most used, and likely to be most effective, for
people in their mid-teens.     There are some centres - about
25 - which cater for 17-21 year olds.     There are no centres
for older people.     This is because, in the Government's view,
older people are unlikely to be amenable to what attendance
centres have to offer.    Attendance centre orders are also only
available for those convicted of imprisonable offences.       None
of the offences under the Bill is punishable with
imprisonment.    So, in terms of seriousness, they do not meet
the present threshold for attendance centres.    Finally, and
crucially, attendance centres are most useful for those who
are going to respond positively.    The young people have to be
cooperative,    for without their cooperation orders cannot be
carried through successfully.     I think that experience shows
that football hooligans, especially those over 21, are not the
most disciplined and amenable of people.    And, on a practical
point,   if attendance centre orders are seen as a way of
keeping offenders away from football matches, the number of
attendance centres would need to be greatly increased to
provide a nationwide service On Saturdays and having to open
for mid week matches would provide further practical problems.


Attendance centre orders are undoubtedly a useful disposal
when they are used for the right type of offender.     The
Government's fear is that the Bill would allow them to be used
for people for whom they were not designed and for whom they
are likely to be unsuitable.


What we are seeking to achieve in the criminal justice process
is to match the penalty to the offence.     That is one of the
purposes of the Criminal Justice Bill now in another place.
The objective of that Bill has been warmly applauded.        Whilst
I understand my hon Friend's purpose in including this
provision in this Bill, I am afraid that its effect is likely
to be counter-productive.     That is why we think this amendment
is necessary.


Amendment 11 has three purposes.     First, it gives the police a
power of arrest and search.     This is necessary in order to
stop the offensive behaviour,    take the perpetrators away from
the scene and enable them to be searched under the normal
provisions of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.     The
police themselves have emphasised the importance of these
powers and I trust the Committee will agree.
Second, the amendment establishes the penalty for any of the
offences created of a fine not exceeding level 3 on the
standard scale.   This is exactly the same level of fine
proposed by Sir John Wheeler and its inclusion in this
amendment is simply a technical measure given the Government
amendment to leave out clause 6 of the Bill.


Finally, the amendment makes those convicted of one of the
offences created by the Bill liable to a restriction order
under the Football Spectators Act 1989.   The Government
believes that preventing convicted hooligans travelling abroad
to football matches is an important weapon in the fight
against disorder at football matches and therefore argues that
these new offences should carry liability to a restriction
order as do existing offences listed in Schedule 1 to the 1989
Act.   Again, this is a technical amendment with the same
effect as that originally proposed by Sir John Wheeler.


I beg to move.
77-3.RB-DISC

FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL
COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS

Mr Peter Lloyd

Clause 7, page 2, line 19, at end insert -

"(  ) The provisions of this Act come into force on such day
as the Secretary of State may appoint by order made by
statutory instrument, and different days may be appointed for
different provisions".


Purpose and effect


Amendment 12 provides for the provisions of the Bill to be
brought into force by order.   Different days may be appointed
for different provisions.


Speaking note


The amendment provides for the provisions of the Bill to be
brought into force by order, which may appoint different days
for different provisions.   The order would be subject to the
usual negative resolution procedure.


I beg to move.
79-3.RB-disc
FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL
COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS

Mr Peter Lloyd

Clause 7 , page 2, line 20, leave out "Scotland" and insert
"England and Wales only".


GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT

Purpose and effect


Amendment 13 deletes the reference to Scotland and limits the
application of the Bill to association football matches in
England and Wales only.    The Secretary of State for Scotland
indicated in his letter of 20 February to the Lord President
that he considered the existing common law powers in Scotland
to be adequate.   The offence of throwing a missile is covered
by the common law offence of reckless behaviour.    Chanting
obscene or racialist abuse can be prosecuted under Breach of
the Peace and Scottish common law provides sufficient scope
for the police to act where running on to the pitch may give
rise to disruption, annoyance or danger to players or
spectators.


Speaking note


As I said when moving Government amendment 2, the Government
does not believe that it is necessary to apply this Bill to
Scotland.   This amendment therefore restricts the scope to
England and Wales.
80-3.RB-disc
FOOTBALL (OFFENCES) BILL
COMMONS COMMITTEE STAGE

NOTES ON AMENDMENTS

M r Peter Lloyd

Title, line 1, leave out from beginning to "football" in line
2 and insert "Make further provision with respect to
disorderly conduct by persons attending.".


GOVERNMENT AMENDMENT

Purpose and effect


This amendment makes it clear that the Bill is adding to those
offences which can be used against disorderly conduct at
football matches.


Speaking note


Mr Latham, a wide range of public order offences can be
brought to bear against football hooliganism.   This amendment
to the title makes it clear that these provisions provide some
additional criminal offences.


I beg to move.
                                                     CHAPTER9
                                        OFFENCES IN THE GROUND
   289. Although incidents o f physical violence inside grounds are now m uch fewer, there rem ains an
und ercurren t o f unruly b ehaviour which can and occasionally does result in disorder. T hree activities in
p articular have this potential: (i) throwing coins and other missiles (ii) chanting obscene o r racialist abuse
(iii) going onto the pitch w ithout reasonable excuse.

    i.   There can be no possible excuse for hurling missiles at a sports ground. It is not only dangerous in
         itself. It may and often does incite others to d o likewise: that may and often does provoke retaliation.
         Violence m ay then escalate.
                          \

    ii. N o-one could expect th a t verbal exchanges on the terraces would be as polite as those at a vicarage
        tea party. But shouting or chanting gross obscenities o r racialist abuse ought not to be perm itted. If
        one starts, others jo in in. and to the m ajority o f reasonable supporters, as well as to those abused, the
        sound o f such chants from num bers in unison is offensive an d provocative.

    iii. Run'ning on the pitch often provokes and is the prelude to disorder. This is n ot ju st because it
         interrupts the game .or because it invades the hallowed turf. It is often done with the intention o f
         attacking someone. Even if the invasion is not with intent to attack the referee, a player or opposing
         fans, it tem pts others to follow suit. If rival fans come onto the pitch violence will probably break
         out. Even if they do not. there m ay well be violent exchanges with police seeking to repel the
         invaders. A fan may run onto the pitch merely to congratulate a goal scorer. But h is action could well
         provoke opposing fans (displeased by the goal anyw ay) to invade the pitch with less benign inicnt.

  290. Ought not these activities therefore to be m ade criminal offences? This has been raised before. M r
Justice Popplewell considered the same three activities. After discussing w hether they should be made
separate offences, he concluded, on analogy with the Scottish "breach o f the peace” , that a sim ple offcnce of
disorderly conduct at a sports’g'round would sweep up not only the three activities m en tio n e d above but other
disorderly activities too. He conclude^}, at paragraph 4.74 o f his Final Report, as follows:

  "4.74 Quite clearly a new'offence in England and Wales ot‘ disorderly conduct o r breach o f the peace on
  the lines o f the Scottish com m on law offence, would be o f substantial assistance in dealing with *
  hooliganism. It would avoid the problem o f trying to define all the different types o f b e h a v io u r which give
  rise to disorder at football m atches and would undoubtedly enable the police to take action m uch earlier
  than they can un d er the present law. This Offence should be confined to sports grounds where the
  disorderly conduct is likely to have such a devastating effect on crowd safety>Disorderly conduct would
  clearly include throwing a missile, running onto the pitch, seeking to climb over or to pull down a perim eter
  fence, shining a m irror towards a b atsm an, throwing bottles or cans onto the field o f play, or interfering
  with a greyhound or horse race. I suggest that it should be triable sum m arily and there should be a power o f
  arrest. / recom m end, therefore, that consideration should be given to creating an ojTence o f disorderly
  conduct at a sports ground."

  291. This recom m endation was not taken up. At the tim e M r Justice Popplewell reported, the Public O rder
Act 1986 was in preparation. It created new offences relating to public order b ut none specifically related to
conduct inside sports grounds. Evidence from the H om e Office gives two reasons for this. First, it was thought
wrong in principle to treat football or sports grounds as a special case. Secondly, it was apparently thought that
the provisions o f the 1986 Act. especially section 5. sufficiently covered the field.

  292. As to the first reason, one must surely look at the nature o f the mischief. T h e three specified activities
would, o f course, be an anti-social nuisance anywhere. But at a designated sports ground they are fraught
with potential disorderly consequences. T here is good reason therefore to treat as a special case the
prohibition o f these activities at such grounds. By analogy, having alcohol in one's blood over a fixed limit
has been m ade an offence only in relation to driving, because it is dangerous to the public in that special
context.

   293. T he second reason requires an exam ination o f sections 4(1) and 5(1) o f the 1986 Act. So far as is
relevant, these provide as follows:-

  “4( 1) A person is guilty o f an offence if he -

     (a) uses towards another person threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour . . .
            with intent to cause that person to believe that im m ediate unlawful violence will be used against h im
                                                                                                                           /
            or another by any person, or to provoke the im m ediate use o f unlawful violence by that person or
            another, o r whereby that person is likely to believe that such violence will be used or it is likely th a t
            such violence will be provoked . . .

     5(1) A person is guilty o f an offence if he -

      (a)   uses threatening, abusive or insulting words o r behaviour, o r disorderly b e h a v io u r . . .
            within the hearing o r sight o f a person likely to be caused harassm ent, alarm or distress thereby” .

   294. Throwing missiles could only be caught u n d e r section 5 as “disorderly behaviour’* if the additional
clem ent were proved that it was “within the hearing o r sight o f a person likely to be caused harassm ent, alarm
or distress thereby”. To ad d uce evidence o f this last elem ent m ay be very difficult indeed. It should surely be
sufficient to show that the accused threw a missile at a football m atch.

    295. As to obscene or racialist chanting similar difficulties arise. Although the chanting m ay be proved
abusive o r insulting it would also have to be shown, u n d e r section 4, that it was used “towards another person
. . . with intent to cause that person to believe that im m ediate unlawful violence will be used against him e tc”.
P r o o f o f those elements may not be possible.                    *

  296. U nder section 5. whilst again the chanting m ay be proved to have contained “abusive or fnsulting
w ords” , it may be difficult to show that this was d o ne “ within the hearing or sight o f a person likely to be
caused harassment, alarm or distress thereby”. T he words may cause nothing o th e r than disgust.

   297. N or does section 18 o f the Act help. U n d e r th e heading '"Acts intended or likely to stir up racial
h atred", the section provides as follows so far as is relevant:-

     “ 18^|KA person who uses threatening, abusive or insulting words or b e h a v io u r . . . is guiltv o f an offence
     if-

       (a) he intends thereby to stir up racial hatred, or
 *                                     •#   ’


       (b) having regard to all the circumstances racial hatred is likely to be stirred up thereby".

  298. Racialist abuse of the kind chanted at football m atches is probably not intended to stir up racial
hatred. N or could it readily be proved that racial hatred was likely to be stirred up. The effect o f such
chanting is to give cheap an d ignoble am u sem en t to those participating whilst causing offence and
em barrassm ent to those abused a n d to the decent m ajority o f fans.

   299. For these reasons. I do not consider that the activities which M r Justice Popplewell concluded should
be the subject o f a criminal offence are covered by the 1986 Act. He set out the arguments for and against
legislation to prohibit them at paragraphs 4.42 to 4.74 o f his Final Report. I do not rehearse those argum ents.
1 agree with his conclusion that on balance, despite the difficulties o f drafting and enforcement, these
activities should be prohibited. M r Justice Popplewell concluded that a “catch-all" offence o f disorderly
conduct at a sports ground should be considered. I appreciate the force o f his reasoning. However, I would
prefer to see separate offences in respect of each of the three activities I have mentioned. T he object o f th e
legislation must be not merely to prosecute offences w hen they occur but to deter them. I.' there is a specific
offence o f throwing missiles at a designated sports ground, a separate specific offence o f chanting obscene o r
racialist abuse there and a th ird specific offence o f going on the pitch w ithout reasonable excuse there and, if
full publicity is given to the legislation, hooligans will know precisely what is prohibited and that they d o
those things at their peril.

   300. As to going on the pitch. I have a reason for recom m ending prohibition additional to those which
convinced M r Justice Popplewell. I have recom m ended lowering the level o f fences and removing spikes a n d
overhanging sections. T hat relaxation is m ade in the interests o f the decent m ajority o f supporters who have
no yen to invade the pitch. To back up the lesser deterrent effect o f lower fences I think it p rudent to have a
criminal sanction against pitch invasion.

   301. I appreciate that at som e sports grounds there is a trad itio n o f running onto the pitch when the game
is over simply from jo ie de vivre or to pat players on the back. At Murrayfield. for example, schoolboys sit on
forms on the pitch side o f the perim eter fencing and run on harmlessly at the end o f the game. Again, going
onto the pitch to escape some hazard on the terraces in an emergency should, of course, be legitim ate.
Accordingly, the offence should be aim ed at prohibiting invasion o f the pitch w ithout good reason or
reasonable excuse. T he police will in this as in m any other situations have to exercise sensible discretion a n d
judgment.


                                                             51
