INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
       STADIUM DISASTER



           With the Compliments of
          the Secretary to the Inquiry




         Hr                  GO—




50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT
01-2733602
0   INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt Hon LordJustice
    STADIUM DISASTER
                                                50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                                London SW1H 9AT
                                                01-273 2577/3602/2370

    C J Gorringe Esq                             Your Ref:      CJG/LC
    Chief Executive
    The All England Lawn Tennis
     & Croquet Club
    Church Road
    Wimbledon
    LONDON SW19 5AE
                                                 3 November 1989




    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


    Lord Justice Taylor has asked me to thank you for your letter of
    20 October. His interim recommendations were primarily directed
    to sports grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds
    Act 1975. Therefore, they cannot be said to apply directly to
    other situations, for example regulated stands under the Fire
    Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987. However Lord
    Justice Taylor would not regard it as unreasonable for similar
    criteria to the ones he has adopted to be brought to bear in the
    latter case.

    I think the best thing for you to do would be to take advice from
    the Home Office, and your first point of contact should be Mr
    David Mould, in G2 Division in the Fire and Emergency Planning
    Department, located here at Queen Anne's Gate. His telephone
    number is 01 273 3099. To save time, I have sent him a copy of
    your letter and the correspondence you attached to it. I hope
    this is helpful. Lord Justice Taylor was nevertheless grateful
    to you for your invitation to come to the club to discuss the
    matter, but hopes you will understand why it is better for you
    now to consult the Home Office rather than him about the detail
    of the matter.
    With best wishes.
                                                               j




                                           R M WHALLEY
                                      Secretary to the Inquiry
                              The A ll England
                    Lawn Tennis & Croquet Club Wimbledon
                                     C h u rc h R oad W im b le d o n
                                          London SW 19 5AE
                                      Telephone 01-944 1066
                                     Telex 265180 a /b A E L T C
                                      Facsimile 01-947 8752




CJG/LC


20th October 1989


The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




I had the pleasure of meeting you here at the Club on the second Thursday of
this year's Championships and it is on the subject of safety at sports grounds
that I am writing this letter.    I realise that you must be extremely busy at
this time finalising your final report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster
but, nevertheless, X hope you will have the chance of giving me the benefit of
your advice.

We have been informed by our Local Authority that any covered stands
accommodating five hundred people or more will need a Safety Certificate prior
to the 1990 Championships.     In order for the Local Authority to assess the
Club, they engaged a firm of consultants to be present throughout this year's
Championships and subsesquently issued their report, a copy of which I am
enclosing.

As a result of that report, we have had three meetings to date with the Local
Authority, Metropolitan Police, London Fire Brigade, London Ambulance Service,
St John, etc.          It seems clear to us that the Local Authority, whilst
appreciating all the positive steps to improve safety that the Club has made
over p r e v i o u s years, nevertheless feels it is correct to apply the
recommendations made in your interim report following the Hillsborough disaster
and are using the Green Guide as their rule book.


Whilst it is recognised that the Club needs to receive a Safety Certificate,
we were led to believe that your recommendations in your interim report were
applicable, predominantly, to football grounds.     This interpretation has, we
tinderstand, been confirmed by the Westminster City Council in respect of one of
the leading cricket grounds and we would have thought it was equally so with an
event such as Wimbledon.

                                                                                             Cont'd ....




                     Chairman R E H Hadingham c b e   mc td   Chief Executive C J Gorringe
                                       2



I am enclosing a copy of the Club's initial response to the Local Authority
following their report.   The Club willingly agrees that a number of measures
should and can be taken prior to next year's Championships in order to improve
crowd safety, including precise ticketing arrangements for our standing areas
on Centre and No 1 Courts.     Our main concern is that the character of The
Championships is not significantly affected and we believe that if we had to
implement all the recommendations in the Local Authority's report that would be
the result.

It is not the Club's intention to go behind the Local Authority's back but it
would be extremely help f u l to k now from you w h e t h e r your inte r i m
recommendations were meant to apply to an event such as ours.

Because of the number of crucial decisions the Club has to make in the next few
weeks, as mentioned above, it would be greatly appreciated if we could receive
your views as soon as possible.

Even better - and perhaps more convenient to you in some ways - my Chairman, Mr
R E Hadingham, would be delighted if you could accept an invitation to come to
the Club on some mutually convenient date when we could discuss our problem.

With kind regards.

Yours sincerely




Chief Executive
,&>
                           The A ll England
                 Lawn Tennis & Croquet Club Wimbledon
                                     C h u rc h R oad W im b le d o n
                                          L ondon SW 19 5AE
                                      Telephone 01-944 1066
                                     Telex 265180 a /b A E L T C
                                      Facsimile 01-947 8752




Your ref:   C/TJM/LT/S004
Our ref:    CJG/LC


12th October 1989


Mr R S Pryke
Chief Building Control Surveyor
London Borough of Merton
Crown House
London Road
SM4 5DX


Dear Sir

Safety at Sports Ground - The All England Lawn Tennis Club

I wish to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of 30th August 1989 with which
you enclosed your Consultant's report and the first draft of the initial part
of the required Safety Certificate.

Following the meetings on 7th September at Crown House and on 26th September
1989 at The All England Club, it was agreed that the Club would make an initial
formal response.    This is being done before a further meeting is held at the
Club on 18th October when further information will be available to the Club,
once calculations involving widths of gangways and lengths of rows have been
evaluated by your Consultants.

I would like to begin by reiterating some points I made at the start of our
meeting on 7th September.     Since we have been at our present site in Church
Road the Committee, especially during the past 15 years, have continually up­
graded and improved the facilities at the Club for the benefit of the public,
players, officials and the media.    There is no part of the complex (Centre and
No 1 Courts) or the grounds that have not been altered.               All these
improvements have taken place with the fullest liaison with the Local Authority
in order to meet planning and safety requirements at all times.              The
Committee has never been complacent about safety measures and the general
comfort of those who attend The Championships.    A number of measures which the
Club carried out voluntarily within the last few years were recorded in two
letters I wrote to your Chief Executive on 3rd and 9th May 1989 (see
attachments 1 and 2).       This should be clear evidence of the Committee's
motives: the quality of the event has, and will always, come first.


                                                                                           Cont'd ....




                    Chairman R E H Hadingham c b e   mc td   ChiefExecutive C J Gorringe
We also believe that The Championships are very different from most of the
other major sporting events in this country. For example,

a)   Play takes place on 18 courts and not on one pitch, circuit, etc.

b)   Spectators, generally, do not come to support one player or team.

c)   Spectators, even those with Centre or No 1 Court tickets, also like
     to watch tennis on the outside courts during the afternoon, just as
     those without Centre or No JL Court tickets value the opportunity of
     using the unreserved areas of these two stadium courts for a limited
     time to watch matches on them - in other words, gradual movement and
     circulation has always been an integral part of our scene.

d)   Play can last from 12.30 p.m. to 9.30 p.m.   (up to 9 hours) and over
     13 days.

e)   The crowd profile at The Championships is very different from most
     other events, including a high proportion of women (48%).

Furthermore, to my knowledge, there has never been any serious form of crowd
disturbance at any tennis event in the UK or, for that matter,anywhere else in
the world - certainly not at Wimbledon.

Having painted a little of the background, I would like to come back to
specifics.   Mr. Pryke said at the first meeting that the Consultant's report
was "a discussion document" and we have appreciated the way your Safety Team
has been prepared to hear our comments in going through the report.

There are a great number of points which I believe the Committee would endorse
in principle.   There are some, however, with which we are not comfortable and
would need convincing are beneficial.

The areas of broad agreement are as follows:

a)   A Safety Officer   - The practical aspects need to be worked out as
      it is not as simple as it may seem.

b)   Stewarding Arrangements   - The importance of training and briefing
      is accepted.    The role of the Honorary Stewards, as opposed to the
      Service Stewards and LFB, has to be understood.

c)   Police Presence     -   The provision of a new Control Room for key
     personnel, including the Police, is beinglooked at and      will be
     established once agreement on site, etc. has been reached.

d)   Monitoring of Crowds Within the Complex     -   The need to control
     numbers in the standing enclosures of Centre and No 1 Courts; use of
     CCTV.
e)   Public Address   - To be upgraded and extended to areas not already
      covered;   to consider increased zoning;   a stand-by supply in the
      event of power failure  To review emergency evacuation announcements
      and procedures.

f)   Internal Communications      -   To   investigate   the benefits   of an
      emergency telephone system.

g)   TV Cameras and Press Photographers     -   where possible to provide
      designated areas for both categories and to ensure that they cannot
      block or even intrude upon escape routes.

h)   Circulation Areas   -   To ensure that these areas are not partially
      blocked by stationary crowds.    Specific examples are the removal of
      the Results Board (from the players' point of view it would be
      necessary to retain the Matches on Court board) on the Main Concourse
      opposite the Referee's Office;   autograph hunters to be kept out of
      SW Hall; WRVS stand in SE Hall to be redesigned and relocated.

i)   Glazing Between Centre and No 1 Courts    -   To replace clear glass
     with opaque at both levels and to provide a safe barrier on mezzanine
      level between Centre and No 1 Court.

j)   Fire Detection - We believe that the fire risks in the complex are
     already very low. However, we will endeavour to ensure that the fire
     hazard is reduced to negligible proportions.

k)   Structural Safety   -  The Club to undertake a structural survey to
     test hand-rails, balustrades, etc.


The issue that the Club is particularly concerned about is the idea that there
might have to be a perimeter fence erected around the Centre and No 1 Court
complex.    With the experience that the Committee and its Executives have had
in running The Championships, we do not believe that, provided other measures
are carried out as described above, a ring-fence would be of benefit to overall
security.    Indeed, we believe it could constitute more of a hazard than the
current arrangements.

On the question of timber seats, number of seats in a row, design of vomitories
etc., we realise that further investigation needs to be carried out.         We
cannot comment on this subject until all the facts are available and
recommendations made.

I apologise for the length of this letter, but it goes to show how seriously
we take safety and security at the Club.     We intend to take a great deal of
action over the next nine months, but we would hope not, at a stroke, to be
required to alter the whole character and atmosphere of the Club during both
The Championships and for other times of the year.


                                                                        Cont'd .
                                       4



Rather, having taken immediate action in certain areas, we would like to
suggest that, where there are other joint concerns, these are monitored
together during the course of the 1990 Championships so that we can all be sure
that any further emergency and expensive alterations are only carried out once
all
parties are satisfied that such alterations really are the right ones for the
safety and enjoyment of all.

We should all be proud of the worldwide status of The Championships that has
grown continually over the years.     We do not wish to change a winning game
unless there is good reason to d© so.

We look forward to our next meeting on 18th October at 9.30 a.m.

Yours sincerely




Chief Executive




c.c   Mr W A McKee, Chief Executive
      Mr C Carter, Director - Development Department
      Mr B Seller, Assistant Director of Development Department
                                  The A ll England
                    Law fi l enfiis & Croquet Glub. Wimbledon
                                     Church Road Wimbledon
                                             London SW19 5AE
                                      'Telephone 01 -944 1066
                                     Telex 265180 a/b AF.LTC
                                       I ',i, simile 01-947 8752




 CJG/LC


    9th June 1989


W . A. HcKea, Esq.,

•
Chief Executive,
London Borough of Merton,
Crown House ,
London Road,
Morden,
Surrey,
SK4 5DX.


Dear

Safety at Sports Grounds

Thank you for your further letter of 6th June.

With regard to the specific point raised in your letter of 27th April, the most
significant "improvement" that we have made recently is the reduction in the
capacity of the crowd from 31,000 to approximately 28,000 at any one time.
This has naturally relieved any possible congestion in the walkways between the
outside courts.

By increasing the amount of temporary seating around the outside courts this,
too, has reduced the necessity for overcrowding down the passageways to watch
particular matches.

Another point which is certainly worth confirming is that in the event of a
disaster meabers of the public are able to gain easy access onto the courts
themselves.

Finally, one point I could have raised In my letter to you of 3rd May is that a
few years ago the Contittee agreed that courtesy oars for players and VIP's
would not be permitted to c o m .into the Club's grounds, except in special
                        **• naturally *«de a significant improvement to
circulation along the main concourse.

Tours sincerely,


      c '%-

Chief Executive


                    Chairman R E H Hadingham c b e   mc td   Chief Executive C J Gorringe
                                                  The A ll England
                                        Lawn Tennis & Croquet d u b Wimbledon
                                                             C-Iiurcli Road W im bledon
                                                                  London SW19 5AE
                                                              Telephone 01-944 1066
                                                             Telex 265180 a/b A H I.TC
                                                              I '.icsiiitile 01-947 8752




 CJG/LC


 3rd Kay 1989


 '•V. 'iCKOc , Lso »r
 C.Micf V . x c c v t i v c ,
    on c o n liorouq-"i o f i - i c r t o n ,
r Crov;n i i o u o e ,
  Lon c o n R o a c i    ,
  M ereen,
  S urrev.




       ink you for your let:                           of 27x:h April,      wnicn


1       -_uate uaseratana that tne Council is anxious                                       to ensure tnat tno 'safetv
                       the stadia within the Borough are                                      s.ufo as possible following
y_ ' I >2
          rjillbOorouQn dis^stiGr                  .




       we at the Club have not had a full Co,m:ittee Meeting since 15th April
we have oeen looking at our safety measures in a realistic way.   1 beliove ^
^blic           w7th7n We h3V* taken stePs to improve         the conditionsforthe general
public          within our grounds during the Fortnight in the followingways:

a)          In 1982 we expanded into Aorangi Park, which virtually doubled <-he
            circulation area for t h e crowd.    The crowd capacity was not
            increased at that time.

b)
            In 1987, however, we did voluntarily reduce the capacitv of the crowd
            w a T o'a             ^        006    t im e W3S 3 1 ' 0 0 0 * t o a p p r o x im a t e ly 2 8 , 0 0 0 . we
            w a n te d       to       e n su re    t h a t t h o s e p e o p le com ing t o The C h a m p io n s h ip
            enjoyed                               .ufficl.„tly to                 to c l                               £

                                         T             °Ut        L'*,,,r“ in 1987 • 95% sala th«              th.y h.S
                                                                               other 54 ”er*                      -        ■
c)
            triTt IVclnlT.                                                 *y,t" * io»* **• «»»«><«•• in
                                  ntr* Court                 thi« has b««n atawardad at both anda.
d)
                                                  “ * p*d**tri*n tr* m             ° n o * in * « « » of « „     ho   . i

«)




                                       Chairman R E H Hadingham c b e   mctd   C hief Executive C J Gorringe
f)    We introduced the West walkway in 1988 whereby lumbers of th« public
      could walk into the North end of the ground, and vio« versa, without
      going through either the tea lawn or the corridor between Centre and
      Ho. 1 Court.   This has eased congestion along the »ain concourse.

g)    we have continued to Increase the amount of temporary seating   for the
      outside courts and that also has continued this year where      we have
      introduced additional temporary seating around Courts 11 , 13   an<a 14
      We believe that well over 27,000 can be seated around all the   Courts!

 h)   Tae Referee’s office and, therefore, the Uiapires are instructed that
      should the Centre and No. 1 Court matches end simultaneously those
      people on No. 1 Court are told toremain in their      seats for a few
      noaonts in order to allow the Centre Court to empty.

i)    In comparison to most football stadia, the Centre Court capacity is
      only 14,500 and No. 1 Court 8,000.

j)    We engage over 750 people for crowd control.

k)    He will be having another Emergency Services meeting shortly in order
      to re-appriase the situation in the event of a disaster.


I hope these points clearly show that whilst we may be confident with
arrangements we are far from complacent and we will continue to m
improvements where we think fit.

I an glad you can make our meeting on 26th May and I look forward to seeing
here at the Club at about 12.00 noon.

Yours sincerely.




Chief Executive
       INTERIM REPORT ON THE



 SAFETY SURVEY CARRIED OUT BETWEEN



 26TH JUNE AND 9TH JULY 1989 ON THE



ALL ENGLAND LAWN TENNIS CLUB STADIUM




                  Prepared by


                     I.W.Bourne MIAS MIBC


                     Lawrence Webster Forrest
                     Associates Ltd.
                     Consulting Engineers
                   CONTENTS



INTRODUCTION



CROWD CONTROL



FIRE SAFETY




FIRE SEPARATION



INGRESS & EGRESS




STRUCTURAL ENGINEERING WORKS
INTRODUCTION


The Safety survey was carried out by LWF between the
26th June and 9th July 1989 when the AELT Championships
were taking place, such to assist the appointed
Consultants in their appraisal of the present
arrangements provided by the Club, with regards to
Crowd Control and Fire Safety.


The Survey specifically looked at the following areas;


a.   crowd control within the stadium,


b.   fire safety,


c.   fire separation,


d.   ingress and egress from within Centre Court and
     Court 1,


since these would be the major subjects of the draft
Safety Certificate.


Crowd Control


Although the brief was to consider the crowd control
arrangements from within Centre Court and Court 1 it
was considered ecjually important to look at the crowd
 flow patterns from the designated access road located
at the front of Centre Court and Courts 14 and 15.
The Stewardinq Arrangement


On close examination of the stewarding arrangement
within the ground it is clear that the responsibility
for stewarding falls under the control of the following
four groups:
                                                            N

a.   Honorary Stewards.

                                                        O
b.   Armed Services.


c.   Fire Services.


d.   Security G u a r d .


It became apparent that there was no overal1
co-ordinating steward or safety officer responsible for
the monitoring or the briefing of the combined groups
on a day to day bas i s .


Each individual group appeared to be under the control
of their own individual commander or chief steward,
with their own particular instructions on what to do in
an emergency situation.
General Briefing of Stewards


a.   Honorary Stewards


     The role of these particular stewards is not
     clearly defined and certainly did not appear to
     contribute to providing a satisfactory stewarding
     a r r a n g e m e n t with respect to emergency procedures
     within the Centre Court and Court 1.


     It would appear that the main role of the Honorary
     Stewards was to show spectators to their correct
     seats and to collect tickets from Centre Court and
     Court 1.    The tickets then resold for charity oh
     spectator departure.        Over 50 % of the Honorary
     Steward's were questioned with regard to their
     briefing by the Chief Steward and to their
     familiarisation of the emergency evacuation
     procedures.


     Although all the stewards had been issued with the
     procedures very few were fully aware of what to dc
     without first consulting the hand-out.


     NONE of the stewards have had any formal training
     in the use of hand fire fighting appliances or with
     regard to their role during an emergency at the
     ■tournament.    Clearly there is a lack of training
     and briefing given to the Honorary Stewards and
     their contribution to providing satisfactory
     stewarding arrangements to the ground must come
      into question.
Armed Services


This particular group of stewards is well briefed
in the emergency evacuation procedures relating to
the Stadium and in the use of hand fire fighting
appliances.


It is, however, apparent that the personnel in and
about the enclosed stadiums were not briefed on
how to deal with the stewarding of spectators,
particularly inside the standing areas of Centre
Court/Court 1.    Further, within the corridor
approaches around Centre Court and at the staircase
exits from within the stands.


Of special concern was the congregation of
spectators at viewing windows to Court 1, at the
players exit from the stadium and general gathering
leading to the effective blockage of escape routes
and staircases.     Spectators were also observed
during matches sitting and standing on barriers,
walls and fences within the Centre Court and Court
 1 stadia.


 The Fire Service


 From the general nature of their training, these
 stewards were well briefed in the use of hand fire
 fighting equipment and were aware of the emergency
 evacuation procedures for the stadium.
They,   like the armed services however,   showed lack
of control in the stewarding of crowds with this
quite clearly apparent where staircases leading to
the standing areas of Court 1 were allowed to be
blocked, also spectators were allowed to climb
onto barriers and the rear fence of Court 1
without without challenge.


Security Guards


An independent company was engaged by the club to
provide security around the perimeter of the grounti
and within the Centre Court and Court 1 during the
night.


The majority of personnel were only temporary (95%)
and employed for the duration of the tournament.


The temporary staff were not trained in the use of
hand fire fighting appliances and were only issued
with the leaflet dealing with the emergency
evacuation procedures.


The Survey showed that staff located on Gate 5 were
not aware of the emergency evacuation procedures,
this was particularly alarming since Gate 5 was the
designated entry for Fire Service appliances.
2.3   The Role of the Police


      The role of the police as defined by the secJLor police
      officer was to keep law and order immediately outaid©
      the stadium, maintain security in and arouni the Royal
      Box and to assist in controlling crowds wiriln the
      stadium grounds in the event of emergency.


      In normal conditions during the tournament tie Chiof
      Inspector of police and his officers are net involved
      in crowd control measures in and about the ground.


      Finally, the police control unit is not ide.-2.-ly
      positioned, a more satisfactory location wazid be
      within the control room under stand 2.


2.4   Monitoring of crowds within the stadium


      At the present time the only method of moni-erring of
      the crowd into the stadium is via the turns--ties and
      ticket allocation.   There is no controlled method of
      determining the number of spectators inside tie
      enclosed stadium within the standing areas    err
      spectators flowing about whilst the matches a^re in
      progress.


      The only area where there is some form of cccrtrol
      within the stadium is within the seating             since
      access to these areas are only via ticket.


      Clearly a method of determining the number zz
      spectators, within the stands is urgently rec-jired to
      ensure adequate crowd control measures.
It is our recommendation that the entire enclosure
consisting of Centre Court/Court 1 and all the
immediately adjacent circulation areas are restricted
to seat ticket holders and pre-issued standing ticket
holders only.


Monitoring Equipment


The only monitoring equipment for spectator control is
at present located within the Chief Executives office.


In the future there is a need for monitoring equipment
to be installed in a central control room to assist the
Senior Stewards and Chief Inspector of Police.


Public Address System


The emergency evacuation practice which took place
during the championships clearly indicated deficiencies
with the present public address system.


Improvements need to be undertaken and an override
facility needs to be incorporated within the public
address system to allow the Chief Inspector of Police
or Fire Officer to break into the system as necessary.


Location of TV Cameras


The location of TV cameras within the public standing
and seating areas of Centre Court and within the
seating area of Court 1, clearly caused problems with
regard to crowd control within the areas resulting in
reduced access and egress from certain exits.
      The exact siting of the cameras should be agreed prior
      to the start of the Championships and must not at any
      time restrict the egress and ingress of spectators
      or impede access to any exit.


2.8   Location of Press Photographers


      A major area for concern existed within the uncovered
      seating area of Centre Court with regard to the
      presence of press photographers, who were allowed to
      block gang ways and exit routes with boxes and
      equipment left without regard to maintaining free
      access ways.


      Greater control of the press should be considered with
      possibly a designated area being put aside for their
      purpose only.


2.9   South West Hall


      A major breakdown in crowd control measures within this
      particular area was evident due to the lack of proper
      stewarding arrangements maintaining free flow of
      spectators from the enclosed stands past spectators
      waiting to see players.


      In the event of restricted access to ticket holders
      only gaining entry to the Centre Court complex,
      enhanced stewarding control will be required in the
      area immediately outside of the South West Hall
      entrance, due to the attraction of the players
      entrance.
     To maintain free unrestricted movement of spectators
     and avoid congestion, consideration should be given to
    relocation of the match board indicator immediately
     opposite.   It was noted during the tournament that a
    major contribution to congestion in the main designated
     access road was the siting of the match board.


2.10 South East Entrance


    The St.Johns Ambulance First Aid room extended into the
    main hall.    Likewise the W.V.S.     information desk is
     located within the main hall.


     In both cases the location caused problems of egress
     and ingress from main staircases from the Centre Court
     and resulted in reduced exit w i d t h s .


2.11 Corridors Running between Centre Court/Court 1


     Clear vision panels that exist within the wall
     construction of Court 1 cause spectators to congregate
     two and three deep within the narrow corridors.        These
     spectators in addition to ticket holders for Centre
     Court waiting for 'change of e n d ’ access to their
     seats cause a major crowd control problem with very
     limited access existing for spectators to move on.


     It was noted that with stewards positioned within this
     area the flow of spectators, still breaks down and
     major problems could occur in an emergency situation.


     This area gave rise to particular concern due to either
     end of the corridor at head of exit stairs forming main
     emergency routes to areas of Centre Court and Court 1.
   The situation effectively trapping persons within the
   corridor area and preventing adequate egress from the
   Centre Court exits onto the corridor.


12 Corridor Approach Around Centre Court & Debenture
  Lounge


   In some areas of the corridor approach at the rear of
  Centre Court adjacent to the Debenture Lounge, the
  corridor width is considered to be too narrow and this
   is clearly indicated when spectators are held between
  matches and people passing have great difficulty with
  general access.


13 Rear of Court 1/Court 14/15


   In this particular area due to the discharge of
  staircases from the seating areas of these courts a
  major crowd control problem exists because of the
  dispersal of crowds into this specific area without any
  proper stewarding arrangement being provided.


  Segregation of spectators at ground level to facilitate
   free movement of persons from Court 1 to a satisfactory
  exit route is considered essential.      This route being
  maintained free of obstructions and general spectator
  circulation.


   In addition the siting of discharge stairs from courts
   13 and 14 should be planned to reduce conflictin egress
  patterns.
Fire Safety


The existing fire safety precautions within the two
enclosed stands was considered in view of the
recommendations contained within the green code of
practice, with evacuation times taken at different
exits during the championships.


Centre Court


a.   Timber seating within the seating areas of Centre
     Court to be replaced.   The number of seats in a row
     in relation to the gangways exceeds the recommended
     limits specified in the code.


     Additional exists to be provided within Centre
     Court to comply with recommendations of the green
     code of practice.


b.   Existing widths of gangways are considered
     inadequate.


c.   Existing gangway widths appear to vary in width and
     are not uniform.


d.   Evacuation time from within the Centre Court to the
     Corridor takes on average 6 mins 14 secs.
     Evacuation timings were based upon normal
     evacuation and not emergency evacuation aided by
     stewards.
The T.V. Control rooms near to the Royal Box are
constructed of timber and have only a single
staircase.    Up grading in line with fire precaution
measures would be considered necessary.


Press equipment should be removed from gangways
affording access and egress within the Centre Court
area.


All loose cabling to be securely relocated into a
duct or secure fixture and not be accessible to
spectators.


This is particularly important at the front of the
uncovered seating area,   in the standing areas and
in areas designated for disabled persons.


Provide adequate means of ingress and exit for
disabled persons to the designated area within
Centre Court.


Wheel Chair personnel and accompanying able-bodied
attendants only to be allowed to occupy this area
and not in any other area of the stand. All wheel
chair bound spectators must be accompanying by an
able bodied person.


TV Cameras should not be positioned within standing
areas of the court, and their positions to be
agreed with the Safety team at least 28 days prior
to the Championship.
#

    j . Portable T.V. equipment including tripods and
         wiring should not to be allowed to be positioned
         within gangways and staircase exits.


    k.   Consideration should be given to the possibility of
         Press photographers being located in designated
         areas of the stand only, and should not be allowed
         to block g a n g w a y s and staircase exits.


    1.   ALTERNATIVE MEANS OF Egress should be provided
         within the standing areas of Centre Court.


    m.   Central handrail should be provided to main
         spectator egress staircases from standing are as .


    n.   Emergency telephone points for the use of stewards
         should be provided within the stand. The positions
         to be agreed with the safety team.


    o.   Close Circuit TV to be installed within the stadium
         at locations to be agreed by the safety team.


    p.   Minimum headroom must be maintained in accordance
         with the guide from all structural projections or
         cable routing.


    q.   Doors opening inwards from the court area of at the
         North open stand should not restrict the means of
         escape passageway at the underside of the stand.


    r.   Emergency lighting system to be incorporated within
         corridor approaches to the main staircases.
C o r r i do r Approaches to Staircases Around Centre
Court/Court 1


a.    The existing vision panels in the walls of Court 1
      which back onto the corridors should be removed and
      the openings built up in masonry construction.


b.    All existing frosted glass glazing should be
      removed and the openings built up in masonry
      construction.


c.    Exit signs must be clearly marked and the route of
      travel to the appropriate staircase clearly defined
      for spectators.


d.    Emergency telephones are to be located at points
      within the corridors as agreed by the safety team.


e.    Close Circuit TV should be installed within the
      corridors at locations agreed by the safety team.


 f.   All mechanical services should discharge direct to
      the external air and not into the corridor.


 g.   All access doors to voids should be kept locked and
       be fire resisting.


 h.    Fire detection system to be installed within the
       enclosed voids under Centre Court.


 i.    Lobby Approaches to be provided to openings from
       offices, press rooms, private lounge areas which
       have direct access onto the corridors.
           All lobby approaches to be of fire resisting
           construction.


      j.   The Insulated flue pipe located within the corridor
           should be enclosed by a non combustible wall
           construction of a minimum fire resistance of 1 1/2
           h ou r s .


3.3   Staircases


      None of the staircases from within the enclosed stands
      are clearly defined as a means of escape and none have
      any means of fire protection enclosing them.                     Means of
      controlling the spread of smoke should be considered
      by the safety team where practicable.


3.4   Lower Level Corridor Approaches Centre Court


      a.   All doors from workshops, TV control rooms and
           offices, having direct access onto the corridor
           should be fitted with 1/2 hr. fire resisting doors
           and kept closed at all times.


      b.   The cushion sales areas should be located outside
           corridors designated for means of escape purposes.


      c.   Fire Exit routes should be clearly marked and Fire
           Exit signs clearly defined.


      d.   The W.V.S.      information desks should be removed from
           the South East/South West Entrance Hall Areas to
           allow an unobstructed exit from the discharging
           staircases.


      e.   The    St.   John's   Ambulance    Room must       not be   allowed
           to    extend   into the   S o u t h W e s t Hall   Entrance.
f.   Spectators should not be allowed to congregate in
     the immediate area of players entrance.


g.   All rubbish bins to be of the sealed type and not
     of the basket arrangement.


h.   All windows on the corridors to be fitted with fire
     resisting glazing and not plain clear or frosted
     glass and should be fixed shut.


i.   Close Circuit T.V. to be incorporated within the
     corridor a r e a s .


Court 1


a.   All existing timber seating to be removed.


b.   Uneven goings to staircases used for ingress and
     egress purposes, will need to be reconstructed.


c.   All clear glazed vision panels to be removed from
     the back of the seating area and the opening
     blocked up in Fire resisting material i.e. masonry.


d.   All doors from the standing opening onto the
     corridor to be 1/2 hr. fire resisting.


e.   Alternative means of escape arrangement to be
     provided to the West standing area at its
     mid-point.


f.   Number of rows of seats in relation to gangways
     exceeds the maximum number specified in -the Green
     Code.
The number of exit widths from within the stand
appears to be inadequate.    Additional exits and
gangways will be required.


Secondary and Emergency lighting systems to be
installed to the means of escape, access staircases
and corridors.


Emergency telephones to be located at key points
around the stand as agreed by safety team.


Clearly signed exits and exit routes should be
marked.


The position of TV cameras within the seating areas
should be agreed by the safety team prior to the
commencement of the Championship, with at least 28
days notice given to the Local Authority.


A designated area should be put aside for the press
photographers within the stand.


All glazed windows on the corridor approach on the
underside of Court 1 (Stewards Restaurant Area)
should be fitted with fire resisting glazing and
the windows should not be allowed to be pivoted
open.


Gas heaters located in the corridor at high level
should be removed from the corridor area.


No spectators to be allowed to queue on staircases
leading to the standing areas or staircases used
for Emergency purposes.
Fire Separation


No proper means of fire separation is provided
between the two stands. With the improvements to
corridors between stands, a controlled method of
fire separation will exist.
In addition to the improvements recommended a further
separation may be provided at the junction of gangway
18 of Court 1 and Centre Court by the introduction of
fire resisting glazing.


Compartmentation should be provided between the office
areas, and Centre Court, and between debenture lounge
and Centre Court.


Ingress and Egress from the Stands


Centre Court


a. West open stand area


   The main access is located at the centre of the
   open stand with very narrow exits being provided at
   either end of the terrace.


   Additional gangways and improvements to the
   existing exits or alternatively new additional exit
   staircases should be incorporated within this area.


b. Standing Terrace West Side


   The terrace has three exits/entrances to the area
   allocated for standing spectators.
However, an additional exit is considered necessary
in the centre of the terrace to assist the egress
from this area and to help the crowd control
measures.


East Open Stand


The stand is served by one main entrance/exit
staircase located centrally within the stand.


Egress from the two ends is via narrow exit
passageways.


Improvements to the two end exits are required
along with an additional staircase located within
the seating area.


Standing Terraces East Side


Egress and Entrance to this standing area is via
three staircases, two of the staircases are located
at either end of the terrace, whilst the other
staircase at the mid point of the terrace.


Although this appears to be satisfactory an
additional exit is suggested in the front of the
terrace.


Main Seating Areas


Thirty one access stairs are provided in and around
the seating areas of the enclosed stand.
          It is evident that to confirm to the
          recommendations of the green code, additional
      access points will have to be incorporated along
      with additional gangways.


      The true assessment will be made once up to date
      survey plans have been provided by the Clubs
      Surveyors.


Court l


a*    Free Standincr Area


      The access to and from this particular area i£ via
      two staircases located at either end of the stand


     There is need for a central exit from the terrace,
     which could either be located at the front or at
     the back of the terrace.


k*   North Stand


     The exit width at the wicket gate entrance to
     stand is too narrow and needs to be increased ia
     width to allow adequate egress and ingress froa
     that part of the stand.


Structural Engineering Works


a * Centre Court


     i.      All handrails,   guard rails,   and b a l u s t r a d e
            to the Exit staircases/main staircases s
            be load tested.
ii.    Proposed and existing Barriers within the
       standing areas should be load tested.


iii. The rail fence around the light well should
       be removed and a structural wall constructed.


iv.    All new walls should be suitably designed to
       withstand the relevant pressures and be
       regularly tested in accordance with the
       requirements of the Safety Certificate.


v.     All temporary scaffolding and support
       structures located within the arena to be the
       subject of structural assessment by qualified
       engineers prior to the commencement of the
       Championship.


 Court 1


 i.    All handrails, guard rails and balustrades to
        exit staircases and main staircases to be
        load tested.


 ii.   Proposed and existing barriers in the
        standing area should be load tested.


 iii. The fence at the rear of the standing area
        should be load tested.


 All free standing walls around stairwells and
 corridors are to be load tested.


 South Stand/North Stand


 Upstand wall located at the front of the stand
 should be load tested.
e.   General


     All structures within the complt»K should be
     assessed structurally and verified in line Kith
     the recommendations of the green code
