                                                              Av
                                             cc   Mr Boys Smith

                                                                  ftv?
Mr Chilcot


LETTER FROM MR TREVOR HICKS                                    f t it*
We spoke about Mr Hicks1 phone call to the Home Office concerning
the position of Mr Peter Wright following the refusal of the lZ
South Yorkshire Police Authority to accept the Chief Constable's
resignation.

2.   I have since returned Mr Hicks' call and received the
attached letter from him. Are you content for me to reply as in
the draft attached?

3.   I do not know exactly how positive a decision the Home
Secretary took in respect of Mr Wright but I assume it was fairly
positive or the Section 29 procedure would have been invoked
earlier.    It may therefore be appropriate to include the
paragraph in square brackets.

4.   Mr Hicks indicated that the Families Support Group would
probably wish to write to the Home Secretary direct and via their
local MP.




                                            P RANSFORD
                                             22 August 1989
FI Division
                      TH/LL



Trevor Hicks Esq
Chairman
Hillsborough Family
  Support firmin




                                            MS RANSFORD



              Thank you for your letter of 21 August about the position
              of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr Peter
              Wright, and the South Yorkshire Police Authority.


              The decision of the South Yorkshire Police Authority not
              to accept Mr Wright's offer of resignation is a matter
              for the Authority alone. There is no provision in police
              service legislation for the Home Secretary to instruct or
              overrule them on that.


              There is a power under Section 29(1) of the Police Act
              1964 for the Secretary of State to require a police
              authority to exercise its power to call upon the chief
              constable to retire in the interests of efficiency.   (The
              Police Authority's power is in Section 5(4).)    However,
              the Home Secretary does not intend to invoke Section
              29(1) in this case.
[The Home Secretary believes that Mr Wright took a proper
and courageous decision in giving the Police Authority
the opportunity of considering his position in the light
of the interim findings of the Taylor enquiry. The Home
Secretary does not feel however that it would be in the
interests of efficiency for him now to require the Police
Authority to seek Mr Wright's retirement.         He is
confident that Mr Wright is the right person to continue
to lead the South Yorkshire force.]


I know that the Home Secretary would want to express
again his sympathy to all the families and relatives
concerned for their great loss.
