From: Linda Rushton                                     cc:    Mr Michael
      APS/Mr Howarth                                           Mr O’Brien
      Room 702                                                 Lord Williams
      Queen Anne’s Gate                                        Mr Omand
      @ 273 4238                                               Ms Weldon
                                                               Mr Middleton
      7 May 1998                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                                               Mr Pugh
                                                               Mr Evans
                                                               Mr Clifford
                                                               Mr Edmundson
                                                               Ms Clifford
                                                               Ms Browne
                                                               Mr Warner
                                                               Mr Owen


Clare Sumner / PS to Home Secretary

MR HOWARTH’S SPEECH FOR HILLSBOROUGH ADJOURNMENT
DEBATE ON FRIDAY 8 MAY 1998

I attach a first draft of Mr Howarth’s speech for tomorrow’s debate and
apologise for the lateness in circulating it. In view of the fact that Mr Howarth
will be closing the debate, more detail will need to be added into the attached
draft during the debate according to whatever issues are raised by various
speakers.

2.    When we spoke earlier this week you indicated that the Home
Secretary would like to see Mr Howarth’s speech. Peter Edmundson is
preparing an additional paragraph to follow on from paragraph 3 which will
make the point that although the families are often grouped together under
the heading ‘Hillsborough families' each family has undergone an individual
tragedy and that should not be forgotten.

3.    I would be grateful for any comments/suggested amendments from
copy recipients by 5pm this evening and if you could let me have any views
from the Home Secretary as soon you can.




                              yowvcia £u.Skt<U

                               LINDA RUSHTON
GEORGE HOWARTH’S CLOSING SPEECH FOR
HILLSBOROUGH DEBATE


1.    Much of the detail arising out of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
and the Taylor Inquiry has been dealt with by my right honourable
friend and I do not intend to cover the ground which has been
covered so thoroughly and thoughtfully.


2.    Several honourable (and one right honourable) friends
together w ith ...............have contributed to this debate in an
equally thoughtful and respectful manner, and some additional
points have been raised which I intend to deal with in a few
moments. However there are some things I feel need to be
expressed and I would like to begin with by putting them on
record.


3.    96 people on that day went to watch a football match and
never came home. Each one of those who died had a future when
they left home. Some were too young to have any clear picture of
what that future might be, others had family responsibilities and
commitments; all of them had fresh experiences ahead of them -
love, joy, disappointment, success and yes the fear of failure and
rejection. In short, they had lives to live.


4.     New paragraph re Hillsborough families...




                                     i
4.    Whatever their potential - for happiness, a career and
fulfilment - it was cut short and that terrible truth still affects us all.
But those of us who did not lose a loved one can come close to
knowing how those who did have been affected. We do not have
the words to describe how they feel nor the imagination to feel as
they do.


5.    This inability to feel or describe adequately has created
problems for us and often hurt for those left behind. Sometimes
because we are unable to express things properly, we do so
clumsily and, although our clumsiness is unintentional, it causes
pain and anguish. If my own inadequacy to express my feelings
and to explain events has hurt people, I here and now apologise
for that. But I hope people will come to accept that such
inadequacies of expression do not apply when it comes to matters
of judgement and good faith.


6.     There are those who have said that Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith’s review of the evidence is the final word on Hillsborough
and that a line should be drawn under the matter. I do not share
that view. There are some things that have been said - by certain
 police officers and by sections of the media - which have left the
 survivors of those who died scarred in a profound, elemental and
 emotional way. In other ways the system failed to provide an
 adequate means for blame to be seen to be apportioned and, just
 as importantly, to be remedied. I think those matters require us to
respond, not just by making sure that for the future, practices and
procedures are properly reformed in the manner described by my
right honourable friend, but also by putting into words the
consequences for those left behind as a result of these failures.


7.    The reasons why those 96 people died had nothing to do
with where they came from or who they were. The fact that they
came from Liverpool, or were football fans had nothing to do with
their deaths other than the fact that their team were playing at that
stadium on that day.


8.    It was not their behaviour or their alcohol intake that caused
the tragedy and nobody should be left in any doubt of that simple
truth. If anyone does question that, they should read both the
Taylor Report and the Stuart-Smith Report and if they do that, they
can be left in no doubt as to who was primarily responsible - it was
the South Yorkshire Police.


9.    Yet we still need to go further. Stereotypes about people
from Liverpool and football fans are just as offensive as
stereotypes about ethnic minorities or women - in some ways
more so. Football fans, now as then, are like any other group in
society - most are just normal people trying to get on with their
lives as best they can and all they seek is to enjoy a sport which in
many cases arouses their loyalty and passion. But we should not
confuse loyalty and passion with an inbuilt tendency to behave
badly to extent that they endanger their own and others lives.



                                   3
[May need to elaborate further on police points raised in
debate]


Coroners Inquests


10.   The inadequacy of the judicial system, and most particularly
the Coroner’s procedures, has had particularly lasting and
corrosive consequences for many of the Hillsborough families, and
some of these will not be eased by our promise to reform these
procedures for the future, welcome and important though they are.


11.   Something that burns on in people’s souls remains. I know
that there are no legal means available to remedy that deep and
infuriating anger but these feelings should be expressed in this
chamber today. The Coroners Inquest itself, whether intentionally
or not, left people hurt, degraded and confused, and no amount of
explanation about the purposes of an inquest will take that away.


12.   I attended for one day of that three month [check] long
ordeal as it became for those families. I did so at the request of
two of my constituents, Mr and Mrs Joynes. Even on such an
admittedly brief visit I was filled with horror, a feeling that instead
of it being a vehicle for establishing the cause of death, it turned
into an occasion when the lives of those who died - the way they
had lived and how they might have behaved - seemed to be on
trial. What happened at that Inquest cannot now be undone, but
we have to understand just how much that process itself caused
bitterness, disillusion, pain and even rage. Whatever else the
Granada programme which Jimmy McGovern wrote did or did not
do, it portrayed that Inquest in a way which squares with my own
feelings and that of those families who had to endure it.


13.   There is one other source of hurt and confusion which arose
out of the Inquest and will endure - the matter of the 3:15 cut off
point. Lord Stuart-Smith describes and explains the legal
significance of this in terms of Coroner’s procedures very well
indeed, and I will not seek to add to that.


14.   But, inevitably perhaps, he could not capture the strong
sense of confusion and the corrosive anger which many people
feel about the 3:15 cut off point. It is almost as if it is being said
that events after 3:15 were of no significance - the fact that people
did continue to suffer, the fact that, had some of the emergency
services been allowed into the ground sooner, some of the 96
people might have lived, seemed to some of those who attended it
to have been put to one side. This feeling is felt by some of the
survivors just as keenly today as it was then.


15.   So something else needs to be said here today even though
it has been said many times before.
16.   People did die after 3:15, those people did suffer God knows
what panic, pain and desperation; and had the police responded
properly and early enough some might have lived. That this was
not considered relevant for the purposes of the Inquest should not
be allowed to diminish the truth of what did happen.


17.   Those powerful feelings of frustration which have grown out
of what happened on that day at Hillsborough have not gone away
and I suspect they never will. As Mrs Joynes put it to me one week
ago all that we have to offer is words and I know in my own heart
and mind that she is right.


[Others matters raised during the debate...]


Conclusion


18.   I hope that in stating part of the truth about what happened, I
have at least expressed some part of what people wanted said. If I
cannot do more it is not because I am bound and gagged as a
minister in the Home Office; if I felt that was holding me back from
doing what I think is right I would honestly resign that office today.


19.   The awful truth we all have to face up to is that the
procedures which deprived people of what they understandably
feel was justice have already happened. We can and will change
them for the future, and, sadly, I suspect that the families own
lawyers will say the same thing to them, the clock cannot be
turned back.


20.   If I felt that my honourable friend and I could do more - and
by more I do not mean empty gestures of more words which
promise much and deliver nothing - we would gladly do it as a debt
of honour to those who died and for the peace of mind of those
who survived them. But I do not know, and in all honesty, I have to
say that nobody has been able to tell me what can now be done.
