From:    David Redhouse                                 cc   Mr Michael
         PS/Home Secretary                                   Lord Williams
         0171 2 7 3 2 0 9 5                                  Mr Howarth
                                                             Permanent Secretary
                                                             Mr Boys Smith
                                                             Miss Sinclair
                                                             M r Eagle
         3 0 March 1 9 9 8                                   M r Hickson
                                   rvA*                      Mr Pui
                                                             Mr €di
                                                             Mr Toon
                                                             Ms Scott
                                                             Mr Owen
                                                             Mr Warner



M r Varnev



DR SIR BRIAN M A W H IN N EY : CHURCHES, HILLSBOROUGH A ND "PRONTO"




The Home Secretary met Dr Sir Brian Mawhinney on 2 6 March. I w as also
present.

Hillsborough

2.     Sir Brian said that he would accommodate the Home Secretary's wishes.
It w as agreed that the Home Secretary would ask the President of the Council to
speak to Mrs Shepherd and that he would also speak to the Liberals.

Churches and the Human Rights Bill

3.     The Home Secretary said that he had had four meetings: with
Ann Widdecombe and other Parliamentarians; w ith the Bishop of Ripon and other
church representatives; w ith representatives of the Scottish churches; and, with
Cardinal Hume. The principal concerns had been that the courts should not
interfere in spiritual or doctrinal matters, and that the churches' rights to insist
on their school-teachers being of the faith and remaining of the faith should not
be affected by the Bill.

4.    The Home Secretary said that there w as no evidence that Strasbourg
would interfere w ith the internal running of the churches. He w as nonetheless
considering whether there could be something on the face of the Bill although
this would not be the current amendment. He w as seeking the Education
Secretary's assistance on the second point and in particular w hether an



5230DR
appropriate amendment could be made to the School Standards Bill. Scottish
lawyers were separately considering a point raised by the Church of Scotland.

5.      Sir Brian said that while there might be no evidence that Strasbourg thus
far had got into doctrinal and spiritual areas the Lord Chancellor had been
stressing that this would be British-made law, not overseen by Strasbourg. The
Home Secretary said that the Lord Chancellor's point w as that people's
arguments would in future be decided in British courts. In addition the
Government had often lost in Strasbourg because it could not argue for a margin
of appreciation. The decision on the Gibraltar Three for example reflected the
court's lack of understanding of British common law . The Convention would be
more sensitively applied once it w as incorporated into British law. There would
still be the possibility of taking proceedings to Strasbourg even if they had been
considered by the House of Lords.

6.      Sir Brian said that the view of Sir Nicholas Lyell was that the margin of
appreciation w as already applied. The Home Secretary suggested that it would
apply to a greater extent. Sir Brian said that it would be helpful if the State
could apply to Strasbourg. The Opposition would be arguing for provisions so
that, if the Government was defeated in the courts here, it would then make an
order saying that the decision would not be implemented and thereby force the
plaintiff to go to Strasbourg. The Home Secretary said that this w as an elegant
proposal which he would consider.

7.     Sir Brian said that legislation w as done on an ethical basis. The Christian
faith however w as a revealed faith rather than a set of ethical principles. The
risk was that legislation was now encroaching onto the revealed faith. The
practical consequences could be wom en demanding to be Roman Catholic
priests or Orthodox rabbis. These should not be matters for secular courts. On
the issue of schools, Sir Brian drew the Home Secretary's attention to provisions
in the 1 9 8 9 Northern Ireland Education Order. This had been very effective in
dealing w ith issues in the Province and something on similar lines might w ork in
the Human Rights Bill. The Home Secretary agreed to look at this.

8.      The Home Secretary stressed that he did not w an t the courts to interfere
w ith the independence of the churches. He did not believe th a t this would
happen. Article 9 provided protection for religious freedom. He w as
nonetheless ready to consider workable ideas.

9.     The Home Secretary concluded that com mittee stage would follow within
three to four weeks. He would let Sir Brian know when a precise date had been
set.

Crime and Disorder Bill

10.   The Home Secretary noted that the Commons Second Reading would be
on 8 March. Sir Brian said that he w as aware of this and that the Opposition
would not be voting against the Bill.



5230DR
Pronto

11.    Sir Brian said that he did not think that a Bill on this issue this year was
practicable. Lord Mancroft had done a good job in casting doubt on the
possibility of a link between drinking and gambling. Sir Brian said that he might
nonetheless be able to broker an agreement that Lord Mancroft and colleagues
open up their books w ith Home Office officials to examine the evidence for an
interdependency between drink and gambling which, if found, would be the
basis for revisiting the issue.

12.    The Home Secretary explained that he had stepped aside from policy in
this area following his w ife's appointment as a non-executive director of
Littlewoods. M r Michael was standing in his stead w ith day-to-day
consideration undertaken by Mr Howarth. He would pass this proposal to Mr
Michael. Sir Brian concluded that he would be happy to speak to Mr Michael
about this.

Next Steps

1 3.  I should be grateful for your advice: on the possibility of the State refusing
to implement ECHR decisions in order to force the issue to Strasbourg; on the
Northern Ireland Education Order; and, on alerting the Opposition to the timing
of com mittee stage.

14.    I should be grateful if M r Hickson would provide advice to Mr Michael via
Mr Howarth on the possibility of joint work with Lord M ancroft and his
colleagues to determine w hether in the context of Pronto there is a link between
gambling and drinking.




                                D A V ID REDHOUSE




5230DR
