From: M J P y n e                                      cc   Mr O’Brien
      Operational Policing                                  Mr Boys Smith
      Policy Unit                                           Mr Pugh
      Room 528, QAG                                         Mr Edmundson
      S 273 2433                                            Mr Granatt
       July 1997                                            Mr Warner
                                                            Mr Owen

Mr Michael

HILLSBOROUGH: CORRESPONDENCE FROM THE ASSISTANT CHIEF
CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE

Issue


How to respond to a letter from Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire, to Ms Quin about the calls for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.
Mr Daines also suggests a meeting to discuss the matter further.

Timing

2.      Routine.

Recommendation

3.    That you reply along the lines of the attached draft, declining his offer of a
meeting.

Consideration

4.     Mr Daines was stationed in Gateshead from 1991-94, and would have met Ms
Quin in an official capacity during that time.

5.    Subsequent to Mr Daines’ letter, the Home Secretary announced the
independent scrutiny into the disaster to be carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
We can expect Mr Daines to be fully up to date with developments. The
announcement of the scrutiny renders his request for a meeting unnecessary at this
time.

Handling

5.      There are no additional handling considerations.



                                      MJPYNE




:odma\meridio\edrm#90179# 1
Thank you for your letter of 15 May to Joyce Quin about the calls for a new inquiry
into the Hillsborough disaster. This issue falls within my remit at the Home Office
and I am, therefore, replying.


As you will be aware, the Home Secretary announced on 30 June that Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith is to conduct an independent scrutiny to ascertain whether there exists
any new and significant evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
football stadium which was not previously available.


I am grateful for your offer to meet and discuss the events at Hillsborough. At the
moment, however, you will understand that these are issues for Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith to consider in his scrutiny.




 :odma\meridio\edrm#90179#1
