MEMORANDUM


From: CHRIS BONE
      Room 1106
      S2512


Date:    1 September 1997

To:      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith




This note lists what you are taking away with you today.


The items are

1.      the complete transcripts of the public sessions of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. These are in
         13 files, with enclosures, covering 17 May to 14 July 1989 (there was a gap from 29
         June to 14 July). The files are numbered HO/397/46 to 58. They run in sequence.
         But the documents within each file are placed back to front (i.e. earlier transcripts are
         at the back of the file);

2.      the Phillips report - 1 attach a letter from Mr Phillips to Mr Danes at South Yorkshire
        in which he describes how he came to be asked to write it and summarises its
        conclusions;

3.      four bound volumes of the Coroner’s summing-up at the Inquests;

4.      written opinion of Gareth Williams QC and Peter Birt QC, in respect of prosecutions;

5.      a letter, with attachments, from Peter Moorhouse, Chairman of the Police Complaints
        Authority; and

6.      files and some other miscellaneous, loose, papers from the Attorney-General’s office
        (the Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers). Of the five files, the two fat brownish
        ones concern efforts made by some of the families to persuade the Attorney-General
        to use his powers under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 to allow them to petition
        the High Court for a new Inquest.

        There is a detailed ‘memorial’ to the Attorney-General to this effect, dating from
        1992, at B on file A. The Attorney refused this 1992 request. A further such
        memorial was put to the Attorney on behalf of Mrs Williams (in respect of her son
        Kevin) early in 1996. The Attorney turned this down too (C on file B). The




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OO7.DOC
         Attorney’s office have apparently lost the 1996 memorial itself (though they say they
         are still looking for it). But Mrs Williams - who has phoned me several times over
         the last couple of weeks - says she will send us a further copy herself.

         The two brownish files also contain other material which I think you might helpfully
         browse through. The three pink files concern the Attomey-General’s dealings with
         Sir Malcolm Thornton, who was until May 1 Mrs Williams’s MP.

         The loose papers are copies of papers on other files at the Attorney-General’s office
         which I identified as being of possible interest. These concern both the Inquests and
         the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions not to institute criminal
         proceedings;

 7.      Some loose papers about police statements and Dr Walker - we discussed briefly this
         afternoon.




C F BONE




G:\HILLSBOR\S-S\OO7.DOC
