                                        >
                                                                                                              Om M .      ^     ^
                                                 (\       1 s)WW wiii u^l              ^                                 U - iW u
                                                  i,wii(>\k ^t*iVo ^'’y^-*\                           U
                 lV \                                            M
                  The British Constructional Steelwork Association Limited
                                     35, Old Queen Street, Westminster, London              s w ih   9Hz

                                 Telephone: 01-222 2254            Telex: 27523      Fax: 01-222 3026
                                                                                                       A nne* de la Construction M ttallique

                                                                                                           oug; o




                                                                                                                                           Jahr des Stahlbaus
      18 April 1989
*

      D A McDonald Esq
      Construction Industry Directorate
      Department of the Environment
      Room A110
      Romney House
      43 Marsham Street
      LONDON
      SW1P 3PY


      Dear David

      HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

      Apologies for writing to you on this topic, but having been at the match
      with my 13 year old son I wanted to pass on one or two comments to someone
      and I thought of you!

      First of all, I confirm the press reports about the overcrowding and the
      inadequacies of the police and emergency facilities; the_pn 1..ice—jpa-^fehe-
      pitch from J3^QjL-pm-..on.iatagds—afipear_e.d-HQ.t- to know what. t h ey_M,er-e--Sxip^.PS.ed to
      be doing and the lack of stretchers, etc, and the time it took the two
      ojntllTahces (only two came onto the pitch!) to reach the injured was
      unbelievable.    I also confirm the press reports about the total
      inadequacies of a 'modern' sports stadium - to me the only solution is an
      immediate total ban on standing in existing stadia and an urgent plan to
      build a series of new 'American' style multi-sports stadia on the fringes
      of towns and cities with controlled access, identity cards, ticket checks,
      etc.

      However, the main point that I can add relates to something which has not
      been mentioned in the press.  This is the fact that between 3.06 p m _ami
      approximately 4.10 pm when we left there was no announcement tn t-.hp
      spectators about what waS happening.  During TJiis period there was a
      contTrulal risk of major^iolence and confrontation which made me decide to
      leave, not the fact that the match was abandoned, because we were not given
      this information.

      The majority of spectators believed, until at least the time we left (and
      we were amongst the first to leave) that the problem was Liverpool
      suporters trying to climb onto the pitch and disrupt the match; this caused
      continual frustration amongst the Nottingham Forest supporters and a major




    BCSA      Registered in England No. 895252        Registered Office: 35, Old Queen Street, W estm inster, London      s w i h 9HZ
riot nearly broke out at approximately 3.30 pm when the Liverpool
supporters charged across the pitch to try to fight the Nottingham Forest
supporters.  The suspicion of Liverpool hooligan problems appeared to be
confirmed to the spectators when the police brought approximately 10 police
dogs onto the pitch to control and contain the Nottingham Forest
supporters, when all that was required was a simple announcement over the
public address system about what was happening.  Total chaos was a v o i d e d due
the self-control of the Nottingham Forest supporters, not the actions of
the police or ground authorities.

If the above observations are of any assistance, I would be grateful if you
could pass this letter on to the appropriate person.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely




cc Tony Baldry, MP
                                                                     _______
                                                         -    ilpill I                                                             1
                                                        M O     n
                                                        YORK CITY FC
                                                                 F o u n d e d 1922                                                        >
                                            York City A sso c ia tio n F o o tb a ll & A thletic Club Pic                              \ f(^ _
               M D B S /C A T                            Bo o th a m Crescent, York Y 0 3 7 A Q             1 2 th   M ay   19g9
                                                              Telephone 0904 624447                                                    is Is
               R M Whalley Esq
                                                                                                                                          OH
               Room 662
               Home Office
               50 Queen Anne's Gate
               London
               SWIH 9AT




               Dear Mr Whalley,

               Hillsborough Disaster Enquiry

               With reference to the letter from the Football League dated 26th
               April, concerning the above, we feel there are comments we are
               able to make arising out of this Club's experiences of problems
               of crowd control in our home match with Sunderland on the 30th
               August last year.

               On the advice of the Police this was an all ticket match so far
               as the Sunderland supporters were concerned but in the event
               there were clearly a number of visiting supporters who came
               without tickets. There was considerable congestion at our
               turnstiles and in an attempt to relieve the pressure building up
               by visiting supporters endeavouring to get into the ground, which
               was exacerbated by the fact that large numbers were still outside
               at the time the match was due to start, the Police directed that
               a gate be opened to allow spectators in, some of wEom <3113' not have
           •-— trcfcetTsT A^~a”r^uTt"^~lrlMB^r_of' Sunde f l r a n d spectators complained
               that the terracing was overcrowded and there was considerable
               discomfort 'experienced':

                We feel that this particular problem could be dealt with if, where
       n-j     matches are all ticket, tickets are checked at barriers some
      "7        distance from the ground, so that only ticket holders are admitted
               -fee the-immeaiate area of the ground where their admission through
                the turnstiles can be properly regulated and without there being
                the buildup or congestion of spectators which is at present
                experienced on such occasions and without there being any reason
                for spectators being admitted without tickets.


                                                                Yours sincerely


                                                               7                 7 / e~C                      j                    r


                                                                M D B Sinclair

                                       Registered office as above address Registered number 183969 England

Directors: M .D .B . Sinclair (Chairman) D .M . Craig OBE JP B.A. Houghton J.E.H. Quickfall FCA R.B. Strachan M A LLB FCIS E.B. Swallow C. W ebb

                                President: J.R. G reenw ay M P Club Secretary: K. Usher Company Secretary: I.R. Fowler

              Team M an ager: J.C. Bird Telephone 32858 Lottery Office: Telephone 52409 Commercial Office: Telephone 645941
