/,
        U N I O N D E S A S S O C I A T I O N S E U R O P E E N N E S DE F O O T B A L L
                c/Sv £oU
                     IH JoVw,n_                  Executive Committee 21.11.1989
                                                 Enclosure no 5 to iten 5.1. on the agenda



      5.1. Proposal of the Study Group regarding safety

           The Executive C*'uui»ittee and the Committee of the Club Competitions have
           dis^cse*! vl'e question if s a f e t y ^ s t a d i a a .** * * r r c decided to up a
           ^.tudy ifcoup.

           After a lengthy discussion and on the basis of the attached FIFA
           Resolution of July 26 1989 regarding safety, the Study Group at its
           meeting on September 12 1989 in Vienna decided to submit the following
           proposals to the Executive Committee:

           1) As a new provision, all quarter final matches of the UEFA club
              competitions will also be considered as high-risk matches.

          2) The qualifying matches for the European Championship final tournament
             in 1996 have to be played in stadia vhich are fitted vith seats only
             or, failing this, no standing tickets may be sold, as is the case for
             World Cup matches.

          3) As from 1993, high-risk matches may be staged only in stadia fitted
             exclusively vith seats. As far as the other matches are concerned, as
             from the 1990/91 season only 80 X of the standing tickets may be sold,
             this figure is to be reduced every season by 10 X until 1999. This
             means that in the year 2000, football in Europe will be vatched by an
             all-seated public.

          4) With regard to the FIFA Resolution concerning safety, the contents of
             item A5 and item B3 shall be communicated to all national associations
             in,a circular.

          5) Item B5 shall be incorporated inasmuch as the stadia of those clubs
             participating at the European competitions have to be inspected every
             three years. A copy of an appropriate certificate will have to be sent
             to the General Secretariat with the entry form.

          6) Item C2 will be incorporated into the regulations of the UEFA club
             competitions.

          7) Item £3 already exists and is to be considered as imperative. However,
             FIFA should be asked to delete the words "in principle" in order to
             avoid any ambiguity.

          8) The idea of the President of UEFA of introducing a permanent Fair Play
             Committee can only be fully supported.


          The Executive Committee is kindly requested to accept these proposals.




     Berne, November 2 1989
                      or-mp
     FIFA

 7-8/89
                                                                        WmIFIFANEW S
 FIFA passes a resolution on the
 them e of security
 Th« series of summer meetings of differen t FIFA                      tion th s i in principle, as frotr *he preiiiv«*sa»y
 coiP'rtiftPwa drew to a close on Zb v^'»y w ith the                   competition of the 19S4 •jV'v ' u      on-y aii-sea-
 longest meeting of the Executive Committee for                        ter stadia would be taken into account. In stadia
 many years. A t the centre of the Executive Com­                      w ith combined standing and seats, tickets
 m ittee deliberations was a resolution on the                         would be sold for seats only.
 subject of safety. FIFA once again repeated its
 demand for better amenities in the stadia, a

«irucial factor in the improvement of safety. The
   ost im portant concrete step was the condi­
                                                                       The resolution passed by the Executive Com­
                                                                       m ittee is reproduced as follows.




                                         Safety in the Stadia
                                    (Resolution by the Executive Committee on 2 6 July 1989)

  A. Fundamental Principles                                           B. Parallel measures
  The Executive Committee acknowledges that violence                  1. Supervision of the sale of tickets (keeping spectator
  is a social phenomenon and not one reserved forfootball                groups apart).
  alone. The Executive Committee advocates the imple­
                                                                      2. Improvement in refereeing.
  mentation of the following basic principles to ensure the
  smooth arrangement of matches:                                      3. Fostering the spirit of fair play among the players, coaches
                                                                         and spectators (for example, players' outfits must be
                                                                         correct and complete).
  1. Good co-operation and co-ordination with the security
     forces.                                                          4. Prohibition of interviews with mass media reporters in
                                                                         the enclosure.
  2. One or two police cordons around the stadium (as the first       5. Verification of the capacity, safety and construction of
     measure to control and channel spectators)                          the stadia.

  3. Personal inspection of each spectator upon entering
     the stadium: confiscation of weapons, flags, fireworks,
     bottles, etc.                                                    C. Urgent steps
  4. No kick-off until the situation outside the stadium and in the   1. A security officer is to be appointed at each Confederation
     stands is under control.                                            and National Association.
                                                                      2. The organisers of any match must conclude the necessary
  5. Improvement of amenities in the stadia: individually
                                                                         insurance contracts, particularly third party liability. If a
     numbered seats, easy access to refreshment stalls, public
                                                                         stadium is not owned by a club, the realm of responsibility
     conveniences, medical and first-aid facilities, stand-by
                                                                         must be clarified with the stadium owner and clearly
     forces etc.
                                                                         defined.
  6. The Associations must instruct the organisers of matches         3. As from the preliminary competition for the 1994 World Cup
     at all levels (internationals, national team matches, friend-       (starting in autumn 1992), matches may in principle only be
     lies, tournaments etc.) exactly what their responsibilities as      played in all-seater stadia. Tickets for standing room in
     organisers are. These duties must be clearly defined. High-         combination stadia are not to go on<«ale.
     risk matches must be identified as such in advance.
                                                                      4. As from 1993, it will be the duty of the Confederations and
                                                                         National Associations to hold high-risk matches in their
  7. The Confederations and National Associations are urged to
                                                                         zones only in all-seater stadia. These matches must be
     devote their utmost attention to these serious issues and to
     work hand in hand with FIFA.                                        identified by the Confederations and National Associations
                                                                         themselves.      "
  8. Sanctions will be imposed upon those who fail to comply          5. Setting light to any type of object, particularly letting off fire­
     with FIFA's mandatory instructions.                                 works, is strictly prohibited.

                                          Security is the concern of the government
            Stadium amenities and the technical organisation o f a match are the concern of football
                     DCfPi ^SGvLflTl otJS,


Binding instructions to the organizers of Final Ties and high risk matches as well as
Final Tournaments of UEFA Competitions and to the participating dabs and associations
with regard to precautionary measures to avoid crowd disturbances

The present instructions are subject to the disciplinary authority of UEFA. Sanctions
will be imposed in case of non-observation.
These instructions are not complete; they cannot be considered a conclusive stipulation
of the security measures to be taken by the organizing dubs and associations. Clubs
and/or associations shall cany out all organizing tasks with regard to the match in their
own responsibility. In particular it is their sole responsibility to guarantee order and secu­
rity before, during and after the match.

High risk matches —Definition
If at least one of the below criteria is fulfilled, the game in question is to be considered
a high risk match (category A):
L All UEFA final and semi-final ties of the UEFA dub competitions as well as final
    tournament matches of the European Football Championship.
IL When dedared as such by UEFA on basis of previous inridents of supporters of
    one or both teams or of other exceptional considerations.
LLLWhen it is expected that visiting team supporters will exceed 10%ofstadium capacity
    or will exceed 3000 persons.
IV When full capacity stadium is expected or more than 50000 spectators present
V When the match is likely to attract a large number of emigrants/foreign workers
    originating from the country of the visiting team, who live either in the country
    where the match is being played or in neighbouring countries.

Associations and/or dubs shall consult their authorities in this matter in order to get
their support
All the matches mentioned under items III, IV and V shall be announced by the
Associations or dubs to the General Secretariat of UEFA.
All other matches are considered as normal risk games (category B) unless unforeseen
circumstances change conditions of the match concerned to the contrary, in which case
UEFA has to be informed immediately.

Precautionary Measures to be taken
A. Ticket Sale and Distribution
    The ticket sale is to be strictly controlled.
    1. At the UEFA Final Ties, with the exception of those played on a home and
       away basis, the teams shall receive a maximum of 25% of the tickets
       ofeachcategoiy.

                                                                                           11
