                                                                              John Raine
           DERBYSHIRE                                                         Acting County Director
           County Council                                                     County Offices
                                                                              Matlock
           Supports Nuclear Free Zones                                        Derbyshire DE4 3AG


                                                                              Telephone Matlock (0629) 580000
  Hillsborough Disaster - Inquiry                                             Extension   7392
  by Lord Justice Taylor                                                      Ask for     Mr Allsop
  Secretary to the Inquiry                                                    Our ref     j a /hdp
  Room 662                                                                    Your ref
  50 Queen Anne's Gate               <j)             »     .                  Date        6 June 1989
  London SW1H 9AT                CC- | V j           IHCUJ'v/




                                                  K W ^ - K hvI
   Dear Sir                                                                        |l7l
   Hillsborough Disaster - Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor

   As part of this Authority's response to the Hillsborough Disaster a meeting
   with supporters of Derby County Football Club and the Football Supporters
   Association was held to consider their views and possible courses of action
   to ensure crowd safety at football grounds. I enclose a copy of the notes
   of that meeting and would ask that they be submitted to Lord Justice Taylor
   to be taken into account in his inquiry into the Hillsborough tragedy.

   I am grateful to you for your assistance.

   Yours faithfully




   H24


                                                          DERBYSHIRE
                                                          COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                           1889-1989
                                                          SERVING THE PEOPLE O F DERBYSHIRE
Telex 377596 Derbys G   Facsimile (0629) 580121                   f o r 100 y e a r s -----------
NOTES of a meeting of the DERBYSHIRE COUNTY COUNCIL
PUBLIC    PROTECTION   STANDING    SUB-COMMITTEE  and
REPRESENTATIVES OF DERBY COUNTY SUPPORTERS and THE
EAST MIDLANDS FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION held on
27 April 1989 at the County Offices, Matlock.

                      P R E S E N T
            Councillor E Swain   (in the Chair)

Derbyshire County Council Public Protection Standing
Sub-Committee

Councillors J McKay and Mrs U M Turnbull.

East Midlands Football Supporters Association

R Spalding and T Whelan.

South Derbyshire Section of Derby County Football
Supporters Club

A Smith.

Alfreton Section of Derby County Members Club

J Cheetham and J A Walker.

Ilkeston Section of Derby County Members Club

F E Stone and R G Robinson.

Derby County Football Club - Members Club and Junior
Rams Club

S Stone.

Derby County Members Clubs - Liaison Officer

E Hallam.

Headquarters Section of Derby County Members Club

J Farmery, M Kellett and P Sheppard.

Nottinghamshire Branch of Derby County Members Club

Mr and Mrs J King and Mr and Mrs A Hall.

Nottingham Branch-of-Derby County Members Club

R Stevenson.
Apologies were received from Chesterfield Football
Club which had a match and dinner previously arranged
and could not be altered at short notice.     The Club
had expressed support for the meeting and wished to be
kept informed of developments.

Those present observed a one minute's silence in
respect of the 95 supporters who had lost their lives
in the tragedy at the Hillsborough Football Ground on
Saturday 15 April 1989.

INTRODUCTION                       _

      The Chair welcomed those present and for their
response to the invitation to the meeting at such
shore, notice.    He stated -chat it was the County
Council's    intention  to   assist   in  the   local
co-ordination of the views of supporters on safety at
Sports Grounds which could be put forward to the
Public Inquiry established to consider the lessons of
the Hillsborough tragedy.

     The Chair explained that the Council's Committee
charged  with   Safety  of  Sports  Grounds   had  met
immediately after the tragedy and amongst other things
had agreed that the remaining perimeter fence at the
Derby County Football Ground be removed immediately.

CROWD SAFETY AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS

     The Chair encouraged a wide ranging discussion of
all matters affecting crowd      safety and safety at
sports grounds.     The following points summarise the
discussion.

Crowd Control

1.   With alcohol consumption having been banned in
grounds, supporters tend to arrive earlier and get a
drink in local'pilfTS cihd' tnen arrive at tne "ground very
shortly before the kick-off which can cause last
minute crowd problems.

2.  The capacity   limits of  defined areas needed
further examination taking into account not only
density, but also exit times.

3.  It was noted that at some grounds (Manchester
United   and  Wembley  were   mentioned  particularly)
sections of the ground were filled up one at a time in
order to avoid crushes in any one section.
5.   Often the police were under terrific pressure and
in some instances their own actions actually had a
provocative effect.

6.   It was pointed out that Clubs could encourage
fans to keep off the pitch.       For example it was
apparently announced at West Ham every week that
supporters  should   keep  off  the   pitch and then
perimeter fences would not be introduced.

7.   The delay of kick-off times could perhaps be more
widely used if crowd problems were being experienced
outside  the   grounds  with   large numbers of   fans
arriving late.   If the kick-off time were delayed and
supporters both inside and outside the ground were
informed that would have the effect of removing the
rush to get inside the ground.

8.   The police had a responsibility to ensure that
supporters did not arrive      at grounds immediately
before the kick-off.   Instances were cited where away
supporters were actually held back until just before
the kick-off.  This sort of action led to pushing and
shoving and rushing to get into the ground.    Also it
was often organised football coaches that were held
back whilst private cars etc were allowed in.

9.   The problem of people turning up at all-ticket
games without tickets could be avoided by letting it
be known that only ticket holders would be admitted.

Supporters as Customers

1.   The standard of service for food and drink at
football grounds whilst differing very significantly
was generally poor and inadequate.   If supporters were
treated better they would respond better.      Also, in
many   instances,  the   existing  provision   did  not
recognise that many away fans travelled long distances
before   arriving  at  a   ground  and   would  welcome
refreshments.

2.   Many supporters regarded attendance at a match as
an afternoon out and maybe some form^of entertainment
immediately before the game would conTrfbute to "the
enjoyment of supporters.

3.    Toilet      provision at  grounds  was  generally
woe ful ly"""'inadequate and accessibility through the
crowds was virtually impossible.

4.   Football was a winter sport and consideration
could perhaps be given to more cover being provided
for standing supporters.
5.   Caged-in  supporters often   felt a bravado in
provoking opposing supporters, but this provocation
could generate violence once outside the ground.

All Seater Stadium

1.   The media had given great attention to so called
wonderful stadiums abroad but in some instances this
was not so and the only seated accommodation was on
concrete slabs.

2.     Wj,th regard to the provision of all seater
stadiums it had to be recognised that many supporters
actually preferred to stand and in any case there was
a financial cost involved with seated accommodation
always      beiriy  more   expensive  than   standing
accommodation.     It was pointed out that apparently
Coventry had reverted back to having some standing
accommodation on terraces having tried an all-seater
stadium and not having found it to be successful.  It
was also pointed out that seats could be potential
w e apo ns.

3.   All seater stadiums were not necessarily safer.
Escape from high up stands onto the pitch could in
fact be more difficult.

Supporters Clubs

1.    Often supporters  Clubs         were   looked on   as
additional and separate to the        Club and that greater
integration with the Club and        perhaps even including
supporters representation at          board meetings could
help.

2.   It was also felt that Supporters Clubs could have
a role in making the purchase of tickets easier to
members of their Supporters Club.

3.   Supporters clubs could have a role perhaps in
disciplining   unruly  and violent members,   perhaps
banning them for a specific period of time from the
ground.   Consideration would perhaps also have to be
given to a ban from all grounds if excluded from one
Club because there were always people who would move
from one Club to another.

4.   If supporters were banned by one supporters club
then  that   information could  be passed   to other
supporters clubs and offenders could be made to
re-apply for membership.

5.   Greater  integration between supporters  clubs
would also help to reduce animosity between opposing


                         -   4   -
supporters.  Supporters clubs could have an increased
role in this area.

ID Scheme and Hooliganism

1.       The t d Car-fl             proposed by the Government was
generall^” regarded as impractical and regarded as an
o^ r - r e a c t i o n and unnecessary measure to deal with a
r e l a t i V e l y s m a 11 number of hooligans.   There was also
the danger that a                        ^ *ny ^nmpntprlisp.d-svstem
would        generate        delays   and  frustration   in ground
control immediately before a match.                    It was also
pointed out that to some extent the season ticket was
already an ID Card System.                The point was also made
t h a x f o o t b a l l hooliganism was just part of a national
hooligan problem not just affecting football and that
there •should be more action to deal with the current
aggressive society.

2.   England was banned from European football but as
television   pictures  had  shown  only  the   previous
evening   there   were  hooligan  problems   in   other
countries in Europe.

3.   Often the punishment meted out by the Courts was
inadequate as a deterrent to future criminal acts.

4.   There was some discussion about the situation at
Luton Football Club which was held up to be a model
club in terms of safety of spectators.         It was
questioned whether Jjiksm could be regarded as typical
because of its^       e       and the fact that in any
case away supporters did get into the ground.

5.   Offenders could be made to report every Saturday
at the local police station at 3.00 pm to avoid them
attending football grounds say for the remainder of
that season.   Also they could be made to undertake
community work during match times.

6.   It was observed that only Derby, Tottenham and
Liverpool  had  taken   away  their  perimeter  fences
following the Hillsborough tragedy.  It was considered
that most clubs were probably waiting for the findings
of the Public Inquiry.   It was observed also that the
removal of the fences at Derby County involved an
extra £2,192 per match policing cost for the remainder
of the season and that like all vandalism there was a
cost involved.

 Communications

 1.   Good   communications ^within   the   ground  were
 considered to be essential-." The public address system
at Derby County was unanimously regarded as hopelessly
inadequate.   There was also the essential need for
good    communications    between   the    authorities
responsible for safety within the ground and outside
it.

2.   There was also considered to be considerable
scope for the police to share experiences and have a
greater degree of uniformity about policing methods.

CONCLUSION    The Chair stated that the views expressed
during the discussion had been recorded and would be
put to the Police and Fire Authorities in Derbyshire
and that they would also be asked to prepare their own
submission based on their own experiences.       Copies of
Lhe noLes caktiii at this meeting would be sent to all
of those present and the views would be submitted
formally to the Public Inquiry.        The Chair thanked
everyone present for their attendance and for the free
and frank discussion which had ensued.      He stated that
he hoped to reconvene the meeting before the start of
the next season and/or when the preliminary findings
of  the   Public    Inquiry established     following  the
Hillsborough    tragedy were    available    in order   to
consider    any    action   necessary    at    Derby   and
Chesterfield.    In response Mr Hallam expressed a vote
of thanks to the Chair with which everyone concurred.




5CD/397
SK
