        7,'11   ’ 8f   l 5 i 23     2   31   20   761069    BRI TCONS   AMS   NL




                                        fl
                                                      B R I T I S H C O N 8 U L A T E -C E N E R A L ,
                                                                              AMSTERDAM.

                                                             &s&i
Peter Palmer Esq                                     ^   JcW^P'v
consular Department                                  rrd<^SO^
Foreign and Commonwealth Office                      w 'V     d>—
                                                      fv

                                                                        November 17, 1989


Ref:   295/1




                         I a >i .
HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER ENQUIRY : YOUR TEL 532
1,   My meeting with KNVB (Dutch Football Association) forecast
in my tel 017, took place on 16 November.   The KNVB is the
national regulatory body and is the link between football clubs
and the Government.   It comprises two arms, professional and
amateur associations.   As the questions in your telegram related
to professional football, most of what follows refers to that.
2.   The KNVB’s total annual budget is approximately 25 million
guilders, made up as follows:

       2i% of all match income, (3i% on all amateur matches)
       1approximately Dfl 4 million)?
       television rights which it negotiates,                    (much of this is in
       turn passed back to the clubs);
       gates/fees from international games and gates on European
       Cup matches.

In addition KNVB receives sponsorship from about six commercial
organisations and a Government subsidy from the Department of
Culture of approximately Dfl 3 million annually for general
purposes.  Government also meets the cost of two senior officials
to deal exclusively with security matters.  Other items on the
budget include Dfl 1J million in financial penalties from clubs
and approximately Dfl 5$ million from football pools.

3,     There are 37 professional clubs.                    They are either
       1T   11   ’S 9   13 s 2 3           2   31   20   761069   BRITCONS   AMS   NL     03




foundations, or what was described to me as unions (ie clubs).
None have shareholders.   KNVB reviews licenses annually.  The
renewal of a license depends inter alia on financial viability
and the state of security precautions at the grounds of clubs.

4.    Government support to clubs has in the past has been very
substantial,   clubs were subsidised to enable them to have flood
lighting and safety gates.   There was also, in the period 1984 to
1987, a programme whereby Dfl 20 million from unemployment
benefit programmes was made available so that many improvements
were carried out by "unemployed11 at football grounds.  The
official funding and those funds which it generated amounted to
approximately Dfl 70 million divided between the 37 football
grounds of the professional teams.

     Transfer fees are based on a formula depending on the length
   time a player has been with a club and his salary.  Contracts
with a club are in general on an annual basis and a player may
put himself on a transfer list by application to the KNVB, who
act as brokers, although this is not essential.  Because of the
financial structure of clubs, transfer fees, for transfers taking
place within the Netherlands, are, even for top players,
generally much lower than in the UK . A club can however, make
money on a player who transfers to a club outside the Netherlands
where the fees are much more substantial.  The very high fee of
Dfl 17 million paid by Milan for Gullit was exceptional, as
unusually, Gullit was on a long term contract to his Dutch club.

6.   I was told that clubs spend approximately 5% of their
income on safety measures.  Government no longer subsidises this
(although they did put approximately Dfl 600,000 into the failed
pass scheme - para two of my letter on the Football Identity Card
Scheme of 13 September refers).   Policing, which is the
responsibility of the local authority where a match is being
played, is provided without repayment.   KNVB estimate the cost of
this to be under 5% of atotal police budget of the Netherlands
of Dfl 4.4 billion.

7.   I am sending a                copy of this direct to Mr           whalley for Lord
Justice Taylor.




                                        George Dickson




                                                                                               4
