            , 8 f f s /997;


From: Linda Rushton                             cc: Mr Michael
      APS/Mr Howarth                                Mr O’Brien
      Room 702                                      Lord Williams
      Queen Anne’s Gate                             Mr Omand
      © 273 4238                                    Mr Boys Smith
                                                    Mr Wheldon
                                                    Mr M i e t o n
                                                    Mr R      ms
                                                    Mr Edmundson
                                                    Mr Butler
                                                    Ms Clifford
                                                    Mr Warner
                                                    Mr Owen
       17 February 1998


Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH

Mr Howarth has seen Paul Pugh’s note of 13 February enclosing with it an
amended draft statement and Peter Edmundson’s submission of 16 February
enclosing with it Q&A briefing. I apologise for the delay in responding to the
former however the submission was not originally copied to Mr Howarth. Mr
Howarth has commented:

2. “The words “Quite properly” should be inserted at the beginning of the first
sentence of paragraph 4.

3. Paragraphs 12 and 13 should be strengthened and should come earlier in
the statement.

4. The following should be inserted following the last sentence of paragraph
20:

“In doing so, however, we should not lose sight of the fact that Lord Justice
Taylor was clear that the South Yorkshire police had to bear a large part of
the responsibility for the tragedy which occurred at Hillsborough on 15 April
1989 and that Lord Justice Stuart Smith has confirmed that this was the case.
Arrangements which we intend to make in future on police disciplinary
procedures, following the Home Affairs Select Committee report, will be
designed to ensure that in future police officers will not be able to evade
being held to account.”

5. Reference should be made in the statement to the unfortunate remark
made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith about some of the supporters. We need to
emphasise the fact that he has apologised and we have full confidence in his
findings.
6. The Q & A briefing should be revised in the light of the above revisions to
the press statement and the House of Common’s statement.”




                              LINDA RUSHTON
   From: Paul Pugh                       cc: Mr Michael                 Mr Pugh
         Head of Operational                 Mr O’Brien                 Mr Butler
         Policing Policy Unit                Mr Howarth                 Mr Clifford
         Room 529                            Lord Williams              Mr Edmundson
         Queen Anne's Gate                   Mr Omand                   Ms Clifford
         * 0171-273-3141                     Mr Boys Smith              Mr Warner
         17 February 1998                    Ms Wheldon                 Mr Owen
                                             Mr Middletoj*




  Home Secretary


  HILLSBOROUGH BRIEFING


 In the light of the World in Action programme last night, which rehearsed the main
 claims about new evidence, I attach:

            (i)       A speaking note for your meeting with the families;

            (ii)      Some slightly more detailed lines to take on some of the key points
                      likely to be raised wHftyou by the families and by M P £ fifB I§  1

 2.    They could also be used to deal with media enquiries. None of the points are
 new, but you might find it helpful to have briefing which draws together the findings
 by Taylor, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and other sources.




                                           PAUL PUGH




E\oppu\hou\lonpub\pp0603p4doc
                       MEETING WITH HILLSBOROUGH FAMILIES 2.15PM



EaUitg-tQ.makg

The Speaker has given special agreement for this meeting to take place before the
oral statement and publication of the report. But it is very important that families
respect that confidence.


2.       Speculation in the press over the weekend about the content of the report.
Assure families categorically that none of that came from Home Office.


3.       No point in a long preamble. Make clear at the outset that the outcome of the
scrutiny will be disappointing and painful for the families.


4.        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has looked in great detail at all the material which
has been put to him. He has treated equally rigorously all the information, whether
that came from individuals or official bodies. His conclusions are clear that there is
no basis for a further public inquiry, or any chance of success in a renewed
application to the High Court to quash the verdict of the inquest, nor any material
which might give rise to criminal or disciplinary proceedings.


5.       He says in his report:


          “/ realise that my report and advice wiii come as a disappointment to [the
          families] especially since they have had their hopes raised that something
          more can be done. But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I
          have had to look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be fresh
           evidence, in the light of the evidence which had previously been considered ”




fi'oppu\hou\advice\pp0S03pAdoc
  6.         I, the Attorney General and the Director of Public Prosecutions have
  considered the report very carefully. We have decided that Lord Justice Stuart-
  Smith s conclusions are right and should be accepted.


 7.          Realise that the families will find it very difficult and painful to accept those
 conclusions. Urge you to read the report very carefully before you react. The report
 is very long because it is very detailed and very thorough. The reasons for the
 conclusions are all out in the open. If you read the report in all its detail, I hope you
 will accept in your heart of hearts that it is right and that it puts an end to speculation
 about conspiracy, cover-up or re-opening of the previous inquiries or proceedings.


 8.         Recognise that families had doubts about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
 personally. His comments in Liverpool were insensitive. But his report shows that
 he has been totally fair and absolutely thorough, and he has done his best to answer
 fully all the concerns which the support group and individual families have put to him.


9.          Happy to go through the detailed reasoning on the particular issues raised by ?
the support group - for example, video evidence, medical evidence or other issues.
But it may be better for you to read the report. [Hope that there will be a chance to
debate it more fully in the House of Commons when everyone has had the time to
read it properly].


If raised


10.        A possible private prosecution is a matter for the families. But urge you to
consider very carefully. A senior Lord Justice of Appeal has considered all the
relevant submissions and is absolutely clear that there are no grounds for instigating
criminal proceedings. Be wary of those who will take your money and delude you
into thinking that there are real prospects of success by starting new proceedings.




Ktappu\hou\tdvfce\pp0«03pd.doc
(parag raph references a r e to Lo rd J u stic e S tuar t -S m ith ’s repo rt )

The Coroner and the 3.15pm cut-off point



It was never suggested by the coroner that all those who died did so before 3.15pm
or that the medical evidence was to this effect. (C hapter 3,        parag raph   12).   The
jury heard evidence about people who did not die until after their arrival at hospital or
who regained consciousness after resuscitation, or who were otherwise treated and
recovered (C h a pter 3 parag raphs 58,59 a n d 60). Evidence that some people died
after 3.15 would not therefore effect the outcome of the inquest.


Response ofJhe emergency services has never been looked at?


2.       The coroner did not examine the response of the emergency services in detail
because his task was to look at how the deaths were caused - that is by traumatic
crush asphyxia (C ha pter 3, parag raphs 55 a n d 56).


3.       The Taylor Inquiry looked at this extensively.        In addition to oral written
evidence from many supporters and police officers, and many written statements,
Taylor took oral evidence from: four St John Ambulance personnel; the deputy
chief ambulance officer from South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
(SYMAS) who was in charge at the ground; two other SYMAS officers who were at
the ground; two senior ambulance officers from headquarters control; five fire
brigade officers; and five doctors (C hapter 3, parag raphs 79 - 84).


4.       Taylor considered at length the questions of when ambulances were
summoned, why there were not summoned earlier, when the major accident plan
was put into effect and why it was not done earlier. Chapter 21 of the Taylor interim
report deals with first aid and the emergency services, making clear that no valid
criticism could be made of them. That report made nine recommendations about
communications between the emergency services, first aid and medical facilities.



£\oppu\hou\longsub'pp0603pddoc
  His final report confirmed those recommendations and made another three on the
  same issues.


  MflW evidence from D r W alker/Tonv Edw ards?



  5.       Dr Walker made a statement which was available at the time (contained in
 Appendix 5). His evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not add significantly to
 that (C ha pter 3,             paragraph   21).   Mr Edwards also gave a statement at the time
  (Chapter 3, paragraph 34). His latest statements and evidence to Lord Justice
 Stuart-Smith add little of substance to his previous account (C ha pter 3,             parag raph

 4 0).    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that Mr Edwards’ criticisms of the
 ambulance service are misplaced (C ha pter 3,               paragraph   100).



 Victims who were still alive were certified dead?

 6.        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered the detailed procedures followed
 doctors at the time and has found no reason wHatever to doubt that fte pro
 were          proper            and   reliable       (C h apter   5,     parag raphs




e\oppu\hoaVlan|fubVppM03p&doc
 Video evidence


 The claim that the police blame their failure to see the overcrowding on camera 5
 being defective is simply not correct. There was abundant evidence at the Taylor
 inquiry and the inquest that the police in the control box had a good view and could
 see the terraces. There was never any suggestion from the officers in charge that
 they depended on camera 5 to see the state of the terraces (C ha pter 2,
 PARAGRAPHS 37-61).



 Eol tee video footaae was concealed/disappeared


 2.         Not correct. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith inspected the originals of the police
tapes. They are intact, timed throughout and with no gaps. All the tapes were
 available in their entirety to the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest (C ha pter 2,
 PARAGRAPH 18).



Stolen tapes/Yorkshire_tv video tapes contain new material


3.         Two tapes (not police tapes) were stolen from the club control room. One
was entirely blank because the camera was wrongly pointing at a wall. The other
showed turnstiles 9-16. The loss could not have had any effect on any of the
proceedings because they would not have shown anything relevant. There is no
evidence at all that they were taken by the police as part of a cover-up (C ha pter 2,
PARAGRAPH 21 AND 22).



4.         The Yorkshire tv tapes are copies, provided by the police, of the four video
tapes made on the day and provided in full to the Inquiry and the inquest (C ha pter
2, PARAGRAPH 76).




fteppu\houMongsub\pp0603pd.<ioc
  MflW evidence from Roaar HnMttwnrtfr?


  5.          His role and his evidence were known both to the Taylor Inquiry and to the
  coroner (C ha pter 2,            paragraph   97).   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers his
 evidence in great detail in Chapter 2 of the report. He concludes that the importance
 of that evidence has been exaggerated out of all proportion. There was a difference
 of opinion between Holdsworth and PC Bichard about the precise quality of the
 pictures from camera 5, but that was not significant (C ha pter 2, parag raphs 88-90).




£\oppu\hoa\longsub\pp0«03pd.<ioc
  Holdsworth. Mr Edwards or others)


  Lord Justice Stuart-Smith concludes that this suggestion is “wholly irresponsible”.
  (ch apter       3,   parag raph   70) Written statements from Walker, Holdsworth, Edwards
 and others were available to the Inquiry and the coroner - they were not called to
 give oral evidence because the issues were fully dealt with by others and their
 evidence had nothing material to add. ( chapter 2,             parag raph    66, 70   and   71.
 CHAPTER 2, PARAGRAPH 97 AND 98).



 Improper pressure bv West Midlands police on witnesses?


 2.         Claims made about pressure on three witnesses are examined in great detail
 in ch apter 4 (Mr Bruder, Miss Martin and Mr Paul Taylor). In relation to Mr Bruder
 he is quite satisfied that there was no improper pressure ( ch a pter 4 ,        parag raph

 31). In the other two cases there are conflicts of evidence, but Lord Justice Stuart-
 Smith is clear that the police had no reasonable motive to bring pressure to bear on
those witnesses, and that there is no indication at all of incomplete or biased
 investigation ( ch apter 4,        paragraph   71-72).


3.        After looking at all the allegations, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith endorses the
conclusion of Lord Taylor, who paid tribute to the West Midlands Police for their
dedication in gathering the evidence. T aylo r            in ter im r epo rt , parag raph   16).
SCRUTINY REPORT, CHAPTER 5, PARAGRAPH 44).



Tampering with police statements


4.        This was brought to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s attention first by the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire.


5.        Understand the reasons why the police solicitors advised the removal of
emotive or abusive passages, or expressions of opinion. That was an error of-


£Voppu\houM<mgsub\pp0603pd.doc
  judgement and It would have been preferable to allow the statements to be
  submitted to the Inquiry unamended. But the Impact of this was negligible: Lord
  Justice Stuart-Smith has found only 10 cases out of over 400 statements where he
  thinks there are question marks over whether the passages should have been
  deleted (c h a pter 4 ,         paragraph   86-89).   The full versions of all the statements,
  some of which are in Appendix 6 and 7 of the report should that nothing of
 significance was removed. Copies of all the statements will be placed in the Library
 of the House.


 6.         The whole effort was counter productive and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is
 clear that there was nothing which could have possibly have affected the
 conclusions of the inquiry or the inquest ( ch apter 4,        parag raphs   104-106).




C\oppu\hou\longsub\pp0603pd.doc
