                                                      St John A m b u lan ce
                                                       A Voluntary Organisation o f The Order o f St. John

                                                    L O N D O N (P R IN C E O F W A L E S’S) D IST R IC T
                                                             President: The Duke of Westminster, D.L.
                                      Headquarters: Edwina Mountbatten House, 63 York Street, London W1H IPS
                                                                    Telephone: 01-258-3456


Commander:                Derek R. Fenton, M.V.O., M.B.E.
Director:                 Mrs. C. M. Stretton, R.G.N., R.C.N.T., DNCert.
Commissioner:             A. L. Gillings, JP.
Public Relations Adviser: Tom Gibson.                                                        8th August 1989
 Home Office,
 Queen Anne 1s Gate,
 London SW1H 9AT

 For the attention of Mr. A. Brown


 Dear Sir,

 HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989

 I acknowledge receipt of your circular dated 4th August 3989
 relative to the Interim Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry.

As you may be aware I have had correspondence since the disaster
with Mr. David Lidington in which it was agreed that further
discussion concerning the involvement of St. John Ambulance
would be delayed until after publication of the Interim Report.

 You will no doubt be interested to know that in London I have
 been actively engaged since the Interim Report on the Popplewell
 Inquiry on improving the facilities at the eleven football grounds
 and, in general, I have been reasonably successful.  I have received
 considerable help from the London Boroughs' Licencing Authorities.

 Ever since Hillsborough there has been great activity and all Clubs
 have agreed to a substantial increase in equipment and have designated
 other emergency first aid rooms within their grounds.

 Although at nearly all grounds we have ambulances we had great
 difficulty in having these officially accepted and therefore do
 not receive any monetary remuneration.  However, with the latest
 recommendations we will be discussin the matter in full with the
 LAS , the Licencing Authorities and the Clubs themselves.

Maybe there will be an opportunity of representing our views to the
Lord Justice Taylor's Committee before the final report is produced.
Yo




De
Commander
