                    Police Policy Directorate                                Home Office
                                                                             50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
                   Paul Pugh                                                 London SW lH 9AT
                                                                             Telephone: 0171-273 3141
                   Head o f Operational Policing Polity Unit (OPPU)          Fax:       0171-273 2703




  RESTRICTED
  PERSONAL

 Richard Wells Esq QPM MA (Oxon) Cl Mgt
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield
 SS38LY                                                               29 January 1998




 HILLSBOROUGH


 As I mentioned on the telephone, the Home Secretary has agreed that you should
 have a copy of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report because as disciplinary authority *
 for South Yorkshire police officers, you are in that sense one of those to whom the i ,
 report is addressed in order to in s id e r whether any questions of a disciplinary*" '
 nature arise from the report. A copy of the report is enclosed with this letter.

I emphasise that the report at this stage is for your personal consideration, and for
that of ACC Daines, with whom you may wish to discuss its contents. The Home
Secretary has not formed any view about the report’s conclusions, nor will he be
making any public comment about the content of the report until he has considered it
and decided the terms of the response which he will make when the report is
published. As I mentioned, I would expect publication to be in February. I know that
I can rely on you to respect the confidentiality of the report. In addition to yourself
and Home Office officials, only the offices of the Attorney-General and the DPP have
received copies.

I expect to be in touch again soon, when the Home Secretary has considered the
report.
                       M ow ,                  ,
                                                     P— P-*c
                                                PAUL PUGH




fi\oppu\hou\letter\ppOJ44pd.doc
    From: Paul Pugh                     cc: Home Secretary         Mr Middleton
          Head of Operational               Mr Michael             Mr R Evans
          Policing Policy Unit              Mr O’Brien             Mr Edmundson
          Room 529                          Lord Williams          Ms Scott
          Queen Anne’s Gate                 Mr Omand               Mr Warner
          « 0171-273-3141                   Mr Boys Smith          Mr Owen
          28 January 1998



    Linda Rushton
    APS/Mr Howarth


    HILLSBOROUGH


O   Your note ° f 27 January records Mr Howarth’s reactions to my submission of
    22 January about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report. I agree with most of
    Mr Howarth’s comments about handling, but there is one point which I ought to
    clarify.

    2.     Mr Howarth refers to ‘the failure on the part of South Yorkshire Police to
    disclose sections of the video tapes ‘and suggests that this should be deplored.
    There is no evidence that South Yorkshire Police failed to disclose any vided
    material. There have been allegations that the West Midlands Police, who
    investigated the disaster on behalf of the Taylor Inquiry and the Coroner,
    deliberately omitted relevant material from the compilation tapes which they
    prepared for the inquiry and the inquest. That is an allegation which, I understand
    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers to be completely unfounded; and there are
    clear records that all the material from police video cameras was secured
    immediately after the disaster and made available to the investigating team, and that
    any of the material which the investigating team did not include on the compilation
    tapes was available at the time for viewing by any legal representatives of the
    parties to the inquiry or inquest. I do not think that the issue of inadequate
    disclosure by the South Yorkshire Police of video material arises.




                                          PAUL PUGH


    f:\oppu\hou\ini3cVppOS41p d d o c
