DRAFT


                                               cc   Ms   Craig
                                                    Mr   Yates
                                                    Mr   Chilcot
                                                    Mr   Hammond
                                                    Mr   Moriarty
                                                    Mr   Turney
                                                    Mr   Addison
                                                    Mr   Sandiford
                                                    Mr   Whalley


Mr Walters



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY: COSTS OF LEGAL REPRESENTATION



We discussed today with Treasury officials and the Treasury

Solicitor the basis for payment of costs of persons or bodies

legally represented at Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry into the

Hillsborough disaster.



2.   As with the Popplewell inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor will

explain at the opening hearing on 28 April that there are no

statutory provisions governing the inquiry, but that the

Secretary of State is able to meet the costs incurred by any

person for the purposes of the inquiry.   The Secretary of State

will look to Lord Justice Taylor to assess costs, and to make

recommendations to him.   Lord Justice Taylor will explain that he

will consider at the end of the inquiry what recommendations to

make, and that he will be prepared to make recommendations for

payment of reasonable costs.



3.   Lord Justice Taylor will also consider at the opening hearing

which witnesses ought to be represented, and how such witnesses
should be grouped for the purposes of representation.



4.   The Treasury have explained that Treasury Ministers have

become increasingly concerned at the extent of representation at

recent inquiries, and the increasingly prevalent expectation that

all costs of representation will be met at public expense.      (They

apparently took particular exception to meeting the costs of

representation of the Fire Officers' trade union at the King's

Cross inquiry.)



5.   We agreed in discussion with the Treasury and Mr Nursaw that,

when Ministers come to consider Lord Justice Taylor's

recommendations on costs, there will be a spectrum of categories

for consideration.    (As the inquiry is non-statutory, payments

will be ex gratia.)   The costs of legal representation for

persons injured (or for the bereaved) would be met: we know   that

Lord Justice Taylor proposes to group witnesses for such

purposes.   At the other end of the spectrum, the Treasury have

indicated that they would not now expect to pay    for   the costs of

companies (e.g. the football clubs, if they are companies),   local

authorities (such as Sheffield) and other public bodies or trade

unions (such as the Police Federation).   They would, however,

expect to pay in cases where a trade union provides the

representation for an individual who would otherwise be legally

represented at public expense, to the extent of the union's costs

for that purpose.



6.   In the middle of the spectrum would come bodies such as the

Liverpool supporters* club and the National Association of
Football Supporters.   The Treasury recognise that it is for Lord

Justice Taylor to decide whether to grant representation to such

bodies, and whether at the end of the hearing to recommend that

their costs should be met.   We agreed, however, that Mr Nursaw

(who of course understands the Home Office interest in all this

as well as the Treasury interest) should attend upon Lord Justice

Taylor this afternoon with Mr Whalley to explain the Treasury

concerns.



7.   I think we can now only wait to see what action Lord Justice

Taylor takes at the opening hearing tomorrow, as regards grouping

of witnesses, grant or refusal of legal representation, and any

comment on the approach he will take at the end of the inquiry on

costs.   My reason for reporting now is that Treasury officials

are reporting to the Chief Secretary the line they have taken,

and it is possible that the Chief Secretary may mention it.




                                        M M-L
