                                  cc   Miss y6<oldridge)without
                                       Mr Qook         Jenclosure.
                                       Mr Wood



Mr Smith
F8 Division



POLICE DEPARTMENT EVIDENCE TO THE TAYLOR INQUIRY

You copied your note of 17 May to Mr Cook seeking a contribution on
the activities of ticket touts and on forged tickets.

Ticket touts

The third paragraph in this section needs to be recast slightly to
reflect Ministers' repeated view that while the activities of touts
may not be admirable they do not consider the selling of tickets at
a price higher than their face value to be a matter for

.the criminal law. I attach a copy of a recent PQ reply by
 Mr Patten to Mr Menzies-Campbell for information.

The problems associated with touting are however a separate
matter. We would agree that the answer lies with the tighter
control of tickets by the organisers of sporting events and that it
is for the police to use their existing powers where appropriate to
deal with the undesirable effects caused by touts at sporting
events.  Indeed I recall that the police took action against touts
at last year's Wimbledon championships.  It is important however
not to give the impression that there is a case for making the
touting of tickets in itself illegal and that the Government would
do so but for the difficulty in drawing up a workable offence. I
would suggest that the third paragraph in this section be recast'
along the lines:

     "Nonetheless, although many people find ticket touting
     distasteful it is not in itself a matter for the criminal
     law. There is no direct victim; people who buy tickets from
     touts do so knowing what the tickets fact value is and that
     they are paying a premium.  It is open to them to choose not
     to buy tickets from touts. That is not, however, to ignore
     the undesirable effects caused by touts' activities especially
     in relation to sporting events where numbers of spectators
*

     may be encouraged to turn up in the hope of buying at the gate a
     ticket to a well-subscribed match.  But the solution would seem to
     rest with tighter controls by the organisers of sporting events
     over the distribution of tickets, and the imposition of sanctions
     against those abusing the controls in conjunction with the
     exercise of the powers already available to the police to deal with
     touts at sports grounds".

     Forged tickets
                                                             jr


     We suggest the following paragraph:

           "Where a person makes or sells a forged ticket he may be
(\<-V      guilty of offences under section 15 of the^l968/sections 1-5
           of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 which carry maximum
A.         penalties of up to ten years inprisonment"




                                             P R EDMUNDSON
                                             C4 Division

     Mr Smith

     Since writing this note we discussed the matter briefly. You
     indicated that F8 and the Inquiry might see attractions in an
     offence of touting at a footbal ground etc.  I do not think this
     will work. An offence of selling a ticket within X hundred yards,
     or whatever, of a ground would only move some touts that distance
     away to where fans would travel, in any case in the hope of
     obtaining a ticket.  I very much doubt it would stop fans without
     tickets appearing at football grounds. Hope will probably still
     spring eternal.

     F8 has many papers dn the FCO proposal to create a 'cordon
     sanitaire' around embassies to control demonstrations. The
     arguments against that proposal have relevance here (and indeed
     implications for the HO's continuing apposition to the FCO
     proposal).




     PRE




                                  2
