                                                                                    <"2 l



 From:    David Redhouse
                                                        cc   Mr Michael
          PS/Home Secretary
                                                             Mr O'Brien
          0171 273 4 6 0 2
                                                             M r Howarth
                                                             Permanent Secretary
                                                             Miss Wheldon
                                                             Mr Boys Smith
          16 June 1997
                                                             Mr Granatt
                                                             Mr Middleton, LAB
                                                             Ms Loudon
                                                             MM-dtnundson
                                                             Mr Warner
                                                             Mr Owen


MLEuab


HILLSBOROUGH




The Home Secretary has seen your submission of 13 June and has written to
the Attorney General as you recommended. I attach a copy.

2 : +u The Home Secretary is also content with the outline proposals on timing
°L     announcement and so, subject to replies from the Attorney General and
others, I will contact the Business Managers to take this forward.




                              DAVID REDHOUSE




                                                                         12646-DR
       sscA*r



                                                      QUEEN ANNE S GATE LONDON SWlH 9AT

                                                                             16 JON 19$7


  The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
  Attorney General
  9 Buckingham Gate
  LONDON
  SW1E 6JP




 THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


e ^ a m L T o n T T T ' f 10 June ab0Ut the pr° p ° sed independent
      ination of the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.

! ^ ri®r! ' ! f“ l t0 you for your a9 reement in principle with what I proposed
res dons Ihi lirL q°ur c on cern s about the terms of reference and the statutory
A lZ u a h wonH     . reSt W" h r u and the Direct0r of Public Prosecutions.
Although I would prefer terms of reference which invited more explicit

Z o s T |ar uw ' h "1 br0adl|r 0n,en, Wl,h the amended                   you
S w tf ;           1' however' l,ke t0 suggest some small changes to refer
explicitly to my role as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to
suooefit?hanyf     ' aCt'° n Wh'Ch Sh0uld be taken in ^ e public interest     I
suggest therefore terms of reference along the following lines:

      To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
      Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

      (a)       To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

      (b)        To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for
                the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
                responsibilities; or

     (c)
                To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
                police disciplinary matters;
       And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
       available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
       Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry
       and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
       previously considered by them which which may be relevant to their
       respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which
       should be taken in the public interest.


amended ver^cm.01 " ^        W° U'd                        V° U are happy Wi,h the sli9 ht|V


la te o n ^ h is ',IL DT lrVine‘f ° r PTOP0Sing ,hat L° rd JuS,ice ®tuart-Smith might
take on this task. He seems to me very suitable for what we have in mind If

task l'L aolL ,° th 0 'rm/ hat L° rd JUSti“  S   t u   a     is wrrrrng to take on the
                                                           , t - S   m   i t h

* ,®;. ' "9 9 .e st the " ext steP m'9ht be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet
h IIh , k n CUSS            requirements. The appropriate official is Paul Pugh,
Head of the Operational Policing Policy Unit here (0 171 -273 3141).

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
      hancf ' or- thf President of the Council, the Minister without Portfolio, the

S         r     °     r Nat,0na' Herita9e' the                              ° f PUb,iC ^rosecut'ons and




                                   JACK STRAW
