From:   R R G Watts                              cc   Miss Nicholson
        G1 Division                                   Mr Marshallsay
        (x 2764)                                      Mr Yates
                                                      Mr Moriarty
        2 May 1989                                    Mr Turney o/r
                                                      Mr Mower
                                                      Mr Boys Smith
                                                      Mr Whalley
                                                      Mr Goddard
                                                      Mr Mould
                                                      Mr Lidington



Miss Bannister



HILLSBOROUGH:    NEIL THORNE MP   -   FIRST AID PROVISION

You asked for advice and a draft reply to Mr Thorne's letter of
20 April.

2. Mr Thorne has for some time been seeking, on behalf of
St John Ambulance, some form of statutory requirement on the
provision of first aid facilities at sports events.  Commander
Derek Fenton and Assistant Commander Dan Regan of St John have
been pressing for this; and both have met Lord Ferrers.   (A copy
of an exchange of letters between Mr Thorne and Lord Ferrers
earlier this year is attached.)

3. Messrs Fenton and Regan feel that safety certificates are not
specific enough on their first aid requirements and that local
authorities do not have the knowledge to set down what is
necessary. They want central, mandatory direction.

4. Safety certificates issued by local authorities for grounds
designated by the Secretary of State as requiring certificates
are the main instrument for achieving spectator safety. It is
arguable whether the provisions of the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975 extend to "secondary" safety matters such as first aid;
in any event there is no power under the Act for the Home Office
to issue mandatory guidelines of the sort requested.

5. We told St John, however, that we intended to update the
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds and would include information
on the provision of first aid facilities. The aim was to produce
guidance in the near future; but the work on this is now
suspended pending the report of the Taylor Inquiry.

6. St John Ambulance have written direct to Mr Renton about this
(see copy of correspondence attached).

7.   The issues of first aid and the operation of the 1975 Act
E.R.


       will of course now be examined by the Taylor Inquiry and St John
       intend to give evidence to the Inquiry.  In the circumstances we
       think that no useful purpose would be achieved by meeting
       Mr Thorne in advance of the Inquiry's report.

       8.   A draft reply to Mr Thorne on this basis is attached.




                                           R R G WATTS




       FEP/89 12/130/1
Draft reply to Mr Neil Thorne. MP




Thank you for your letter of 20 April about the provision of
first aid facilities at sports grounds.


As explained by Robin Ferrers in his letter of 21 February the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 does not empower us to issue
the sort of statutory guidelines that St John Ambulance were
seeking;     but he did explain that we were to update the Guide to
Safety of Sports Grounds and would include information on the
provision of first aid facilities.


The system of safety certification by local authorities is the
way in which statutory requirements are brought to bear on ground
operators.    The question of whether this is the best system
    or whether changes need to be made are matters which the
Inquiry under Lord Justice Taylor will no doubt look at.     In the
circumstances I think it would be premature for us to discuss
such issues before we have the benefit of the Inquiry
recommendations.     I know from correspondence received from St
John Ambulance that they intend to provide evidence to the
Inquiry.
                                                              H   ome   O   ffice
                                                             QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                             L O N DO N SW1H 9AT



 Our Ref: FEP/89 12/130/1 (S)



                                                                             Ti'v- 1   .....
                                                                             -{j:              -

                                                                             •2.1



  Thank you for your letter of 26 January together with enclosures from
^fiommander Fenton of St John's Ambulance about First Aid facilities at
^ l o t b a l l league grounds.

 I do not think the Home Office is vulnerable in the way in which you
 suggest. Responsibility for the safety of spectators lies with the
 ground operator. Terms and conditions of safety certificates are a
 matter for the local authority.

 The Popplewell Inquiry found the system of certification to be effective
 in securing safety improvements. The principal safety recommendations of
 the Inquiry have been implemented by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places
 of Sport Act 1987. It would not be right to place additional regulations
 on ground operators.

 The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds is being updated. We shall include
 in the Guide information on the provision of first aid facilities. Section
 10B of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 refers to the inspection of
 designated grounds by local authorities. It does not empower us to issue
 guidelines of the sort envisaged in Mr Regan's letter.




                                                  FERRERS
              NEIL THORNE O BE, TD., MP.
                                                        0

                H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                    L O N D O N SWIAOAA


                    26th January 1989




I forwarded your Assistant Private Secretary's letter
of 24th November to Commander Fenton at St John Ambulance
and in reply have received the enclosed letter dated
11th January from his assistant, Dan Regan.

Is it possible that the Home Office could find itself
in an exposed position in the event of some future
tragedy ?   Perhaps you could ask your officials to give
some positive guidance about this aspect of the matter
as you can see from Derek Fenton's letter of 24th January
and the accompanying schedule.

I fully accept that the Government does not wish to nanny
local authorities but I am concerned that standards vary
so widely, and many see opportunities to economise in
areas of safety when quite clearly they should not be
allowed to get away with it, particularly as it is usually
the Government which gets the blame when tragedies occur.




The Rt Hon The Earl Ferrers,
Minister of State,
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne's Gate,
London SW1H 9AT.
                                      ST. JOHN AMBULANCE
                     A Voluntary O rganisation o f The O rder o f St. John

                                  LONDON (PRINCE OF WALES'S! DISTRICT
                                              Commander Derek ft Fenton UVO U8L
                               A stt Commander DI «ef*n MA 8Sc lEconl IPfA ferrater
                                                                                      V
                                                      Edwina Mountbatten House
                                                                 63 Yori Street
 Telephone                                                    London WIH IPS
01 * 258 3456

                                                11th January 1989
Neil Thorne, Esq., OBE, TD, MP,
House of Commons,
London SW1A OAA


">ear Neil,

Jei^c Fenton has shown me your letter to him of 5th December
0 4 ^ - h e r with the letter to you from Mr. Mason, the Assistant
Private Secretary to Lord Ferrers.        I have the following comments
to make on the penultimate paragraph of Mr. Mason's letter:-

Section 6(2) of the 1975 Act is quite clear in empowering the
Secretary of State to make regulations for safety at sports grounds.
Indeed it gives him very wide powers.  It reads:—
  nS6(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make
   provision for securing safety at sports grounds."
By the 1988 Act (S25) a new section is inserted into the 1975 Act
i.e. 10B. Sub-section 2 of this new section makes it mandatory upon
local authorities to act in accordance with such guidance as the
Secretary of State may give them.    Unfortunately the only guidance
I can. find is in the Summary of Management Responsibilities issued
by The Home Office in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.   If
  •TuT6 SuilX in local government I would interpret this as guidance
within the Act, but I am not sure if a Court would uphold this.
Anyhow, the guidance is minimal in that it says "To provide first
aid facilities and first aid staff".

I enclose a note I prepared for Derek last July which may be
helpful.  (You may already have a copy.)

I really do think the Home Secretary is in an exposed position if
there is unfortunately a tragedy at a sports ground and I would
respectfully suggest that Lord Ferrers be asked to look at the
matter again.

Yours sincerely,
nr
