From: Peter Edmundson
      Operational Policing Policy Unit
      Room 527
      Queen Anne’s Gate
      0171 273 2621

        17 June 1998



Mr Middleton. LAB




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER - 20 QUESTIONS BY THE FAMILY
SUPPORT GROUP

On the morning of the Hillsborough Adjournment debate last month, the
Hillsborough Family Support Group published 20 questions to the Home
Secretary about the disaster. Mr Howarth undertook to reply to the questions
and I put up the attached submission covering a reply for him to send - 20
Questions are at Annex A. He is generally content with the draft reply, but
asked for some changes, reflected in the version of the draft attached, and
asked that LAB be asked for comments, as the Family Support Group are
likely to scrutinize the reply in detail.

Are you content with the revised draft attached?




                                         PETER EDMUNDSON




F:\OPPU\CRIM E\M ISCAPE 1122MA. DOC
From: Linda Rushton                                        cc: H om e Secretary
      A PS/M r H ow arth                                       M r Michael
      Room 702                                                 M r Om and
      Queen Anne’s Gate           fu    IfJ £*rc^              M r Boys Smith
      S 273 4238                                               M r Pugh
                                                               M r Clifford
                                                               Miss Scott
                                                               M r Granatt
                                                               Ms Clifford
                                                               M r Warner
                                                               M r Owen
       15 June 1998




H IL L SB O R O U G H : FAMILY SU PPO R T G R O U P ’S 20 Q U ESTIO N S

M r H ow arth has seen your submission of 8 June regarding the above. I apologise
for the delay however M r H ow arth has been abroad and was therefore unable to
clear work.

2.   H e is content to write to Trevor Hicks, as drafted , w ith the following
amendments:

Paragraph 13 Third Sentence

3.    Replace “entirely proper” w ith “necessary”

Paragraph 16

4.     M r H ow arth has commented that it would be a good idea to bring the
E C H R issue into this paragraph. I would be grateful if you could provide a further
contribution to the letter to cover this point.

Paragraph 18

5.    At the end of this paragraph, M r H ow arth would like to add:

       “I do, however, understand people’s feelings about this and I did refer to this
       in m y speech on 8 May”.
Paragraph 19

6.    At the end of the paragraph, Mr Howarth would like to continue the
sentence with:

       “and I hope that you will feel able to make the necessary arrangements for
       such a meeting to take place”

Paragraph 20

7.     Mr Howarth has asked whether it would be possible to reiterate our
commitment to any future proceedings regarding inquests and police discipline. I
would be grateful if you could provide a contribution covering this point for
insertion in the letter.

8.      I would be grateful if you could let me know if you are content for the
above amendments to be added to the letter. In addition, Mr Howarth has
requested that LAB be asked for their comments on the revised letter, in view of
the fact that the Family Support Group are likely to scrutinise the letter in great
detail.




                              LINDA RUSH TO N
From: Peter Edmundson                                        cc Home Secretary
      O perational Policing                                     Mr Michael
      Policy Unit                                               Mr Omand
      Room 527, QAG                                             Mr Boys Smith
      9 273 - 2621                                              Miss Scott - Parly Sect
      8 June, 1998                                              Mr Pugh
                                                                Mr Clifford - ABCU
                                                                Mr Granatt
                                                                Ms Clifford - CD
                                                                Mr Warner
                                                                Mr Owen
Mr Howarth

HILLSBOROUGH: FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP’S 20 QUESTIONS

Issue

To respond to the 20 questions published by the Family Support Group on the day of
the recent adjournment debate on Hillsborough.

Timing

2.       An early reply is recommended.

Recommendation

3.      A draft reply to Trevor Hicks, Chairman of the Family Support Group, is
attached behind and responds to each of the questions raised. You may also wish to
send a copy of your letter to those Merseyside MPs and others with a particular
interest in the disaster who spoke in the debate, and place a copy of it in the House
Library.


Consideration

4.     The Family Support Group produced a press release on 8 May, the day of the
adjournment debate on Hillsborough, raising 20 questions on a wide variety o f issues.
This is reproduced at annex A behind. You gave an undertaking at the adjournment
debate on 8 May to write to the Support Group to answer any of the 20 Questions not
already covered in the debate. A number o f the questions do refer to issues which were
covered in the Home Secretary’s speech and, although we have answered the points in
the draft reply, it may be helpful to also enclose the Hansard extract.

5.     The Support Group complained that it had not received a number o f the police
statements which were meant to have been released. We have now received copies of
the statements concerned and are arranging for them to be sent to the Support Group
and the Library of the House. It appears that these statements were held separately
from the bulk o f the statements as a part of the discipline inquiry papers.



f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
Handling/presentational issues

6.     No other considerations.




                                       Peter Edmundson




 f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
                                                                            Annex A
HILLSBOROUGH DEBATE - 8 MAY 1998

20 QUESTIONS TO JACK STRAW/HOME OFFICE FROM THE
HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP



 1.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith glosses over the theft of two video tapes from the
Sheffield Wednesday control Room on the night o f the disaster because the tapes
showed “nothing relevant.” The key issue is the theft and its motive. The tapes were
taken from a locked cupboard, in a locked and alarmed room on a major incident/scene
o f crime site guarded by South Yorkshire Police.

How on earth can the Home Secretary accept Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
dismissal of this act?

2.      The Coroner advised PC Bichard in the presence o f the Jury that police video
tapes from score board camera 5 were missing. Lord Justice Stuart Smith states that
the same footage was never missing.

Can the Home Secretary explain this clear contradiction and what he intends to
do about it?

3.    Why did Lord Justice Stuart Smith completely ignore the variety of excuses
from South Yorkshire Police in relation to the performance o f camera 5?

At the inquest it was stated to be faulty and therefore not used. This was confirmed in
a South Yorkshire Police press statement in January 1997 which stated “although the
camera was operating, interference from live TV broadcast equipment rendered it
useless.” This was the first ever reference to Outside Broadcast Unit interference, and
the families cannot find anyone who believes let alone accepts this spurious technical
argument.

When actual footage from camera 5 was retrieved by the families and it proved that
camera 5 was working perfectly, South Yorkshire Police changed their stance yet
again. In a press release dated 1 April, 1997, South Yorkshire Police stated that they
had never claimed that camera was faulty, the fault lay with the monitor in the police
control room. Copies of both press releases were submitted to Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith who did not even see fit to comment on them.

Does the Home Secretary accept that this is hardly the action of a fair and even
handed judge?

4.      Why did Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fail to address the Group’s submission re
late/non implementation of major disaster plan as per Wardrobe’s article in the British
Medical Journal published subsequent to the inquest.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
Wardrobe categorically states that the hospital never received notification o f a major
incident taking place at Hillsborough. This failure meant that there was only a small
number o f staff to deal with the exceptionally large workload.

Why didn’t Lord Justice Stuart-Smith interview any ambulancemen? Surely this is
indicative o f his closed mind and that he was firmly behind the “sudden death” theory
which conveniently renders irrelevant any evidence of ambulancemen and or other
rescuers.

Why did Ambulanceman Tony Edwards have to literally beg Stuart-Smith for an
interview? He was then told he would have to pay his own expenses as he was not
attending the meeting at the invitation o f the Judge! Was this an attempt to dissuade
him from attending?

5.     Lord Justice Stuart-Smith dismisses the importance of Roger Houldsworth’s
evidence on the grounds that the Jury had been to the ground and had viewed the
scene for themselves. The jury of curse visited the ground when it was empty and
would have had a different perspective to that on the day of the disaster. In any event
Dr. Popper himself made it clear that visits to the ground were not part of the court
proceedings.

6.     The Judge makes no comment on why Houldsworth was not called as a
witness to the inquest other than to say in any event his evidence was the same as PC
Guest. Sadly PC Guest dies before the Inquest took place leaving Houldsworth as the
only non-police witness as to the capability and extent of the police CCTV system.

Can the Home Secretary defend this ridiculous analysis or will he accept it is yet
another example of bias in the scrutiny.

7.     Why does Stuart-Smith make no reference to Ed Walker’s allegation that Sgt.
Julie Appleton was not present when he made his statement and simply added her
signature as a witnessing officer at a later stage. Instead, in response to allegations
that Appleton pressurised SPC Debra Martin, he states he found her a very impressive
witness.

8.      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has commented on the editing of police statements.
The families understand that some form of undertaking was given by Mervyn Jones,
the then Assistant Chief Constable, West Midlands to Peter Wright, the then Chief
Constable, South Yorkshire in respect o f this tampering with evidence.

Can the Home Secretary comment on the covert nature of this undertaking and
is he prepared to place a copy of it, along with any relevant correspondence, in
the public domain.

9.     The Home Secretary undertook to place in the House of Commons library all
supporting documentation. Whey are the key police statements not yet in the House of
Commons library and why were they not in the document bundles recently supplied to
the family group, despite them being on the index?



f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
Does the Home Secretary agree that families are entitled to believe they have
been removed deliberately?

10.    Lord Justice Taylor’s terms of reference were to ? into the events at Sheffield
Wednesday football ground on the 15.4.89 and to make recommendations for the
needs o f crowd control and safety at sports events.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has taken it upon himself to re-write those terms of
reference and states that the first part of the Taylor enquiry was to find out what
happened and why and to consider the response of the emergency services.

Stuart Smith however, accepts the criticisms contained in the statement of
Ambulanceman Peter Howes which was not made until after the Taylor Inquiry.
Howes was not called as a witness at the inquest

Does the Home Secretary really feel confident that sufficient enquiry has taken
place into the implementation of the disaster plan and the emergency response.

11.     South Yorkshire Police have admitted that they had been given a copy of the
scrutiny report some days in advance of its presentation to the House o f Commons.
Surely this is a breach of parliamentary privilege and is indicative of police bias at the
Home Office.

Is the Home Secretary prepared to name those responsible for this breach of
privilege and to denounce the reports use by South Yorkshire officers in press
interviews, both prior and immediately after the announcement in the House.

12.    Is the Home Secretary prepared to give access to all witness transcripts,
submissions and other supporting documentation to the Family Group’s legal
representative?

13.    Why was the Hillsborough Family Support Group told in March that they
could have no information from South Yorkshire Police while PC Greenway was away
on holiday.

Resources were however “found” to enable South Yorkshire Police to offer “briefings”
to Merseyside MP’s, to throw down the gauntlet to ITV and for Assistant Chief
Constable Daines to write a series of articles for the media.

14.     In earlier statements to the House, Mr. Straw made public has disapproval of
failures by police forces to properly implement existing police disciplinary rules.

Can he confirm his approval or otherwise of Chief Constable Richard Wells
decision to allow Duckenfield to retire on ill health grounds while facing
disciplinary charges for neglect of duty and could he further confirm whether
that decision was in accord with the disciplinary code in place at that time.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
15.      The Police Complaints Authority placed on record that they had “had to use
their statutory powers” to initiate “neglect of duty charges” against Messrs.
Duckenfield and Murray.

Can the Home Secretary comment on this quite clear example of South
Yorkshire’s failure to take action within the disciplinary codes?

16.     When addressing the families at the Commons and Southport, Mr. Straw three
times used the term “gross negligence” in relation to the execution by the police of
their duties.

Can the Home Secretary offer an explanation of the fact that despite his
assessment that there had been gross negligence, no-one has been charged with
unlawful killing or indeed anything.

17.      The Home Secretary has openly stated he is prepared to meet the families
and/or their representatives again. Ht is also on the record as not being prepared to
alter his position o f supporting Stuart-Smith’s report.

18.    Following the Hillsborough Disaster, major changes have been made in football
ground licensing legislation, there are proposals to strengthen up the police disciplinary
code and its implementation, and the Home Office Working Party has recommended a
major overhaul of the current relationship between the Inquest an any Public Inquiry.

Can the Home Secretary comment on how an “accidental death” verdict can be
acceptable when almost everything associated with Hillsborough has been found
grossly wanting?

19.    Can the Home Secretary confirm whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and
others associated with the scrutiny are Freemasons?

20.     When the West Midlands police serious crime squad was disbanded following
investigations into its conduct, the officers were supposedly transferred to menial
tasks.

Could the Home Secretary comment on how Superintendent Beechy of that
discredited squad came to be a key player in the collating of Hillsborough
evidence for Lord Taylor, the Inquests, the DPP and the police internal
investigations?




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
DRAFT REPLY FOR GEORGE HOWARTH’S SIGNATURE


Trevor Hicks Esq
Chairman
Hillsborough Family Support Group
Central Buildings                                                                     I
41 North John Street
Liverpool L2 6RR



When I responded to the adjournment debate on Hillsborough on 8 May I undertook
to write to you about the 20 questions in the Support Group’s press release issued that
day. A number of the issues raised were covered by the Home Secretary in his speech
or in the course of the debate and I enclose a copy of the Hansard extract for ease of
reference. I will respond to the questions in order.


Question one on your press release referred to the theft of two video tapes from the
ground. As the Home Secretary indicated during the debate, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
is quite clear that the loss o f these tapes did not hinder the inquiry into the disaster
since they would not have shown anything relevant (Page 18 para. 21 & 22 of his
report). Your press release suggests that their importance rests on the motive behind
the theft, but since investigations at the time failed to identify who was responsible, it
is not possible to draw any firm conclusions from the incident either about who took
the tapes or their reason for taking them.


Question two referred to an extract of the inquest proceedings when PC Bichard gave
evidence that appeared to indicate that footage from Camera 5 had disappeared. Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith discusses this dialogue between the Coroner and PC Bichard at
some length (Page 26, para. 62 and following). Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusion
(at para. 75) is that 'PC Bichard was mistaken in thinking that there was tape from
camera 5 of the same scene prior to 15 .02 .’ He states categorically (at para. 77) that
there is no foundation to the allegation that video tape was suppressed or hidden by
the police.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
Question 3 suggested that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had ignored contradictions about
the performance o f camera 5. The Support Group’s submissions about the video
evidence were dealt with in detail in Chapter Two of the report. Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith found that the police did not blame their failure to appreciate the overcrowding
at the Leppings Lane terraces on the performance of camera 5. He therefore concluded
that suggestions that evidence about the performance of the camera had been
exaggerated was of no consequence to the Taylor inquiry and other proceedings.


Question four referred to the Support Group’s submission about the implementation of
the major disaster plan and Mr Wardrope’s article in the British Medical Journal. Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith refers to Mr Wardrope’s article at paragraph 49 on page 47 of his
report. At paragraph 64 the Judge concludes that Mr Wardrope’s article does not
differ significantly from the evidence which he gave at the inquest. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith considered the question of whether there should be a fresh inquiry into
the response of the emergency services in Chapter Three. He concludes (at page 61,
para. 102) that in the 'light of Lord Taylor’s full and detailed inquiry, and specific
findings and recommendations’ no useful purpose would be served by having any
further inquiry into the rescue operation.


         V ^
Question fiy^asks why Lord Justice Stuart-Smith did not interview any ambulancemen
and why he had not thought it necessary to see Tony Edwards, wnerhe eventually saw
at rjis'own request. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says (at Page 45, para. 33) that he was
asked to consider the evidence of three ambulancemen, including that of Tony
Edwards. At paragraph 48, he indicates that he did not consider it necessary to
interview these witnesses because their statements were available to the police at the
time and he accepted what was said in them. The conduct of the scrutiny was, of
course entirely a matter for the Judge. In this case, he clearly felt no purpose would be
served by interviewing the ambulancemen concerned. In fact, as you note, Tony
Edwards did give evidence to the scrutiny at his own request and this is dealt with at
paragraph 98 o f the report.


Question six referred to tjie Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions about the
evidence of Roger Houldsworth. The judge considers the evidence of Mr Houldsworth


f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
at some length in Chapter Two of his report. Lord Justice Stuart Smith concluded that
the police had not blamed their failure to appreciate the overcrowding on a faulty
camera and, on page 25 paragraph 56, he says that the Coroner’s jury went to the
police control box and saw for themselves the view which each police officer had. Mr
Houldsworth also demonstrated the capability of the CCTV cameras. On page 36
paragraphs 97 and 98, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says that Mr Houldsworth’s existence
and evidence were known to both the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner but there was
no reason for him to be called since what he was then saying about the police and club
systems was dealt with by other witnesses.


Question seven asked why Lord Justice Stuart-Smith made no reference to Dr Ed
Walker’s allegation that Sgt Appleton added her signature as a witness to his statement
at a later time. I cannot, o f course, answer for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on the
content o f his report but there is no suggestion by Dr Walker that the evidence given
by him in the statement was incorrect or that it was altered in any way by the police.


Question eight refers to an undertaking given by Mervyn Jones, the investigating
officer from West Midlands Police, to the then Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
about the use of police statements. This concerned an undertaking not to use original
police statements for the purpose of the Taylor Inquiry where they had been
superseded by a subsequent statement. I understand that you have now been supplied
with a copy of the letter from Mervyn Jones to the Treasury Solicitor referred to in the
letter shown at Appendix 8 of the scrutiny report.


Question nine asks about missing copies of police statements. As I indicated in the
House on 8 May, officials have been making enquiries of South Yorkshire Police about
the statements which the Support Group indicate were missing, and we have now
arranged for these to be supplied. I understand that some of the police statements were
held separately from the others as part of the police discipline enquiry papers and that
this is how they came to be omitted. It was never the intention to withhold any of the
police statements and I am sorry for the delay in providing them.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
Question ten asked whether the Home Secretary was satisfied that sufficient enquiry
had taken place into the implementation of the disaster plan and the emergency
response. The Home Secretary noted in his speech to the House on 8 May that Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith had found no evidence o f want of care by the emergency or
medical services and that no purpose would be served by any further inquiry into the
disaster. The Home Secretary has accepted this conclusion.


Question eleven refers to South Yorkshire Police receiving a copy of Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s report in advance of its presentation to Parliament. The Chief Constable
is mentioned in the terms of reference for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny as the
disciplinary authority for South Yorkshire Police and therefore one of the parties to
whom the report is directed. While I understand the families’ concern, it was necessary
that the Chief Constable, as disciplinary authority, should have been given the
opportunity to consider the report once it was submitted by the Judge.


Question twelve asks about access to material gathered in the course of Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny. We have made it clear that we will place all the evidence
considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the House of Commons Library unless
there are overriding reasons against doing so. In addition to the South Yorkshire
Police statements, we have already placed in the Library the following:


        Transcripts of interviews with those who gave evidence to Lord Justice Stuart-
        Smith

        Other records of discussions held by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, where
        transcripts were not made

        Written Evidence provided to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith by witnesses

        Other written statements consulted at the request of the families

        South Yorkshire Police Operational Orders for the 1988 and 1989 semi-finals

        Nineteen statements by the Police Complaints Authority

        Report produced by David Phillips of Devon & Cornwall Constabulary

        Report by Noel Bume (a structural engineer)



f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
        Police videotapes TB1,2,3 and 4

         Transcripts of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s open meeting on 6 October and
         meeting with Counsel on 30 September



 Question thirteen queries South Yorkshire Police’s inability to supply information to
 the Support Group during March because of staff absence on leave. As you will
 appreciate, I cannot answer for the South Yorkshire Police and I can only advise you
 to pursue any concerns with the force direct.


 Question fourteen asks about the decision to allow Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
to retire on ill health grounds. Under the Police Pension Regulations 1987, the
 responsibility for considering an application for retirement on ill health grounds rests
with the police authority for the force concerned. Before reaching a decision, the
 police authority is required to obtain the views of a suitably qualified medical
 practitioner on whether the officer is permanently disabled for police duties.-However,
-4twOuT^notT)e a.ppropi iale foi the Home Secretary to diseuss-how individual casey-
hajffi-heen-dealHvith—that-fe a matter for the police authority concerne^The Home
 Secretary indicated in the House that it was 'plainly unacceptable’ that no police
 officer was brought to book in this case and he signalled his determination to ensure
 that discipline procedures are strengthened so that, in future, hearings can be decided
 in the absence an accused officer, subject to appropriate safeguards. However, under       j         ^

the terms of the European Convention on Human Rights, these new procedures cannot           ^     ^

be applied retrospectively, and it would be wrong for me to suggest that any such               /«> f *
 action could now be taken against Mr Duckenfield.




 Question fifteen refers to the South Yorkshire Police’s failure to bring disciplinary
 charges against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray until
 directed by the Police Complaints Authority. Again, this was a matter for the force
 and the Police Complaints Authority and it would be inappropriate to comment on the
 decisions (were taken. The Police Complaints Authority, quite rightly, has the




 f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
power to direct that discipline charges are brought where the police have failed to do
so.


Question sixteen refers to the failure to bring any criminal proceedings following
Hillsborough. The possibility of criminal proceedings was fully examined by the then
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) who sought Counsel’s opinion on the report
submitted by the West Midlands Police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith explains (at page 10
paragraph 56) that the DPP had to consider the 'significantly different and greater
degree of culpability’ which is involved in a criminal offence of manslaughter
compared to liability under the civil law. I do, however, understand people’s feelings
about this and I did refer to this in my speech on 8 May.


Question seventeen refers to the Home Secretary’s offer to meet the familiesJand
questions the purpose of such a meeting^The Home Secretary understands the
families’ disappointment at the outcome of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny and
that is why he has been happy to meet them on a number of occasions; and why he has
offered to meet the families again to explain his decision not to re-open the inquiry, if
they would find that useful. Clearly, he has accepted the findings of Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny but his offer to meet the families again to explain his decision
remains open, and I hope that you will feel able to make the necessary arrangements
for such a meeting to take place.


Question eighteen asks how the inquest verdict of accidental death’ can be maintained
when so many things associated with Hillsborough have been found wanting. The
Home Secretary made it clear that there are deficiencies in procedures covering
inquests and police discipline which Hillsborough helped to highlight and which he
intends to address. He emphasised his support for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
endorsement o f the findings of a Home Office Working Party, published in March
1997, that the role of the coroner after a public inquiry should be limited. The main
change proposed by the Working Party was to relieve coroners of the need to resume
their inquest after an inquiry has been completed. If this had been in place at the time
of the Hillsborough Disaster, it would have spared the families of those who died
unnecessary distress when the Taylor Inquiry had covered substantially the same


f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
ground as the Inquest. The scrutiny conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
considered carefully the arguments submitted that the inquest verdict should be
quashed, but he found no grounds for recommending such a course of action. With
regard to police discipline, the Home Secretary responded, in March, to the
recommendations of the Home Affairs Select Committee on police disciplinary and
complaints procedures. In addition to the changes we propose to make to the
procedures relating to retirement on ill-health grounds which I outline above, the
Home Secretary also confirmed his intention to reduce the standard of proof to the
civil standard in discipline procedures and to remove the existing double jeopardy
provision which restricts criminal and disciplinary action on the same facts.


Question nineteen asks whether Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and others associated with
the scrutiny are Freemasons. This is entirely a matter for those concerned to disclose.
The Home Secretary is satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart Smith has conducted his
scrutiny with the utmost integrity. His report clearly sets out what evidence he
considered, his conclusions and the reasons for those conclusions.


Question twenty refers to the role played by Superintendent Beechy in the
Hillsborough investigation. The deployment of Superintendent Beechy was a matter
for the Chief Constable of West Midlands and the investigating officer, Mr Jones. I
understand that he was involved in the examination of specific ancillary matters rather
than part of the main team investigating the disaster, and that he was subsequently
assigned to assist the Coroner in the arrangements for the inquests.


I hope this is helpful. I realise that there are many issues which still leave the families
with a deep sense of frustration and injustice. This was vividly brought out in many of
the speeches during the debate on 8 May. I hope that although the families may not
accept the reasons for the Home Secretary’s conclusions, they will appreciate that we
have listened to their concerns very carefully. I am sure it was right to establish the
scrutiny. I am only sorry that the families’ burden has not been eased by its outcome.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
I am copying this letter to those Merseyside MPs and others with a particular interest
in the disaster who spoke in the debate on 8 May, and I am also arranging for a copy
of this letter to be placed in the Library of the House.




 f: \oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
DRAFT LETTER TO LIVERPOOL MPS FOR SIGNATURE BY MR
HOWARTH


To: -   Maria Eagle                          Colin Pickthall (West Lancashire)
        Eddie O’Hara                         Derek Twigg (Halton)
        Louise Ellman                        John Greenway (Ryedale)
        Claire Curtis-Thomas                 Vernon Coaker (Gelding)
        David Watts
        Joe Benton
        Andrew Miller
        Mike Hall
        David Hanson
        Helen Jones


You will recall that on the day of the Adjournment Debate on the Hillsborough
Disaster on 8 May, the Hillsborough Family Support Group issued a document asking
Jack Straw twenty questions about Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny, and other
matters. During the course of the debate, I undertook (Official Report Col 999) to
write to the families.


I enclose for your information, a copy of the letter I have sent today to Trevor Hicks.
As you will see, I am also placing a copy in the Library of the House.




f:\oppu\complnts\advice\mp-0606.doc
