E.R.
       183N/BN/MT




   NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 20 JUNE WITH THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
   AUTHORITY:  COST OF INVESTIGATION BY THE WEST MIDLANDS POLICE


   Present:         Lord Ferrers                Sir Jack Leydan:   Chairman
                    Mr Addison                  Mr P Wright:   Chief Constable
                    Mr Nagler                   Mr R Johnston:   Clerk and
                    Ms Ransford                    Financial Officer
                    Miss Nicholson              Cllr D A Axe
                                                Cllr Fisher
                                                Cllr Walayat
                                                Mrs Bullivant JP




   Having thanked Lord Ferrers for the meeting Sir Jack Leydan/
   without further ado, accepted that it was Mr W r i g h t ’s decision to
   call in (via Sir Richard Barrett) the West Midlands Police force
   to conduct the investigation into the tragic events at
   Hillsborough.  Mr W r i g h t ’s decision to do so was fully supported
   by the Authority.   Mr Wright added that in practical terms his
   force could have conducted the investigation but for moral and
   political reasons he felt that it would have been inappropriate to
   do so.

       2. However, Sir Jack argued that the circumstances under which
       the investigation was to proceed had been changed;  the Home
       Secretary having altered the terms of reference to include such
       things as the safety of sports grounds to name but one example.
       The investigation had therefore, in his and his colleagues view,
       taken on a national dimension and as a matter of principle the
       Authority should not be expected to bear the costs.  After all the
       Home Office were running the enquiry and it was the Home Office
       who would take decisions upon it. The Government should therefore
       bear the entire costs.  The Lockerbie enquiry (estimated to be in
       the region of £8 million) was being met by the Government so there
       was no question of a precedent being set.  Having put forward what
       he believed to be an intelligent case Sir Jack hoped that
       Lord Ferrers had listened with some sympathy.




                                                    /3.   Lord Ferrers



                                       -   1-
    E.R.
        3. Lord Ferrers thanked Sir Jack for putting across the views of
»      the Authority in such a fair and courteous manner.        He was
        grateful that it had been accepted that the initiative for calling
        in the West Midlands had come from Mr Wright.        As they were no
[      doubt aware there had been some misunderstanding in some quarters
        over this aspect.        It was true that the terms of reference of the
        investigation had been altered with the introduction of the
        Lord Justice Taylor enquiry.        Nevertheless, a large part of the
        investigation still focussed on the policing arrangements of South
        Yorkshire.   Sir Jack and his colleagues were reminded that the
        Home Office were already paying for the administrative costs
        relating to the Lord Justice Taylor enquiry.        The policing costs
        were another matter.        However because it was recognised firstly
        that the costs of the investigation could not be absorbed without
        detriment to the efficiency of the force, and secondly that the
        scale and scope of the investigation had widened because of the

    •   Taylor enquiry it was proposed to offer South Yorkshire a special
        payment on m i n e r s ’ strike lines.  The effect of this would be that
        whatever the total costs of the investigation, South Yorkshire
        would contribute no more than a 3/4p rate, which it was estimated
        would be in the region of £975K.        Once that figure had been
        reached they would not be expected to contribute further; the
        Government would then meet any further costs entirely.

       4. Cllr Fisher was unhappy with this proposal and said that its
       effect would be to diminish the contingency funds of the
       Authority.  It was unacceptable for South Yorkshire to meet the
       costs arising out of a match arranged by the Football Association
       and it was unjust that the people of South Yorkshire should be
       penalised in this way.  The Government should he said therefore
       pay a substantial contribution.  Lord Ferrers reminded Cllr Fisher
       that the Government were, in offering the special payment referred
       to, paying a considerable chunk of the costs which it was
       estimated would involve the Government in paying costs of £4 to
       £5 million.  All Authorities could find themselves in similar
       positions as far as finance was concerned and it was for this very
       reason that the police grant was increased from 50% to 51% in 1986
       so as to allow Authorities to cope better.  Given this situation
       the offer of a special payment was quite exceptional.  To expect
       the Government to pay the whole cost of the enquiry would imply
       that there was no South Yorkshire responsibility and this simply
       was not the case.  Cllr Axe informed Lord Ferrers that South
       Yorkshire were not suggesting that they should escape from their
       responsibility and advised that they were already paying for their
       own in-house investigation.  Asked by Lord Ferrers whether the
       offer which had been made would exhaust the contingency fund
       Mr Johnston (Clerk) said that the sum of £975K mentioned by
       Lord Ferrers would do so, although when asked about reserves by
       Lord Ferrers he said there was something under £1 million in
       reserves in addition to £1 million in the continguency fund.




                                                    /5.   Cllr Fisher

                                          -   2-
E.R.
   5. Cllr Fisher reiterated his concerns about the offer and added
   that the Authority would as a result face difficulties in
   maintaining a good police service.  It was hoped, he said, that
   the matter could be resolved and he added that it would not be in
   anyone’s interests if the matter had to be argued in public or by
   seeking redress through the courts.

   6. Sir Jack acknowledged the offer which had been made by
   Lord Ferrers, and said that he hoped very much that further
   thought could be given to improving upon it.      He again referred to
   the circumstances surrounding Lockerbie but added that the
   Authority would nevertheless give consideration to the offer.       As
   far as Sir J a c k ’s reference to the case of Lockerbie was concerned
   Lord Ferrers advised that that was quite a different matter.       It
   was not something for example in which the police had been
   involved until after the event.      The same could not be said of

 • Hillsborough.     Lord Ferrers in concluding the meeting replied that
   he would consider all that had been said and that he would write
   to the Authority.      However, Lord Ferrers added, it was very
   unlikely that the offer could be improved upon.




                                Pi- BARBARANICHOLSON
                              Assistant Private Secretary



       30 June 1989

       Private Office, QAG.



       cc   Mr Walters
            Mr Yates
            Mr Chilcot
            HMCIC
            Mr Woodcock
            Mr Brownlow^
            Mr Boys Smith
            Mr Malone-Lee
            Ms Edwards, LAB
            Mr Addison /
            Mr Sandifojpd
            Mr Nagler/
            Mr Whalley
            Ms Ransford
            Mr Lidington
