                                                       ft, fVAAU^-
                                                                               •n%
        H      ome                O ffice^                                      *H *
                                                                   U-x^v          UK Presidency of the
                                                                                  European Union



News Release               066/98
                                                   50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London SW1H 9AT
                                                   (Night line: 0171 273 4595) Fax: 0171 273 4]
                                                   E'Mail: commdir.ho@gtnet.gov.uk

     18 February 1998                                                 0171 273 4610



           HOME SECRETARY PUBLISHES HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY

    Home Secretary Jack Straw today published the report of the Hillsborough
    Scrutiny carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

    The 120,000 word report examines in detail the evidence which was put to
    the Scrutiny, but concludes that there is no basis for reconsidering previous
    criminal, disciplinary, public inquiry or inquest decisions regarding the
    disaster.

    Mr Straw announced the findings, and the Government’s acceptance of them,
    in an oral statement to Parliament today.

    He also met the Hillsborough families to explain his response and give them
    copies of the Scrutiny report.

    The report looks in detail at allegations about:

           • the suppression of video evidence;

           • the issue of the 3.15 ‘cut-off point set by the Coroner;

           • witnesses being pressured by police officers into changing their
             evidence;

           • evidence from South Yorkshire Police officers being collected in an
             unacceptable manner.

    The main conclusions of the report are that:

           • the conclusions of the Taylor report are still valid and there is
             therefore no basis for a further public inquiry;

           • there is no basis for a renewed application to quash the verdict of
             the inquest;




    Home Office News Releases can be found on: www.coi.gov.uk/coi/depts/GHO/GHO.html
              Home Office homepage can be found on: www.homeoffice.gov.uk/
       •   nor is there any material which Director of Public Prosecutions
           (DPP) or the disciplinary authorities which might cause them to
           reconsider the decisions they have already taken; and

       •   none of the evidence which the Scrutiny was asked to consider
           added anything significant to the evidence which was available to
           Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the inquests.

Emphasising his feelings for the plight of the families, Mr Straw said:

       “No-one could have anything but most profound sympathy with all the
       families and friends of those who died at Hillsborough. W e can scarcely
       begin to comprehend what they have suffered.

       “I fully understand that those who lost loved ones should feel betrayed
       by those responsible for policing the Hillsborough football ground and
       for the state of the ground on that day. I hope and believe that the
       changes which resulted from the Taylor Inquiry should mean that such a
       disaster will never happen again.”

Mr Straw said that the Scrutiny was the latest in a series of lengthy and
detailed examinations of evidence in this case, and that the main reason for
the disaster - the failure of police control - had been identified by Lord Taylor
in his report.

He added that Lord Justice Stuart Smith’s report was thorough and
comprehensive. He said:
                                               i

       “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has considered in great detail all the evidence
       which was put to him. This included all the relevant evidence presented
       to the earlier inquiries and inquests. He has looked equally rigorously at
       all the information presented to him, by individuals and official bodies,
       including those representing the families of those who died, and others
       who have acted in support of them.

        “With any major disaster, it is almost inevitable that over the course of
       time some new information may become available.

        “But that does not necessarily mean that the outcome of any previous
       inquiries would have been different. What is crucial is not just whether
       the information is new, but also whether it is of such significance - to
       use the phrase in the terms of reference - as to justify a new inquiry.”

Adding that the report highlighted the shortcomings of the police disciplinary
system, Mr Straw said:
      "But there is another sense in which the system has failed the
      Hillsborough families. As Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says in chapter 7 of
      his report,

             "I understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
             personally been held to account either in a criminal court,
             disciplinary proceedings, or even to the extent of losing theirjo b ”.

      “W hat happened after Hillsborough is a prime example of why we
      have to improve the current police discipline arrangements, and I will
      be responding fully to the recent recommendations of the Home Affairs
      Select Committee soon.”

Mr Straw also commented on the Scrutiny’s finding about the holding of an
inquest when a judicial inquiry into major disaster has already covered the
same ground. He said:

      “Lord Justice Stuart-Smith brings out in his report the exceptionally
      difficult task which the coroner had in conducting the main inquest.

      “It placed an unreasonable, and I think unnecessary, burden on the
      families when the Taylor report had covered substantially the same
      ground.

      “1 am clear that Hillsborough proved that the inquest system in its
      present form is unsuitable as a means of dealing with disasters of this
      kind.

      “In my view, it would be far better, above all for bereaved families, if
      there is one fully comprehensive inquiry into the causes of death and
      the wider circumstances.”

Mr Straw concluded:

      “The entire country is united in sympathy with those who lost loved
      ones at Hillsborough and we cannot take the pain from them. But I
      hope that the families will recognise that this report represents, as I
      promised, a most independent, thorough and detailed scrutiny to
      examine all the evidence which was brought before it.”



NOTES TO EDITORS

1. The Home Secretary announced the Scrutiny on 30 June 1997.

2. It was carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. His terms of reference
were:
       To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:

       (a)   to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

       (b)   to the Director of Public Prosecutions or Attorney General for
              the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
              responsibilities; or

       (c)   to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire police in relation to police
              disciplinary matters; and in relation to (a) to advise whether any
              evidence not previously available is of such significance as to
             justify establishment by the Secretary of State for the Home
              Department of a further public inquiry; and in relation to (b) and
              (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously
              considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
              duties;

             and to advise whether there is any other action which should be
             taken in the public interest

3. A summary of the report is attached. Media copies of the Home Secretary’s
statement and the Scutiny report are available from Home Office Press Office
on 0171 273 4610. Non-media copies of the report can be obtained from
HMSO, CM 3878, ISBN 0101387822, price £22.

4. Most of the evidence considered by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith either
already in the public domain (eg Taylor inquiry material or transcripts) or is
contained in the Appendices to his report. Other material will be placed in the
House of Commons Library, save that where there are overriding reasons for
doing otherwise. The material to be published will include all the original
statements made by South Yorkshire police officers together with amended
versions.
CHAPTER 7



Summary


1.   In this chapter I summarise the findings which I have made.


2. Before doing so I must make it clear that anyone who is familiar with the terrible
events of 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough is bound to have great sympathy with the
relatives of those who died and the spectators who were injured. I have now spent many
weeks studying the evidence of what happened and considering the representations and
submissions made by the families and their legal representatives. I find it difficult to
imagine anything more horrific than that experienced by those who endured it and
flAse who lost their children, relatives and friends.


3. That 96 people, the majority of them young, should set out in high hopes and spirits
on a fine Spring day, and yet within a space of less than half-an-hour suffer crushing
injuries from which they died, is nothing less than appalling. I have the most profound
sympathy with all the families and friends of those who suffered in this way, many of
whom I have met. I also understand the dismay that they have that no individual has
personally been held to account, either in a criminal court, disciplinary proceedings, or
even to the extent of losing his or her job.


4. I realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them, especially
since they had had their hopes raised that something more could be done. But I cannot
allow compassion to cloud my judgement. I have had to look dispassionatelv and
objectively at what is said to be fresh evidence, in the light of the evidence which had
previously been considered.


5. Having done so, for the reasons I have set out. I have come to the clear conclusion
that there is no basis upon which there should be a further Judicial Inquiry or a
reopening of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry. There is no basis for a renewed application to the
Divisional Court or for the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners
Act 1988.1 do not consider that there is any material which should be put before the
Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause
them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken. Nor do I consider that there is
any justification for setting up any further inquiry into the performance of the
emergency and hospital services. I have carefully considered the circumstances in which
alterations were made to some of the self-written statements of South Yorkshire Police
officers, but I do not consider that there is any occasion for any further investigation.

6. None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to the
evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests.


                                           103
Video evidence


7. Chapter 2 of this report deals with video evidence of the disaster. My conclusions
about that are that there is no new video evidence of it or video evidence which was not
available to Lord Taylor, the Coroner, or the other authorities who examined the
disaster at the time.

8. Two video tapes which were stolen on the day of the disaster remain missing. They
were tapes of pictures from CCTV cameras operated by Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club. They were not police tapes and would not have shown anything significant. Their
theft is unsolved. The suggestion that the police tried to blame their failure to spot
overcrowding on the terraces onto faulty CCTV equipment is wrong. They did not
blame the CCTV equipment. The police controllers had a good view over the terraces
from their control box and did not pretend otherwise.

9. The allegation that police hid videotape evidence of the terraces is unfounded, and
the allegation that the Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of this ‘missing’
police footage is equally unfounded. Police officers did not give false evidence about the
state of the police CCTV system at the ground, and I do not accept the evidence of
Roger Houldsworth, video technician at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that he
realised from looking at police CCTV pictures of pens 3 and 4 at about the time Gate C
was opened at 14.52 that these pens were dangerously overcrowded.


The aftermath o f the disaster


10. I deal in Chapter 3 of the report with suggestions that the inquest into the deaths of
those who died in the disaster was seriously flawed, and that there should now be a
public inquiry into what was done, or not done, to help them and others who were
crushed.

11. I do not consider that the Inquest was flawed. Most of the criticisms relate to the
so-called “3.15 cut-off point”. I do not agree with these criticisms. The Coroner
considered the questions of who the deceased were and when and where they died at the
mini-inquests, and this involved consideration of matters long after 3.15. It was only in
relation to the question of how, i.e. by what means, the deceased came to their deaths
that the Coroner imposed a cut-off point of 3.15 pm. He had good reasons for deciding
to limit the inquiry in this way and the cut-off did not limit inquiry into that question.

12. Questions of whether the response of the emergency services was adequate were
not relevant to the task the Coroner had to perform. It was suggested to me that the fact
that Dr Walker, Mr Houldsworth, and others were not called as witnesses at the inquest
amounted to fraudulent concealment of their evidence. That suggestion is false and I
regard it as wholly irresponsible.
13. Lord Taylor inquired into the rescue operation and his findings are published in his
report. He made criticisms of the slow response of the police and recommendations for
the future. I cannot see that any useful purpose would be served by having any further
inquiry into the rescue operation. In my opinion there is no evidence of want of care by
the emergency or medical services. Any wide-ranging inquiry into this aspect of the
disaster would place huge burdens upon them, but to no purpose.


Interference with witnesses

14. Chapter 4 of this report deals with suggestions that the evidence of witnesses to the
disaster was tampered with, so that the truth did not emerge either at Lord Taylor’s
Inquiry or the Inquests. These allegations are of two types - that the West Midlands
Police put pressure on Derek Bruder, Debra Martin, and Paul Taylor which affected the
evidence they wished to give, and that the way in which the South Yorkshire Police went
about collecting evidence from their own officers who were at Hillsborough and
witnessed the disaster was unacceptable. I have interviewed Mr Bruder, Miss Martin,
and Mr Taylor and have come to the conclusion in each case that there was no improper
attempt to affect their evidence.

Mr Bruder


15. So far as Mr Bruder is concerned, I am quite satisfied that the West Midlands
Police, in seeking to confirm details of his statement relating to Kevin Williams, did not
subject him to improper pressure. He told me himself that they did not. His statements
were accurately summarised at the inquest on Kevin Williams and there was no attempt
to discredit him.


Miss Martin


16. I did not find Miss Martin a reliable witness. Her statement about events at
Hillsborough, where she was on duty as a Special Constable, was seriously at variance
with the account of everybody else who was there. She remains plainly - and
understandably - deeply upset by the disaster, and her memories of the day and of
subsequent events relating to it are vague and confused. I think that she gave her
account of Kevin Williams sitting up in her arms and saying “Mom” in good faith. But it
cannot be relied upon. It contradicts Mr Bruder’s evidence and is also contrary to the
pathological findings.

17. I interviewed the West Midlands police officer who Miss Martin claims bullied her.
I found this officer to be an impressive witness. I cannot see that she had any reason to
discredit Miss Martin, and she told me that she did not bully or browbeat her. I accept
her account and prefer it to Miss Martin’s.
Mr Taylor




he had no reason to put pressure on Mr Taylor.


South Yorkshire Police statements




 «ss«fe-
 a suitable form for submission to Lord Taylor s Inquiry.


 20. The solicitors made no comment on the                   ° ^   ^   S   y   a"d ‘n
 others their advice was confined to cleanng up ambigu.ties and



 matters not to have been excluded, or the comment elucidated.

 21. It was well known to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry Team that the statements were being
 vetted in this way. The process did not materially differfromt e way in w 1      FC
 statements were taken from witnesses who were employed by Sheffield
 or the Ambulance Service.

  22 Towards the end of May 1989 the South Yorkshire Police team responsible for
  collating the evidence of officers in tl“ Forf             “S o n             were on
  statements without refemng them to the solicitors. Thesugg             sL ements that
  the same basis as those made by the solicitors. I have / “ !c^ 1a^ 1
  were altered in this way. In most cases the alteration is tnvial Where^comme
  opinion is excluded the amendments cannot in my opinion be criticised. In no
  statement rendered misleading.

  23. Iam quite satisfied that Lord Taylor’s Inquiry was not in any
  impeded by what happened. Lord Taylor was well aware o fthe c n u a m s m a ^
  junior officers. His Inquiry examined these issues and he made find g
  which were adverse to the police.



                                              106
24. I am also satisfied that the exclusion of these comments did not affect the outcome
of the Inquests, or the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions not to bring
criminal charges as a result of the disaster. I do not consider that there is any question of
misconduct either by the solicitor who gave the police advice upon the statements or by
the police officers who suggested alterations to the statements without referring the
statement to the solicitors.

Other issues


Inconsistent evidence


25. It is clear that there is inconsistent evidence about precisely what happened to
some of the people who died at Hillsborough. Such conflicts of evidence are inevitable
given the scale of the disaster. The Coroner did his best to resolve these questions at the
Inquest, and I have tried to get to the bottom of some of those which remain and which
the families of those who died have asked me to look into. I have not been completely
successful in this. What is clear however is that no further inquiry involving examination
of the witnesses could help after this lapse of time.

The Inquests


26. The Divisional Court found that the Coroner was not biased and had no conflict of
interest. I see no reason to disagree with that. I can find no evidence to support the
suggestion that Liverpool supporters who gave evidence at the Inquest were given a
difficult time in the witness box.

27. I do not agree with the criticisms which have been made of the Coroner and the
way in which he ran the Inquests. But I endorse the recommendation of the Home
Office Working Group on Disasters and Inquests that the role of the Coroner should be
limited in circumstances such as these. I have reached the firm conclusion that is not
satisfactory to have an inquest into the deaths caused by a major disaster when an
Inquiry chaired by a High Court Judge has already covered the same ground.


The police


28. Some of the families of those who died have told me that they have been unable to
obtain copies of documents to which they were entitled from the South Yorkshire Police
archive on the disaster. Two families supplied me with material to enable me to check
on this. In neither case did I think the complaint was justified.

29. The investigation of the disaster by the West Midlands Police was not biased in
favour of the South Yorkshire force.


                                             107
30. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has on many occasions apologised for the
disaster on behalf of his force.

Examination by doctors confirming death


31. Criticism that doctors who examined bodies at the ground did so in a cursory or
inadequate manner is wholly unsubstantiated.

The state o f the ground


32. There are two questions to do with the state of the Hillsborough football ground
which seem to me to have aspects which were not considered by Lord Taylor’s
otherwise very full Inquiry. These questions are to do with the height of the crush
barriers on the Leppings Lane terrace where the disaster happened and the overall
capacity of that terrace. I do not consider that they give grounds for reopening the
Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.
