                                                                                                    iii   ”
                  S A F E T Y
                      S & P House. 3/5 Charing Cross Road, London WC2H OHA
                             Telephone: 01-925 0225 Fax: 01-925 0219




KHS/gos
1 June 1989

The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
Inquiry Into The Hillsborough Statium Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




PREPARING FOR EMERGENCIES
I am writing in response to your general invitation for written submissions to
the Inquiry.
From 1983 to 1988, a Health and Safety Executive Working Party, of which I was a
member, looked at the topic of preparing for emergencies in the context of the
safe operation of swimming pools. This work was nothing to do with the causes
of the Hi 1Isborougtf- disaster but may, I believe, have relevance to the lack of
an adequate emergency action plan at the Stadium and the resultant poor response
by those in a position to render assistance of all kinds.
Our Working Party's eventual publication "Safety In Swimming Pools" (Health and
Safety Commission/Sports Council, 1988) identified two major factors in thorough
preparation for emergencies of all kinds. The first was the preparation of an
'Emeroenrv Ar t ion Pl a n ' to cover all forseeable emergency situations. An
appendix (no 5) identified some ten such situations and, looking at that list
now, it is uncanny that both the Hillsborough and the Bradford situations are
envisaged but in the pool context.
The second factor was regular rehearsing of such emergency procedures, going
beyond simple skills training to full scale staged emergencies. It has been
thought hitherto that there was public resistance to participation in such
activities as mass evacuation of premises. However, in my work now, it is clear
to me that public perception has changed and, properly managed, a new enthusiasm
for taking a personal interest in one's own safety, especially at large
spectator events, can be capitalised upon in this way.




                        Directors; Keith Sacn (M a n a g in g ). P eler Sargenl, M a rk Potinadis
                      Registered Office: S&P H o use In c orpora ted in E ngland No. 21412S:
-   2   -


KHS/gos
1 June 1989
The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor




Your Inquiry may consider that an unhappy succession of disasters at sports
stadiums now makes thoroughgoing emergency planning and rehearsal, necessary for
the future. This was our conclusion for swimming pools and associated leisure
premises, where several thousands of people may be involved. Our publication
sought to go further, by giving practice and detailed guidance in the
preparation of such plans and their regular rehearsal




                                     KEITH SACH
                                 Managing Director
