                                Jenni Hicks,




                             18th August, 1997


Dear Lord Justice Stuart-Smith,

I am Jenni Hicks. I lost my two beautiful daughters Sarah (19) and
Victoria (15) through the Hillsborough Football Disaster.

I would like a new inquiry into the events of that day and I would like the
inquest verdict quashed for the following reasons.

In 1988, when the same two teams played at Hillsborough, the South
Yorkshire Police knew the turnstiles could not cope so they filtered and
slowed the fans' arrival at the Leppings Lane End. In 1989 they did
nothing. But, they say, that was simply down to their incompetence.

When, in 1989, the crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles got so big
that lives were threatened, they ordered a gate to be opened. Two
thousand people went through. They gave no thought as to where these
people were going to go but, honestly, that was simply down to their
incompetence.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield then lied in saying the fans had smashed
down the gate. There were other police officers around at the time. No-one
corrected that lie. But, again, that was simply down to their incompetence
and there were, after all, video cameras recording the opening of that gate.

But later that night somebody walked into the locked and alarmed
Sheffield Wednesday Control Room to steal those tapes. I find it hard to
believe that, despite a massive police presence, and after the biggest
sporting disaster in British history, crucial evidence could be stolen from
under the noses of a British police force but it was and, I am asked to
believe, it was simply down to their incompetence. Fortunately, the thief
was even more incompetent than those police officers: he took the wrong
tapes.
And they never did find that particular thief.

At the inquest, the crucial question was this: what did they, the South
Yorkshire Police, know of the state of those pens just before they let
another two thousand people into them? Well, there was video evidence of
the state of those pens, as the coroner and P.C. Bichard confirmed.

But, sadly, that evidence, er, disappeared. Nothing devious, you
understand; it was simply down to their incompetence.

Surely it must have dawned on even the South Yorkshire Police that
people would find it hard to believe that any police force could be this
incompetent. Surely they knew they had to find an independent witness.
Someone who could say, "Look, they really were this incompetent; there
was notiiing else to it." They had such a witness in Roger Houldsworth,
the video technician, the ideal person to back up all their claims about
faulty cameras and disappearing video footage and whatnot. After all, he
installed the stuff. And he could see on his screen what they could see on
theirs.

Why, then, was Roger Houldsworth never called to give evidence? I can
understand why he was never called by Taylor, of course. Lord Justice
Taylor implied that he accepted that the pens were full prior to the opening
of the big gate. That was never really challenged at Taylor. But the South
Yorkshire Police did challenge it at the inquest (and challenge it robustly)
so why Houldsworth was never called to that is very difficult to
understand. Incompetence, I assume.

We now know, of course, that had Roger Houldsworth been called he
would have contradicted much of the police evidence. That, I would
suggest, is the fundamental question facing you, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

If I could go on to other, more personal points.

As I have said, my daughters Sarah (19) and Victoria (15) both died as a
result of the disaster. Victoria was taken to hospital; Sarah was not.
Victoria died in the Northern General hospital but her body was taken
from there to the temporary mortuary at Hillsborough Football Ground.
This, I have since learned, is unprecedented. Sarah was certified dead at
the ground.
There was great disparity, therefore, in the treatment received by my two
daughters. I wanted this disparity examined at the inquest. It wasn't. The

coroner refused to hear evidence about events after 3.15 and, thus, there
was no investigation of an inadequate emergency response. To give you an
example, I have only recently heard the following new evidence about my
younger daughter Victoria. It is startling.

A fan (Paul Taylor) pulled Victoria from the pile of bodies in pen 3. He
attempted resuscitation. A police officer came along and felt for Victoria's
pulse. He had thick leather gloves on and did not remove them, yet he
told Paul Taylor to abandon his efforts, Victoria was dead. Victoria was
far from dead; staff at the Northern General later spent twenty minutes
attempting to save her. Paul Taylor made a statement to this effect to West
Midlands Police Officer Graham McCrombie. Detective Sergeant
McCrombie warned Paul Taylor that he should not make such an
accusation unless he could quote the officer's badge number, otherwise
Paul Taylor could end up in prison - for peijury. It was blatant intimidation
of a vulnerable witness. At the subsequent inquest Paul Taylor did make a
statement, yes, but the gloved police officer was omitted from it. To this
day, Paul Taylor bitterly regrets it.

My husband and I set off for that football match with two beautiful
daughters. We returned with a plastic bag with their belongings in it.
Whilst we were making that terrible journey home, four senior South
Yorkshire officers were telling vicious lies about the fans urinating on, and
stealing from, the dead. These lies became headline news. I ask you to
imagine the effect this had on us. I want to know:

       1. Who were these officers?

      2. Why did they feel the need to lie and spread such vicious
         propaganda?

      3. What did they hope to gain from it?

Later, at the inquest, a South Yorkshire police officer testified that, as he
was lifting a girl from a pen, a fan shouted out: "Throw her over here and
well fuck her." He said he thought this injured girl was one of my
daughters. Again, please try to imagine the effect this had on us.
The coroner asked the jury to disregard this officer's evidence so the
officer was not cross-examined. I wanted to know: How did he manage to
hear this particular statement when other officers testified that they could
not hear cries for help because of the level of noise? I am utterly
convinced that the coroner knew that the officer would make that statement
so why did he allow the jury to hear it and then expect them to disregard
it?

When the inquest started, I had every faith in the coroner’s impartiality. As
the inquest wore on, I lost that faith and began to suspect that, because of
his relationship with Sheffield City Council, the man was biased.

That inquest was (forgive my strong language) a farce. I ask this of you:
When you have considered all of the evidence, please, at the very least, do
justice by my two beautiful daughters and quash that verdict of accidental
death.

Yours sincerely,




Jenni Hicks.
