                                                              reference




Alan Milbum encloses correspondence from                  in support o f a new inquiry into
the Hillsborough disaster.

The Home Secretary is currently considering whether there are sufficient grounds to
order a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster in view o f the issues raised in the
Granada television drama “Hillsborough” last year, and the subsequent campaign by the
Hillsborough Family Support Group.

                      ? Drafts to P/S o f M o f S as within




                      MWard
                      13 June 1997




                                                - 3 SEP 1997
                                              MINISTER OF STATE wrote as wfthte
                                                                     H   om e   O   f f ic e

                                                                    QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                     LONDON SW1H 9AT




Alan Milburn Esq MP                              Our Ref:  P W /9 7 5 /2 1 8 0 /5 2
House of Commons                                           PO 8 9 8 7 /9 7
LONDON                                           Your Ref: J T /J S /jtle t3 9 5
S W 1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 3 0 M ay to Jack S traw , enclosing one from
                                                               n support of calls
for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster. I am sorry or the delay in
responding.

As you know, the Home Secretary has been considering whether there is a
case for a further public inquiry into the disaster in the light of the many
representations which have been received. Concerns that a number of issues
relating to the disaster remain unresolved received renewed attention following
the Granada television documentary drama "Hillsborough" last December.

The Home Secretary has had the opportunity to consider fully the material which
has been put forw ard, calling for a new public inquiry. He has decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no
m atter of significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. To this
end, as you will know, he announced in the House on 3 0 June that he had
invited Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal
to conduct the scrutiny. I enclose for your information a copy of the
Home Secretary's statem ent to the House, which includes Lord Justice Stuart-
Sm ith's terms of reference. You will see that he has undertaken to make public
the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith gives him.

It is our earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to
the uncertainty over the events of that terrible afternoon.                                    , ,   Q   ^




O
Thank you for your letter o f 30 May to Jack Straw, enclosing one from
                                                  i support o f calls for a new inquiry

into the Hillsborough disaster.    I         S tyv                +‘kj?                 O'-—


As you know, the Home Secretary has been considering whether there is a case for a
further public inquiry into the disaster in the light o f the many representations which
have been received. Concerns that a number o f issues relating to the disaster remain
unresolved received renewed attention following the Granada television documentary
drama “Hillsborough” last December.


The Home Secretary has had the opportunity to consider fully the material which has
been put forward, calling for a new public inquiry. He has decided, in all the
circumstances, that there should be an independent scrutiny to ensure that no matter o f
significance is overlooked before a final decision is taken. To this end, as you will
know, he announced in the House on 30 June that he had invited Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith, a senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal to conduct the scrutiny. I enclose
for your information a copy o f the Home Secretary’s statement to the House, which
includes Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s terms o f reference. You w ill see that he has
undertaken to make public the advice which Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gives him.


It is our earnest hope that the independent scrutiny will finally bring an end to the
uncertainty over the events o f that terrible afternoon.
                                                                  H   om e   O   f f ic e

                                                                QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                 LONDON SW1H 9AT




Alan Milburn Esq MP                            Our Ref:   P W /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /5 2
House of Commons                                          PO 8 9 8 7 /9 7
London                                        Your Ref:   J T /J S /jtle t3 9 5
SW 1A 0A A




Thank you for your letter of 3 0 M ay to the Home Secretary, enclosing one from
                                                            n support of recent
calls for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.

The Home Secretary is currently considering the representations which have
been made for a fresh inquiry. He has followed the families campaign for a new
inquiry closely and has also had the opportunity to m eet some of the members
of the Hillsborough Family Support Group since the broadcast of the Granada
television drama last December. He is very aware of the strength of feeling on
this issue and will reach a decision as soon as po




                                ALUN MICHAEL
Thank you for your letter o f 30 May to the Home Secretary^paclosing one from Mr

                                                           in support o f recent calls
for a new inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster.
                                               /

                                         /
The Home Secretary is currently considering the representations which have been
made for a fresh inquiry. He hasfpilowed the families campaign for a new inquiry

closely and has also had the opportunity to meet some o f the members o f the
Hillsborough Family Support Group since the broadcast o f the Granada television
drama last December He is very aware o f the strength o f feeling on this issue and will
reach a decision as soon as possible.
                        Dlvblonol File Rcferenco___          s ~ iz c s t\o '2-

HOME OFFICE
MINISTERS CASE DRAFT REPLY

A ddressed]
 Name             & W                          ______ _______
 Address                           Reference v r
 Tick on* box
      Gf          House of Commons
      □           House of Lords
      □           Other - Insert fu ll postal address




Letter drafted for Signature by

          M   -     < V \o U * l                   ( Noma of Signatory j


Enclosures




Copies to be sent to




                                          ( Full addresses. If nccessary)
                                               Alan Milburn M.P.
                                         Member of Parliament for Darlington




                                       H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                             LO 'NDON SW1A OAA


       Ref: JT/JS/jtIet395

       30th May 1997


       Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
       Home Secretary
       50 Queen Anne's Gate
       London
       SW1H9AT




       Dear Jade

       Ref:

       Please find enclosed a copy of a letter which I have received recently fron   I would be
       grateful for your comments so that I am able to respond to my constituent.

       I look forward to hearing from you.

       Yours sincerely




   ^   ALAN MILBURN MP




       Enel




Constituency Office: 123 Victoria Road, Darlington, DL1 5JH. Tel: 01325 380366 Fax: 01325 381341
14 May, 1997

Alan Milbum MP
House of Commons
London
SW1A OAA

Dear Mr Milbum,

Last Saturday nearly 40 000 people attended the Hillsborough Justice Concert at
Anfield, Liverpool. We were there to show our continued support for the call for the
enquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster to be re opened and for the real truth to be
uncovered.

I am from Liverpool and I was living there at the time of the disaster. The communal
grief felt by the city at the time is something I will never forget. We all felt that once
again the lives of ordinary people had been put before the convenience of the
authorities. Now, 8 years on, there is still a feeling that justice has not been done.

Before the general election the outgoing Home Secretary had promised to reconsider
the possibility to re open the enquiry and I hope that his successor is also willing to
consider this. As my MP I am asking you to use whatever influence you can to
persuade him that there is a definite need for this to be done.

The people who died on 15th April 1989 deserve the truth to be heard.


Yours sincerely,
Alan Milbum MP
House of Commons
London
SW1A OAA

Dear Mr Milbum,

Last Saturday nearly 40 000 people attended the Hillsborough Justice Concert at
Anfield, Liverpool. We were there to show our continued support for the call for the
enquiry into the Hillsborough Disaster to be re opened and for the real truth to be
uncovered.

I am from Liverpool and I was living there at the time of the disaster. The communal
grief felt by the city at the time is something I will never forget. We all felt that once
again the lives of ordinary people had been put before the convenience of the
authorities. Now, 8 years on, there is still a feeling that justice has not been done.

Before the general election the outgoing Home Secretary had promised to reponsider
the possibility to re open the enquiry and I hope that his successor is also willing to
consider this. As my MP I am asking you to use whatever influence you can to
persuade him that there is a definite need for this to be done.

The people who died on 15th April 1989 deserve the truth to be heard.


Yours sincerely,
