frt.
                                                   FOR INFORMATION
From: G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                     WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
      CHIEF CONSTABLE                                         HEADQUARTERS
                                                             PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                             Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                             Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                             Telephone: 021-236 5000




       B Mehmet Esq                                          GJD/MR
       Home Office
       Queen Anne's Gate
       London
       SW1H 9AT                                              5 June 1989



       Dear Mr Mehmet

       I refer to your letter of 31 May 1989 concerning the Hillsborough
       Enquiry.

       We have received a number of similar letters at these Headquarters, but
       the points raised are easy to address.

       When the Enquiry began, something in excess of 350 staff (Police and
       civilian) were involved on the Enquiry working variously in Sheffield,
       Liverpool or the Birmingham co-ordinating office.

       Today that number has reduced to 125 and we are shortly to close the
       Sheffield office. The Liverpool office will remain open rather longer,
       but that too will be closed within the next few weeks. I anticipate
       within a month, that the personnel engaged on the Enquiry will be down
       to 65, working mainly out of the Birmingham co-ordinating office.

       All of those abstractions have been covered in their absence in the West
       Midlands Police area by other personnel working overtime to fill the
       vacuum that would have existed. You can take it as categoric that there
       has been no diminution of service to the people of the West Midlands and
       no lowering of police efficiency. I would not have been happy to see
       the situation prolonged because, as you will appreciate, the strain of
       officers working extensive periods of regular overtime can be
       considerable. However, as the figures quoted in the earlier paragraph
       indicate, the numbers involved in the Enquiry have been steadily
       diminishing and the situation is fast returning to normal.

       It would not have been possible to have organised so complicated and
       comprehensive an enquiry utilising officers from a number of Forces.
       The administration of such a team would not lend itself to efficient
       working and, given our ability to "take up the slack" in West Midlands
       was not necessary.

       You will know that questions relating to costs and reimbursement of the
       West Midlands Police Authority are currently being dealt with byyour
       Division and others at Home Office, but do not address the points raised
       in your enclosed letters. Suffice it to say that we have been verbally
       assured that no cost will fall on the West Midlands ratepayer, but the
       details of the procedures have yet to be worked out.




                                                           Cont.
You might be interested to know, and to quote as general background, thetf?
West Midlands were almost uniquely successful in performance terms in
1988. Against a national average reduction of crime of 5%, West
Midlands crime reduced by 11% (or 28,000 fewer offences). The detection
rate rose by over 6% to 42.4%. There were substantial reductions in the
three priority crime categories of Burglary Dwelling House, Robbery and
Thefts of and from Motor Vehicles. These encouraging trends are
continuing with crime down a further 9% to the end of April 1989. The
Hillsborough Enquiry has apparently done nothing to disturb this
encouraging picture.

I hope this information will be of assistance to you.   Please feel free
to contact us again if necessary.




Chief Constable
                                                           -   S i r c o e   -   ( 3   ,




NOTE OF A MEETING BETWEEN REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SOUTH YORKSHIRE
POLICE AUTHORITY AND THE HOME OFFICE TO DISCUSS THE COSTS OF THE
INQUIRIES BY THE WEST MIDLANDS POLICE INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
STADIUM TRAGEDY



Thursday 18 May 1989 at 10.45pm in room 241. Home Office. Queen
Anne's Gate



          Mr M J Addison       (in the Chair) Home Office, FI
          Mr N A Nagler       Home Office, Finance Division 2
          Mr E Soden          Home Office, F2
          Mr F J Archer       Home Office, G1
          Ms P Ransford       Home Office, FI
          Mr R C Johnston     Clerk and Financial Officer to
                              South Yorkshire Police Authority
          Mr T Watson         Assistant Chief Constable,
                              South Yorkshire Police
          Mr S C Waghorn       (Secretary) Home Office, FI

Introduction

Mr Addison on behalf of the Home Office welcomed Messrs Johnston
and Watson, and thanked them for coming to London to explain
their police authority's position. The Home Office was anxious
to help in resolving quickly the problems which had arisen over
the costs of the inquiries being carried out by the West Midlands
Police into the Hillsborough tragedy.

Home Office view of responsibility for costs

2*   Mr Addison recalled that the letter of 24 April that Mr
Johnston had sent on behalf of his police authority to the Home
Secretary had indicated that the likely scale of costs would be a
problem for South Yorkshire and had asked that the costs of the
inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor and of the investigation being
undertaken by the West Midlands police should be met from central
funds.

3.    In his letter of 8 May to Mr Johnston, Mr Addison had stated
that the Government would meet the full costs of the enquiry
undertaken by Lord Justice Taylor.   But the Home Office had never
regarded the investigation undertaken by Mr Dear and his men to
be part of the Taylor enquiry. The Home Secretary, when
questioned by Mr Hattersley on 17 April, had said that the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire had taken the view that it would be
right for another force to undertake the police work that was
necessary both in preparation for inquests and to submit the
necessary information to Lord Taylor's enquiry.   The Home
Secretary had distinguished between the two tasks and had said
that the work carried out by Mr Dear (at Mr Wright's request)
would be placed at the service of Lord Justice Taylor.

4.   As regards central government help with the costs of the
police enquiries, there was already a system for financing
police investigations and for meeting expenditure for police
purposes. The West Midlands investigation was being conducted on
behalf of South Yorkshire for police purposes ie to provide
evidence for coroners inquests; the need to review South
Yorkshire police actions; possible police complaints; giving
evidence to the Lord Justice Taylor enquiry which would
otherwise have had to be provided by South Yorkshire.   The Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire had properly decided that these
enquiries would be better carried out by officers of another
force. The cost of the West Midlands operation seemed therefore
properly to fall in the first instance on South Yorkshire.

5.   Mr Addison said that the Home Secretary had made it clear to
the West Midlands Police Authority that only additional costs
were involved. As far as the scale of these costs was concerned,
the fact that they might be significant did not imply that they
should be reimbursed other than through the normal police funding
arrangements in the first instance.  There were however
precedents for police authorities to argue that they were
confronted with unbearably high expenditure such as in the
miners' dispute and to make requests for a special payment.

South Yorkshire's view of responsibility for costs

     Mr Johnston said that he could not accept that the
investigation being carried out by the West Midlands police was
to do with policing in South Yorkshire.  This might have been
true initially but it had been overtaken by subsequent events.
The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr Wright, had had regard
for the intense public/national interest rather than the internal
need to investigate when he called in West Midlands. The mutual
aid provisions did not apply since the scale of operations needed
in order to investigate the actions of his own force could
probably have been accomplished within the Chief Constable's own
resources. The nature of inquiry had then changed and Mr Dear
was not reporting in the first instance to South Yorkshire. The
nature of the investigation had more to do with the general
safety of sports grounds and general issues of conduct at
football matches than the actions of the police on the day.

7.   Mr Watson said that when Mr Wright became aware of the scale
of the disaster he decided that it would be wrong to get his own
officers to investigate its causes, and that it would be a good
idea to get a Chief Constable of another force to conduct an
investigation.  The Home Secretary and HMCIC had identified Mr
Dear as the most suitable person. When they had done so, Mr
Wright had asked Mr Dear to report to him. On Sunday 16 April,
however, the circumstances changed and the Home Secretary
announced to the House of Commons on 17 April his decision to
hold an enquiry chaired by Lord Justice Taylor.   There would be
one enquiry. Mr Wright had then decided to appoint his own team
for an internal enquiry to meet possible complaints against
police and to report to the police authority.   Lord Justice
Taylor's enquiry concerned actions of football ground stewards as
well as the police, yet the football club was not contributing.

8*   Mr Watson added that Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry was not
using any South Yorkshire or Merseyside officers and there were
no costs to West Midlands for statements from South Yorkshire
officers. The control of the enquiry was with Lord Justice
Taylor.  Letters from the West Midlands police to South Yorkshire
police implied requests and direction from Lord Justice Taylor.
The West Midlands Police could not release any information
without approval of Counsel to the enquiry.  They had also taken
possession of all evidence collected by the South Yorkshire
police. All requests for the information to be returned for use
in South Yorkshire's internal investigation had been refused. Mr
Dear had eventually agreed to return most of the material but the
files on safety certificates issued to football grounds in South
Yorkshire had been retained. The South Yorkshire police internal
enquiry team was supplying information to South Yorkshire's
counsel.

9.   Mr Watson said also that South Yorkshire Police Authority
believed that the cost of the West Midlands police salaries,
premises, subsistence, telephone bills, car rental and computer
enhancement should not be met by South Yorkshire because they
were not providing anything for South Yorkshire.  The major part
of the West Midlands costs were primarily generated by the
Treasury Solicitors, and only part of the information would go
back to South Yorkshire.   Moreover, South Yorkshire were already
footing the bill for their own internal enquiry.
Discussion

10. Mr Addison thanked Mr Johnston and Mr Watson for the helpful
background detail. He said that the Home Office agreed with
South Yorkshire that this could not be classed as mutual aid
under Section 14 of the Police Act 1964. On the other hand the
mutual aid arrangements were a good analogy and were often used
as the basis for reimbursement in complaints and discipline
enquiries where one force called in another and costs were likely
to arise on a major scale.

11. On the events surrounding the setting up of the enquiry, Mr
Addison said that he accepted that things had changed from
Saturday 15 to Sunday 16 April. The original intention was that
Mr Dear would be the assessor for Lord Justice Taylor but he had
already been invited by Mr Wright to investigate. He could not
combine the two roles so the Chief Constable of Lancashire was
appointed assessor. None of this seemed to affect the argument
that South Yorkshire had invited the West Midlands Police in in
the first instance. Moreover if the West Midlands police had
not been called in and Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry had been set
up, then Treasury Counsel and Treasury Solicitors would have
asked questions of South Yorkshire police who would still have
had to do their own enquiries.

12. Mr Watson said that the costs could have been less if South
Yorkshire themselves had made the enquiries.  The West Midlands
police had declined the use of office accommodation provided by
South Yorkshire police in order to establish that their
investigation was completely independent.  If South Yorkshire had
carried out the investigation their costs would have been much
less. Mr Archer said that those additional costs were in areas
like accommodation, car rentals etc. There were presumably other
costs such as officer overtime which South Yorkshire would have
borne if they had conducted the investigation. Mr Watson said
that a large proportion of the costs went on operating three
bases: Birmingham, Sheffield and Merseyside - and particularly on
Birmingham as all information is was fed there before anything
happened. Mr Johnston said that if one were to seek to impute
part of the costs to South Yorkshire there would be need to
analyse what the West Midlands team were doing day to day, but
that would not be easy. Mr Watson said that the team was being
controlled by the Treasury Solicitors working at the behest of
Lord Justice Taylor and that Mr Wright had no direction and
control of the enquiry at all. For that reason it was felt that
all that part of the West Midlands costs should fall on the
Taylor enquiry. Nothing in the circular on mutual aid applied to
complaints against the police. Mr Addison said that he agreed
that the mutual aid provisions might not be wholly appropriate
but suggested that was a reasonable point from which to start.

13. Mr Soden said that there was no perfect analogy with this
case. The closest analogy would be complaints and discipline
investigations where an outside force was called in. The way
the Hillsborough police enquiries had developed was quite normal,
in that HMCIC was consulted about who was best to call in. The
guidance that the Home Office issued to forces on complaints and
discipline cases stated that costs should be treated on a knock
for knock basis but the scale of costs claimed in some
circumstances should be reimbursed as for mutual aid, if the
knock for knock arrangements did not apply.

14. Mr Nacrler said that it seemed to have been accepted that Mr
Wright asked the outside force to come in and that where an
outside force was called in the decision as to the necessary
extent of the investigation would always be for the Chief
Constable of the investigating force. Mr Watson replied that the
difficulty was that the investigation was not just a matter for
the Chief Constable.  Lord Justice Taylor and his enquiry were
effectively stepping in and adding to the police enquiries. Mr
Addison agreed that it might well be the case that the West
Midlands investigation was on a scale greater than originally
envisaged, driven by Treasury Solicitor's need for additional
evidence. He saw all the arguments for arguing that this was an
unforeseen burden on South Yorkshire and that they might need a
special payment.  But one could not escape the principle that the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire had asked for an
investigation by officers of another force, for the very good
reason that South Yorkshire police were too close to the tragedy.
An independent input could well mean losing some control over
costs.

15. Mr Johnston reminded the meeting that it was the Government
who had taken the decision to launch the public enquiry and
claimed that the scale of Mr Dear's enquiries arose from that
decision, not Mr Wright's decision. Mr Watson said that the
scale of the enquiry was critically affected by Lord Justice
Taylor's request for an interim report in time for    the startof
the  next football season. Mr Dear may have had to    triple or
quadruple the size of his team as a result. This had nothing to
do with South Yorkshire but was primarily generated by Lord
Taylor's timescale. Mr Johnston said that there had been two
separate decisions leading to the very large enquiry and it was
wrong to suggest that because one decision preceded the other,
the   financing should all fall on South Yorkshire.

16.    Mr Addison said that it seemed to be accepted   that Mr Wright
had called in Mr Dear and he could quite see that the subsequent
setting up of the Lord Justice Taylor enquiry had generated an
additional need for enquiries which led to costs on an even
greater scale. He also saw the argument that the enquiry was not
just about what had happened at Hillsborough, there was a strong
wish of the Government to learn about what had happened and to
prevent any recurrence elsewhere. The work of the West Midlands
police was therefore of national as well as local interest. This
did raise the question as to whether there was any way of
apportioning costs between the national and the local elements.

17. Mr Johnston said that the Government should distinguish
those elements of the enquiry which served purposes other than
the policing of South Yorkshire. He asserted that if one took
the proportion of the costs attributable to policing in South
Yorkshire as opposed to national interests (eg safety and
policing at sports grounds) then the costs to South Yorkshire
would be minimal. Mr Archer said that it was less than clear
that the costs of investigation were significantly less than
would have been borne anyway. Mr Soden said that he accepted the
point that the Lord Taylor enquiry had to look at wider issues
but the scale of the police investigation, because of the size of
the tragedy, would have had to have been similar. He gave the
example of the scale of the Wapping dispute investigation by
Northamptonshire police. Mr Watson disagreed and stated that
Wapping was different because it was instigated by complaints.
Mr Soden said that in fact the Commissioner had instigated the
Wapping investigations before any specific complaints had been
received.

18. Mr Addison said he thought that there was nothing to be
gained by further discussion of the principle.  South Yorkshire's
views could only be noted at this stage. He was not authorised
to offer a special payment but if South Yorkshire were to receive
one on the lines of the one offered at the time of the miners*
dispute, the Government would pay an increasing proportion of
the expenditure possibly up to 100% depending on the scale of
costs. Apart from recognising the burden on South Yorkshire of
excessively high costs in proportion to their overall budget,
such an approach would go some way to meeting the point that the
costs involved a national dimension.

19. Mr Johnston said that he was not empowered to negotiate, but
if they were to approach it in that way, it should be made quite
clear that it was being done not because of pressure on South
Yorkshire but because the enquiry was generated by national
interest. Mr Addison said that South Yorkshire might claim that,
w   -   ^                                   4




            although the Government were likely to see more force in the
            argument that costs were excessive. Mr Naqler added that there
            was an awkwardness in concentrating on "national interest" as
            that was already a basis for the payment of police grant. The
            basis of special payments is that costs are exceptional and
            unforeseen.

            20. Mr Archer said that the enquiry had two aspects to its terms
            of reference: one was what happened on the day, the other was the
            wider questions. Mr Johnston said that the events on the day
            had great significance to the wider aspects of the enquiry. Mr
            Watson made the point that South Yorkshire had incurred greater
            policing costs at sports grounds since the tragedy and that the
            West Midlands enquiry was costing £1.7m per month. He said that
            bills would soon be arriving and asked who should they be sent
            to. Mr Addison said that the Home Office initial view as
            expressed at the beginning of the meeting still seemed valid to
            him. The bills should therefore go to the South Yorkshire Police
            Authority and they should pay as much as was reasonable on
            account to stop arguments over interest. The invoices should be
            examined carefully to ensure they did not include things like
            basic salary costs which were not a proper charge in this kind of
            situation.

            Conclusion on costs

            21. Mr Johnston said that the South Yorkshire Police Authority
            had only had a short discussion on the matter of costs and his
            instructions were that they did not want to pay any costs. Mr
            Addison said that the Home Office was not diverted from its view
            that the costs fell to South Yorkshire.  Lord Ferrers was seeing
            a deputation from the West Midlands on 25 May. Mr Addison asked
            Mr Johnston to report matters as soon as possible to his police
            authority and said that there were two options.  The police
            authority might accept the responsibility for meeting the costs
            and pressed the Home Office for a special payment, in which case
            the Government could move quickly to consider that request. Or
            secondly, the police authority might wish to press for a meeting
            with Ministers to press in principle the case for the Home Office
            to pay direct.

            Compensation

            22. Mr Archer asked Mr Johnston whether, with regard to
            compensation to victims/relatives, anyone was accepting
            liability? Mr Johnston said that at present nobody was. Mr
            Watson said the police authority had received 7 writs. Mr
            Addison asked whether the police authority was insured. Mr
            Johnston confirmed that it was. Mr Archer said that in a number
            of recent disasters the owners, such as London Underground Ltd,
            had admitted liability.  In this case it was less obvious against
            whom eventual claims might be. There was a fear that this might
            lead to prolonged consideration of claims and there was a need to
            take forward resolving the question of liability as soon as
            possible. Mr Johnston said that the police authority was not in
            the same position as London Underground Ltd but Mr Watson added
            that the Authority were seeking legal advice on their position.
The need for immediate financial assistance could be relieved by
disaster fund payments.

Financial position of South Yorkshire

23. Mr Naqler asked about the financial position of the police
authority.  It was confirmed that the gross budget was £85m; net
budget £40m; end of year balance £2m; the product of lp rate =
£1.5m; product of 3/4p rate = £lm.

Conclusion

24. Mr Addison summed up by saying that the whole question of
costs was souring the atmosphere and the Home Office was anxious
to resolve this issue as soon as possible.  It was essential that
the South Yorkshire Police Authority let the Home Office know as
soon as possible whether they wished to press for special payment
or for a meeting with Ministers to seek direct central funding.




Police Department
FI Division
5 June 1989
