                   Office of H.M. Coroner
                   The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

HM Coroner:                                                             South Yorkshire (West)
Christopher P. Dorries                                                        (0114) 273-8721



                                                                             18 August 1997
Your ref:
Our ref:


Mr C F Bone
The Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 528
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT

RECORDED DELIVERY




Dear Mr Bone
Hillsborough Inquest
 1. Thank you for your letter of the 7th August. I am sorry for the slight delay in replying
    but it was necessary for me to refer parts of your enquiry to my predecessor.

2. I enclose a copy of Doctor Popper’s summing up to the jury as requested.

 3. So far as Tony Bland is concerned, the inquest was not dealt with in this jurisdiction.
    Mr Bland actually died at the Airedale Hospital near Bradford. Whilst it might normally
    have been appropriate to transfer the case to Sheffield, in view of my work on the day
    (on behalf of a charity aiding the relatives) and subsequent peripheral involvement in
    legal work (for a Medical Defence Union) it would have been wholly inappropriate for
    me to hear the matter. That would inevitably remain the case should the High Court
    ever order a fresh inquest.
     It was therefore agreed that my colleague in Bradford, Mr James Turnbull, would retain
     the case and deal with the inquest. Mr Turnbull has since retired but I have spoken
     with his successor who would be happy to assist you. Please write to Mr Roger
     Whittaker, HM Coroner, City Courts, The Tyrls, Bradford, West Yorkshire, BD2 1LA.

 4. Turning to the question of material available to Doctor Popper’s inquest, this is difficult
    to answer in simple terms as there is no single, comprehensive list of the papers
    referred to my predecessor. Whilst the main core of evidence considered for calling at
    the inquest was apparently drawn from the DPP submission papers and the ‘body files’
    (see below), it is clear the Doctor also received a large number of other papers in a
    more piecemeal fashion. This was often in response to specific requests for
    information on a particular topic.

                                        Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                        Document3
      The ‘body files’ were individual files for each deceased containing statements relating
      to their movements on the day (both ante and post mortem), identification and exhibits
      such as photographs with the location of the deceased marked. The learned Judge
      may find these useful in respect of particular deceased where there is a query.
      Doctor Popper is preparing a further note on the paperwork supplied to him and will
      correspond with you directly in the next few days.
      It would therefore seem quite impossible at this stage for me to give the Judge a
      meaningful or accurate list as to the documents perused. However, as I indicated on
      the telephone, a query as to whether Doctor Popper saw an individual statement or
      exhibit may be relatively easy to answer. I must say that I have always found Doctor
      Popper’s recollection of the paperwork to be exceptionally detailed and accurate.
  5. I am sending this letter by recorded delivery because of its bulk and the sensitivity of its
     enclosures. If I can further assist please do not hesitate to write or telephone.
  Yours sincerely---------------------------




k )C P Domes  N           ^
   HM Coroner


  cc Dr Stefan Popper




                                               Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                          Document3
