                                                      1)4v ^ L
DRAFT


                                               December 1989




Dear Sir Peter


You invited the Technical Working Party "to review technical
aspects of the guide to Safety at Sports Grounds;      identify areas
requiring clarification or amendment;    and recommend         . i. *
accordingly."    I have pleasure in submitting its Report^       ,Ffc has
been agreed by all members.    Detailed supplementary notes dealing
with certain of the technical features will be available for your
use in due course.


We note that the Guide is not confined to football grounds and
stadia but includes guidance on all sports grounds,      and we have
borne this in mind in our considerations.    Although not within
our terms of reference,   and for that reason not addressed in our
Report, we recognise that efficient and effective stewarding is
an integral element of crowd control and safety.      Our
recommendations complement,   rather than supplant,   the need for
such stewarding.


The Technical Working Party met first on 18 October and held five
formal day-long meetings supplemented by many working papers and
informal discussions during the period available for report.            The
heavy pressures of the timetable could not have been accommodated
without the fullest co-operation of those concerned,        and I record
my thanks to all members of the Technical Working Party and to
its Secretary for the integrity,   commitment and enthusiasm with
which they approached the task.
         REPORT OF THE TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY


The Green Guide

        The Technical Working Party recognises the valuable
contributions of successive editions of the Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds, commonly known as the Green Guide.      Its
scope and status are described in its introduction as
f ol l ow s :  "This  booklet  provides   guidance  to  ground
management, local authorities and technical specialists such
as engineers on measures for improving spectator safety at
existing sports grounds.    It is a voluntary guide and has no
legal force".

     In view of the variability of existing sports grounds
in function and in scale, there are serious difficulties in
establishing comprehensive and general regulations, backed
by legal force, to cover all the complex details of design
and  construction.    Adherence  to the   standards  set by
Building Regulations should provide a measure of uniformity
in respect of new work at sports grounds.  Nevertheless, the
Technical Working Party is strongly of the opinion that a

                                        /
much higher degree of standardisation should be sought in
practice.

      It considers that a revised issue of the Green Guide
should form the basis on which a designated ground or stand
is certified by the certifying authority, and recommends
t hat   any  departures  from  its   guidance  on  technical
provisions that may arise from local circumstances should be
fully defined and should be subject to approval in writing
by the certifying authority.

A Centre of Expertise

     The Green Guide covers a wide range of material, much
of which concerns the physical characteristics of grounds.
Its successive issues have been published in response to a
number of serious accidents at football grounds.         This
process has led to incremental advances in the Guide as
experience has grown, but the Technical Working Party does
not believe that such a process, although essential, is by
itself sufficient to cope with present-day requirements.

     Many British    sports grounds were first constructed a
long time ago, and   improvements have been introduced largely
on an   individual    basis.    A central body of knowledge
applicable to the    complex design of such grounds has been
entirely lacking.    As a result, progress has been piecemeal.

     The Technical Working Party considers that this is a
serious defect.   A continuous and expanding body of public
knowledge, drawn from the relevant professional fields, is
required to provide a basis for good individual designs at
modern standards.   At a time when substantial improvements
are under consideration, including a higher proportion of
seated accommodation, it is imperative to establish and to
disseminate rigorous standards of design if expectations are
to be   fulfilled.    The work of organisations    in other
countries,   including   the  Comitato   Olimpico  Nazionale
Italiano (CONI), can provide a valuable reference.

     The Technical Working Party recommends the formation of
a central body, under a title such as The Advisory Council
for Sports Grounds, to provide an authoritative source of
knowledge   for   all those  involved   in  the  design  and
construction of stadia.    A detailed specification of its
structure and funding is not proposed at this stage but, as
envisaged,  its members would be drawn from the relevant
professional fields and would commission specialist advice
when   necessary.     It  would   be   independent   of  any
Inspectorate.   The relationship of such a body to other
organisations is a matter for further discussion, but it is
suggested that the Football Association might wish to play a
leading role.

Seating and Standing

     The Technical Working Party notes that FIFA has agreed
regulations on seating for certain classes of football
matches, and that the regulations are to be imposed within a
short time-scale.     It also recognises that the British
tradition of standing on terraces runs counter to these
international requirements.

     It is clear that if British Clubs are to continue
within the international community, they will be obliged to
close their standing accommodation for matches that fall
within    the   FIFA    definition.       For  other matches, the
Technical Working Party recognises that, whilst standing
accommodation is not intrinsically unsafe, the benefits to
spectator comfort and crowd control brought about by all-
seater stadia are likely to accelerate the move towards such
venues.     The Technical Working Party accepts, however, that
although the introduction of all-seater stadia for l e a d in g ,
well-supported football clubs may be both beneficial and
practical, clubs in the lower divisions may find it less so
and in s i stence o n a l l - seating at these grounds may affect
their financial viability.            Alterations to seating from
standing arrangements at existing grounds may have both
design and cost implications through the impact on such
matters as spectator sight-lines and crowd density.

     In addition, it must be recognised that there are many
sports (horse, greyhound, motor racing and car rallying for
example) where the nature of the sport favours the mobility
of large sections of the crowd and where viewing from
standing areas is an essential e l e m e n t . Any recommendations
towards  all-seater  stadia   must      therefore    be  carefully
worded.
Capacities

     The Technical Working Party recognises that the safe
allowable capacity of any viewing area, whether seated or
standing, is the least of (i) its holding capacity, (i i ) the
number of persons who can leave through a normal exit system
within a prescribed time at the end of an event, (iii) the
number of persons who can leave through an emergency exit
system within a prescribed time, and (iv) the number of
persons who can be admitted through the turnstiles serving
that area within one hour.

     The theoretical holding capacity of a seated viewing
area is simply the number of seats in good condition which
comply   with  the   relevant   Green  Guide  recommendations
including those relating to distance from exits and gangways
and size and spacing.   Determination of the holding capacity
of a viewing terrace or slope is not so simple;       factors
that must be taken into account include the strength and
spacing of the crush-barriers, the position of gangways, the
dimensions and physical state of the steps, the effective
standing area, and the acceptable packing density.

     A packing density of 5 . 4 / m 2 is recommended in the
current Green Guide as the maximum allowable figure for
terraces and viewing slopes that meet all the specified
guidelines.     A reduced  figure of    2 . 7 / m 2 is presently
recommended    for  areas  deviating    materially     from  tFe
guidelines.   The Technical Working Party sees no point in
retaining reference to the lower figure and recommends that
there should be no lower limit to the reduction;       ie if the
enclosure had such poor safety standards that it was totally
unfit as a viewing area the figure could be zero.

     As to the maximum figures, the Technical Working Party
concludes that a uniformly distributed density of 5 .4 / m2
should be safe in conditions in full compliance with the
Green Guide.    It recognises, however, that there may be
variations of density within a given enclosure, and that
conditions may not comply in full.

     The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
allowable average packing density determined by the Inquiry
should   establish    a   general   reference    for      certifying
authorities.  For an individual ground, the packing density
applicable to a given standing area should be derived from
this figure, the full figure for areas in good condition and
reduced figures for areas in poorer condition.               Detailed
calculations of holding capacities should then be determined
on the basis of the agreed packing density for that specific
enclosure or other relevant factors.        These calculations
should take into account specific features of the crush-
barriers and fences and of step dimensions as illustrated in
the Green Guide.   The Technical Working Party recommends a
thorough review of the examples currently contained in
Chapter  16 of   the    Green  Guide,  and   t h e i n c l u s ion o f
appropriate diagrams.
Structural Elements

        It    is   a    fundame n ta l requirement  of  safety that
structures at grounds should provide spectators with safe
accommodation and safe means of ingress and e g r e s s .      They
should also enable police and stewards to exert proper
control over crowd movements. If a conflict should occur
between these objectives, a substantial re-arrangement may
be required;        in no circumstances should safety standards be
compromised.         The Technical Working Party recommends that
references to sub-divisions in Chapter 14 of the Green Guide
be reviewed with th^se considerations in mind, and that the
Chapter as a wholeT relflect^wmore positively* the b enefits =&£
-o-Fdcr 1 y~'crowd- b chn” iHiir '                ~ ~ —

Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch

      The Technical Working Party recognises the importance
of physical barriers as deterrents to pitch invasions.    It
also recognises that not all viewing areas present the same
risk,    and  recommends  that  consideration  be  given  to
differentiating   those  areas requiring higher   levels  of
security and other areas, such as seated accommodation and
members' enclosures, where a lesser degree of security might
be acceptable.

     The general principle of separation endorsed by the
Technical Working Party is that the means adopted should
provide sufficient security against pitch incursions to
enable the police to take timely and effective action should
such incidents occur.     Clearly a balance has to be struck
between   crowd   control    a nd  safety,     A  configuration
recommended for wider consideration consists of a perimeter
barrier   on  the   pitch-side    backed   by  a  parallel  and
continuous crush-barrier on the terrace-side, set back from
the perimeter barrier so as to provide a clear walk-way
between the two;     except in emergencies, spectators would
not be allowed to enter the walk-way.       Such an arrangement
would reduce the risks associated with a common feature of
British grounds, namely that the front steps of terraces are
substantially lower than the level of the pitch:      immediate
attention should be given to the elimination of this hazard.

     The Technical Working Party recommends that the maximum
height of perimeter fences should be determined in relation
to the UEFA standard of 2.2m.            It also recommends the
removal of overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire
attachments at the tops of f e n c e s .

     A form of separation increasingly adopted in new stadia
is the dry moat.     To be effective, a dry moat must be
sufficiently wide and deep,    and should be protected by
fences on both sides to ensure that spectators and players
do not fall into it.    Where enough space is available, a
moat may offer an attractive solution, but its application
to older grounds is likely to be restricted by limitations
of space.
Emergency Access to Pitch

     The Technical Working Party recommends that emergency
access to the pitch should be provided from all adjacent
viewing areas.   It considers the provision of gates or gaps
in any formal barrier to be in all cases advantageous for
the evacuation of adjacent enclosures and essential except
where adequate, safe alternative arrangements exist.    Where
fences, barriers or moats are installed the majority view of
the Technical Working Party is that there should be clear
gangways leading to emergency exits on to the pitch.     Such
gangways must be properly identified and kept clear at all
times.  The exit gates or gaps should be at least 1.1 metres
wide or as wide as the gangways feeding into them, whichever
is the larger and should be sufficient in dimensions and
spacing to allow evacuation of the enclosure within a
prescribed time.   The Working Party recorded a minority view
that the need to police gangways exacerbated friction on
terraces, and that gangways were not always essential for
proper crowd control and safety.

Crush Barriers

     A review of the procedures for inspection and testing
of barriers is recommended.      The Technical Working Party
considers that greater emphasis should be given to thorough
recorded  and certified annual      inspections of all crush
barriers  for conditions which might impair their structural
performance.

     It is further recommended that 25% of barriers, evenly
spaced through each enclosure as designated by a competent
engineer, continue to be tested each year.  In addition, all
barriers which the inspection has identified as of possibly
sub-standard condition should also be tested.

     The adopted test method should be capable of applying
to barrier rail, post and foundation anchorage, a loading
equivalent to a uniformly distributed load 1.20 x the design
load of the barrier as at present.

     The  test procedure should    be revised in line with
current practice for structural testing to incorporate (i) a
detailed visual inspection of the barrier, (i i ) a bedding-in
cycle taken to a percentage of the design loading and (iii)
a single cycle of proof testing taken as at present to 1.20
x the design loading with deflections recorded for the rail
and the tops of the posts at maximum load.

     After the full proof load has been held for a minimum
of five minutes the full deflection should be recorded prior
to release of loading and the p e r m a n e n t /deflection recorded.

     It is recommended that barriers are considered to be
satisfactory where no significant defects are revealed by
the inspection and where the required percentage recovery
(dependent on the materials of construction of the barrier)
— from— the— f-uXJ— defl-ecfcion— under-— the-— proof— l-ead— eyeie— 4-s-

      The   Technical  Working   Party  recommends   that  the
 distinction currently drawn in the Green Guide between
 "peak" and "non-peak" viewing areas for the purpose of
 assessing barrier spacing should be abolished.      All areas
 should comply with the peak viewing specifications.

 Stands

      A substantial part of Chapter 10 of the Green Guide,
 'Roofed  Stands  with   Seated  Accommodation',  deals  with
 temporary structures.   It is recommended that this material
 should be placed in a separate chapter, and that it should
 give explicit references as required to British Standards
 and to applicable regulations.

       The remainder, which might be called 'Covered Standing
 and   Seated     Accommodation', should clarify  the  special
 requirements for safety that are involved, noting that fire
 risk is not the only hazard and that statutory control of
 the requirements may be vested in different authorities.
 Appropriate references to Building Regulations should be
 made.    It is important to ensure that all spectators can be
 cleared into safe protected escape routes within prescribed
 times, although such routes need not be exits from the stand
 as a w h o l e .

 Ingress/Egress

      The current Chapters on Ingress and Egress in the Green
 Guide (Chapters 5 and 6) contain much useful information,
 but are nonetheless in need of some revision.       Consideration
 was given by the Technical Working Party to the possible
 amalgamation of features common to both ingress and egress,
 but despite the common ground it is recognised that emphases
 might well differ.    The Working Party does not therefore
 recommend amalgamation of the individual C h a p t e r s .

 Ingress

      The Technical Working Party felt that Chapter 5 needed
 expansion to incorporate additional clauses on                   (a) the
 positive counting and      recording of those            passing through
 each turnstile;     (b) the location of amenities inside the
 ground to avoid obstructing or disrupting the flow between
 turnstile    and   enclosures;             (c)   the   sub-division    of
 enclosures;    (d) the adequacy of well distributed entrances
 into large enclosures to facilitate even packing;                 and (e)
 the design of entrances so as to avoid local pressure on
 spectators    caused,    for     ex a m p l e ,   by  downward     ramps.
 Informative     diagrams     s h o u l d be     adopted    an d   general
 principles laid down,      wherever possible. The Technical
 Working Party would not favour the introduction of numerical
 examples   which   might,   in      any      event,  be    difficult   to
 establish.   It views the current maximum notional flow rate
 per turnstile of 750        persons per hour            (as set out in
paragraph 47 Green Guide) as too high, and recommends a
figure  of  500  as  the median   for a normal  turnstile.
Furthermore, it recommends that variations up or down be
approved by the certifying authority, subject to a maximum
upper limit of 660 persons per hour.

Egress

     Greater    cross-referencing   with   other  Chapters  is
required, and the Technical Working Party favours expansion
or amendment of a number of paragraphs.     In particular, the
density  figure   set out    in paragraph   54 in respect of
reservoir areas is felt to be too high, and the members of
the Technical Working Party recommend that, where reservoir
areas cannot be removed from egress routes, a lower density
of 35-40 persons per 10 sq metres be substituted.          The
Technical   Working    Party   favours   greater  emphasis  on
networking, and believes that the Green Guide should include
a stipulation that each ground produce proper, networked
plans, delineating all aspects of ingress/egress.

Enclosures/Turnstiles

     The Technical Working Party strongly recommends that
there should be a direct one-to-one relationship between
turnstiles and enclosures in order to maintain accurate
counts of e n t r i e s . A review of the current state of League
grounds had shown that sub-divisions such as had occurred at
Hillsborough were u n c o m m o n , and had generally been initiated
by police for crowd control.            Where such sub-divisions do
exist, it is imperative that the total number of spectators
entering each sub-division should be counted separately.

Stairways and Ramps

     The Technical Working Party notes the dangers presented
by stairways and ramps,    particularly those used by the
public in large numbers, and recommends extensive redrafting
of the Green Guide to present more sharply the hazards
involved.    It recognises   that the standards of safety
required for stairways and ramps which form part of the
access between enclosures and an exit and those which exist
as gangways within enclosures differ and recommends that the
differences be explained in more detail.

     Similarly,   the   Working  Party   believes  that  the
channelling of flows by the provision of handrails should be
given greater emphasis.    The recommended width of channel
for both stairways and ramps should not exceed three persons
(unit widths) in line abreast, and the width of up to 1.8
metres permitted by paragraph 76 should therefore be reduced
accordingly.   Handrails should extend, by at least 300mm
beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or ramp.

     The   difference  between  handrails,  balustrades  and
barriers on or near the top and bottom of stairways and
ramps, and their appropriate strength requirements, needs to
be clarified.
           The Technical Working Party recommends the inclusion in
      the Green Guide of a greater number of diagrams illustrating
      the  potentially    hazardous   situations  in  relation  to
      stairways  and ramps   and of    the principles  behind  the
      provisions.


10.   Inspections and Tests

           Inspection and tests of all equipment and structures at
      grounds are vital features of good operation.    Their range
      is wide, extending from visual inspection before and after
      each event to regular testing of structural components.    It
      is a matter of serious concern that the interpretation of
      requirements by those responsible is unacceptably variable.
      The Technical Working Party considers that action should be
      taken to ensure that common high standards of inspection and
      test are realised, and makes the following recommendations.

      (i)     The   Green  Guide should  include a  comprehensive
      tabulation of inspections and tests covering the essential
      technical features of grounds.     It should prescribe the
      minimum   frequencies  at which the inspections and tests
      should be conducted.

      (ii)   The required levels of competence of those    carrying
      out the inspections and tests should be defined.

      (iii)   Records of the results of inspections and tests,
      including the identification of defects and the remedies
      adopted, should be certified by those carrying out the work.

      (iv)    A national Inspectorate should be established to
      oversee the adoption of common standards of inspection and
      test.  Its terms of reference should include the compilation
      and maintenance of a national register of organisations
      employed to carry out     inspections and tests;     central
      recording of the extent and type of the inspections and
      tests adopted at individual grounds;    and the provision of
      advice on inspection and test for those responsible for
      carrying out the work and for certifying authorities.      It
      would  be   in  the  interest  of  common  standards  if  an
      Inspectorate of this kind dealt with the grounds of all
      relevant sports, and consideration should be given to its
      formation through an association of their governing bodies.

11.   Fire Safety

           There is general recognition amongst Technical Working
      Party members   that the current Chapter on Fire Safety
      (Chapter 11)   is well-defined.   It contains much useful
      advice on egress and means of escape, application of which
      is not   restricted to fire risks    and which would bear
      repetition in other Chapters.
           The  Technical   Working Party  considers  that  it  is
      essential to maintain simple, clear lines of authority and
      communication;   independent input from individual bodies is
      to be avoided. With that in mind, its members believe that
      consultation on all safety matters should be directly with
      the certifying authority who, in turn, would consult with
      the fire, police, and other authorities.

12.   Emergency/Auxiliary Power

           The Technical Working Party considers that the current
      Green Guide contains insufficient information on auxiliary
      power.  It recommends a separate chapter on the topic with a
      requirement that emergency power should be sufficient to
      maintain an adequate level of lighting, and public address
      system and to operate any electronic gates, alarms etc for a
      period of three hours from the time of failure of the normal
      supply.

13.   Communications

           The Technical Working Party considers that too little
      weight has in the past been attached to the need for a
      comprehensive communications system,  capable of reaching
      both inside and outside the ground.

           Chapter   12 of   the Green Guide   therefore  requires
      substantial amendment to reflect the importance of effective
      communications   systems, the need to make use of high-
      technology equipment, and the value of closer co-operation
      between club and police personnel.    The Technical Working
      Party considers that Interim Recommendations 31-34 should be
      retained permanently and incorporated into the Green Guide.

14.   Disabled Spectators

           The current 'Green Guide' fails to address the specific
      problems   encountered   by   d i sa b l e d spectators and  the
      Technical Working Party recommends the introduction of a
      Chapter  to  cover   these  aspects.         It  should deal  in
      particular with Ingress and Egress and with the provision of
      self-contained viewing areas.
                   SUMMARY OF MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS


The Green Guide


1.   A higher degree of standardisation in stadia design and
construction is required.    An updated and revised Green Guide
should form the basis on which a designated ground or stand is
certified.   It should incorporate appropriate diagrams and refer
to relevant Building Regulations.


Advisory Body


2.   There should be a single,   central body   (called perhaps the
Advisory Council for Sports Grounds)    to provide an authoritative
source of knowledge for all those involved in the design and
construction of stadia.


Seating/Standing


3.   Whilst standing accommodation is not intrinsically unsafe,
all-seater stadia bring benefits to spectator comfort,      safety and
crowd control.


Capacities


4.   Capacity depends on standards of ingress,     egress and safety
generally as well as the area of the accommodation.       The current
maximum packing density of 5. 4/ m 2 recommended in the Green Guide
is acceptable from an engineering perspective.       The reduced
figure of 2 . 7 / m 2 should be abolished and there should be no
specified lower limit.    If an enclosure has such poor safety
standards that it is totally unfit as a viewing area,      the figure
should be zero.


Separation of Viewing Areas and Pitch


5.   Different perimeter arrangements may be appropriate for
different areas of a ground.
6.     The means of separation adopted should provide sufficient
protection against pitch incursions without compromising
spectator safety.       The maximum height of fences should be
determined in relation to the UEFA standard of 2.2 metres.
Overhanging sections and spiked or barbed-wire attachments should
be r e m o v e d .


7.     Attention should be given to the elimination of spectator
viewing from front steps of terraces which are substantially
lower than the level of the pitch.


Emergency Access to the Pitch


8.      Emergency access to the pitch should be provided from all
adjacent viewing areas.


9.      Exit gaps or gates should be at least 1.1 metres wide or as
wide as the gangways feeding into them, whichever is the larger.
All gangways must be clearly identified and must be kept clear of
spectators in normal cir c um s ta n ce s .


Crush Barriers


10.     A review of the procedures for inspection and testing of
barriers is recommended.        Greater emphasis should be given to
thorough recorded and certified annual^inspections of all crush
barriers,       and to the establishment of an unambiguous testing
procedure.


Stands


11.     The Green Guide should contain a separate chapter on
temporary structures,       with appropriate references to applicable
regulations and British Standards.


Ingress


12.     The current maximum notional flow rate per turnstile of 750
persons per hour is too high.       A figure of 500 should be adopted
as the median with a maximum upper limit of 660 persons per hour.
Variations from the median must be approved by the certifying
authority.


Egress


13.     Where reservoir areas cannot be removed,      a lower density of
35-40 persons per 10 sq metres should be adopted.          Each ground
should produce networked plans delineating all aspects of ingress
and egress.


Enclosures/Turnstiles


14.     There should be a direct one-to-one relationship between
turnstiles and enclosures.       Where sub-divisions exist,    it is
imperative that the totals entering each sub-division are counted
separately.


Stairways and Ramps


15.     The recommended width of channels should not exceed three
persons    (unit widths)   in line abreast.     Handrails should extend
by at least 300mm beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or
ramp.     The design and strength of handrails,      barriers and
protection on or near stairways or ramps should be clearly
defined.     Ramps should not produce dangerous crowd pressures.


Inspection and Tests


16.     Action should be taken to ensure that common high standards
of inspection and test are realised.          A national Inspectorate
should be established to oversee the adoption of such standards.
Its terms of reference should include compilation and maintenance
of a national register of organisations employed to carry out
inspections and tests;      central recording of the extent and type
of inspections and tests at individual grounds;          and the
provision of advice.
Disabled Spectators


17.   The Green Guide should contain a separate Chapter to cover
this subject.
