                            cc Mr. Storr                 1 0 OCT 1989
                                Mr. Boys Smith
                                Mr. Goddard                             lovs^
                                Mr. Hammond
                             -- Mr-.-Bolton S -
                                Mr. Clayton                H o m e Office
                                Mr. Osborne               QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                Mr. Pugh                  LONDON SWIH 9AT
                                Mr. F. Smith
                                Mr. Lidington
PARLIAMENTARY UNDER             (w/o e.-'ci              9th October 1989
SECRETARY OF STATE




  While the Bill was in Committee in the Commons the Opposition
  tabled amendment 105 proposing a very broad extension to the
  alcohol offences at paragraph (f) of Schedule 1 (ie those
  offences which are football related).  You agreed to consider
  the matter and I enclose a Hansard extract (column 521) giving
  your response.

   I agree that we should think carefully before proposing
   extensions to the Schedule but, on reflection, I am convinced
   that a carefully defined extension is justified in this
   instance.  As presently drafted, paragraph (f) catches only
   those alcohol offences defined in Section 1 of the Sporting
   Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985.  I see some force in
   the Opposition's view that, in relation to drunkenness on
   journeys to or from designated matches, Section 1 offences are
   too narrowly defined for the purposes of the Bill:  the
   definition includes, for example, someone who is sober but who
   possesses a single can of beer on a special train, coach or
   minibus going to a match;  but it excludes someone who is
   drunk and perhaps disorderly trying to make the same journey
   on foot.

   I propose that we should extend the offences in paragraph (f)
   to include all drunkenness offences on the way to or from a
   designated match.  This would catch offences of being drunk in
   a public place, disorderly behaviour while drunk in a public
   place and driving when under the influence of drink or with an
   alcohol concentration above the prescribed limit.  As Schedule
   1 applies not only to Part II of the Bill but also to Part I , X
   am writing to ask for your agreement to amendments for this
   purpose being tabled.



                                                  /in Committee




   Hon. Colin Moynihan MP
In Committee you rightly cautioned that it would be necessary
to bear in mind the relevance of any conviction to football
before it was included in the Schedule, but I think this point
is satisfactorily dealt with by the requirement in paragraph
(f) which limits the offences caught to those in respect of
which the court makes a declaration of relevance.

I am copying this letter to Robert Atkins at the Department of
Transport.




                         PETER LLOYD


       Approved by Mr. Lloyd and signed in his absence
                   by the Private Secretary
