                                           13 SEP     )oOS^




J S Mason Esq
Office of the Parliamentary Counsel
36 Whitehall
London   SW1                                    12 September 1989




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


     We spoke on the 'phone about Mr Russell's letter of
6 September to you.

     2.   As respects paragraph 8, the FLA should be obliged to
consult the local authority, in addition to the authorities
specified in section 4(8) of the 1975 Act, before exercising its
powers under clause 13(2) of the Bill.

     3.   As respects the final sentence of that paragraph, I was
concerned whether the obligation to consult under sections 3(3)
and 4(8) of the 1975 Act was sufficiently disapplied by clause 13
of the Bill, in view of clause 13(2), the consultation would
clearly be an absurdity; but does that absurdity remove the force
of the duty imposed by those provisions? Section 3(3) would
clearly continue to apply as respects those provisions of a
safety certificate other than ones required in pursuance of a
notice under clause 13(2). Presumably a local authority would
include in the consultation letter some wording to the effect
that the conditions which are required by the FLA cannot be
altered and therefore should be ignored for the purposes of the
consultation. This would also apply in respect of consultation
under section 4(8) if the local authority decide that amendments
in addition to those required by the FLA should be made since
section 4(8) would continue to operate in respect of such
amendments.

     4.   As respects section 5 of the 1975 Act, I cannot see how
clause 13 of the Bill (as presently drafted) could have the
effect of reducing the right of appeal under section 5 of the
1975 Act (as amended by section 22 of the Fire Safety and Safety
of Places of Sport Act 1987). If that view is correct, an




                                                                    J
"interested party" (as defined in section 5(5) of the 1975 Act)
could appeal to the courts against a condition required by the
FLA. It is here that I believe the policy is not agreed, but the
Home Office view in relation to the 1975 Act generally is that
the courts (including the higher courts on appeal) are the proper
forum in which disputes should be resolved. If this view
prevails, it would seem desirable to amend section 5 so that the
FLA could be a party to the proceedings (and thereby argue its
own case before the courts) and so that it could appeal to the
higher courts under section 5(3C) and (3D). I am not clear that
the application of the Magistrates' Courts Act 1980 by section
5(3A), as respects England and Wales, is itself sufficient to
allow the FLA to be a party.

     5.   Whilst I am concernedonly with those parts of the Bill
relating to the 1975 Act, it might be helpful if I explained the
confusion created by the first sentence of paragraph 11, to which
you referred on the 'phone. Our view was that it ought to be
possible to prosecute a turnstile operator who was bribed to
admit spectators without a membership card for the offence under
clause 9. In such a case the ground management could probably
avail itself of the defence in clause 9(2) and so no-one could be
prosecuted. However, if admission is to be by automatic gate and
plastic cards, the problem may not arise.

     A copy goes to Mr D G Russell (Solicitor's Office, D o E).




                                                     R J CLAYTON
                                          Legal Adviser's Branch

hcc: Mr   Hammond
     Mr   Bolton
     Mr   Osborne
     Mr   Mould
