                                             cc Mr Haslam


Mr R M Whalley
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Enquiry




I am now able to list those who have expressed a firm
intention to attend Lord Justice Taylor's meeting on Thursday,
together with a number of journalists who will come if other
commitments allow of it. The degree of interest has been very
impressive and it seems clear that Lord Justice Taylor's
invitation is much appreciated by those invited; one felt that
they were pleased that it had been recognised that they might
have something serious and constructive to say.

I have stressed repeatedly that this is not a reporting
occasion but an opportunity to give their views on a range of
matters relating to crowd control and safety, and I think
there is a general understanding of the position by all those
I have invited. Nevertheless, Lord Justice Taylor may feel
that it would be prudent to make the point again in opening
the meeting.  I would not think it profitable to make
reference to the misconstruction by John Carlisle MP, of what
was said of membership schemes at the All Party Football
Committee Meeting on November 14, but I will have copies of
the letter of November 21 to David Evans MP, to draw on if the
point arises directly.

We have received calls from the Daily Star and The Sun, both
convinced that Lord Justice Taylor was holding a press
conference.  In the case of The Sun, there was the added
conviction that the press conference was about identity cards
and that their exclusion from the guest list reflected our
desire to entertain only those opposed to such schemes.  I
disabused him of such ideas and, having explained the true
nature of the occasion, made clear that, on that basis, he was
welcome to attend. He declined that invitation.   It must be
hoped that nothing appears in The Sun about 'secret* meetings.

The list of attenders and possible attenders is as follows:

     The Times                Stuart Jones
                              Tom Clarke
                              David Miller
                              Sheila Gunn
                              Clive White

     The Independent          Patrick Barclay
                              Vic Robbie (possible)

     Daily Telegraph          Colin Malam
                              Christopher Davies
     The Guardian             Martin Thorpe
                              David Lacey

     Daily Mail               Jeff Powell
                              Peter Lea
                              Trevor Haylett (possible)

     Daily Express            Steve Curry

     Today                    Bob Harris
                              David Alexander (possible)

     BBC TV                   Bill Hamilton
                              John Motson (possible)

     ITN                      Peter Wallace
                              Brian Moore
                              Glen O'Glaza

     BBC Radio                Brian Butler
                              Peter Jones (possible)

     Sunday Times             Chris Navrat
                              Chris Lightbown

     Observer                 Peter Corrigan
                              Hugh Mclllavenny

I assume that Lord Justice Taylor, his assessors    and officials
would wish to sit behind a desk in order to take    notes and
accommodate papers, notwithstanding the informal    nature of the
meeting.  I would suggest that the guests should    occupy two or
three semi-circular rows facing the desk.




                                                B R WILLIS
