E.R.                                                                      ^

                                        cc:   Mr Cogbill
                                              Mrs Lee
                                              Mr Hopley
                                              Miss Wooldridge
                                              Ms Rex



       Mr Goddard
       F8 Division


       BILL ON TAYLOR OFFENCES:     DRAFT INSTRUCTIONS


            This is in response to your note of 2 6 February.


            2.          With reference to paragraph 4 of that note, I
       apologise for not consulting you about the addition to the
       Home Secretary's response to the Lord President of the
       Council.    However, you were absent on leave last Friday when
       the matter arose and my efforts to contact Mr Hopley were
       unsuccessful.


            3.           I think I need to revise the first two paragraphs of
       the draft instructions to bring out the rather curious status
       they currently enjoy.     Even the title "A Bill to ... [etc.]11
       is somewhat misleading.     Whilst retaining most of what is
       contained in the existing paragraphs, I suppose that I need to
       explain that the instructions will probably form part of the
       instructions for a Criminal Law Bill to be introduced in the
       next Session, but that they have been delivered early so that
       they can be used by Counsel as the basis on which to draft
       Government amendments to the Wheeler Bill, should the need
       arise.     However, such instructions would usually be directed
       at those specific provisions in a Private Member's Bill that
       need to be changed.     I would therefore need to explain that,
       in our opinion, so much of the Wheeler Bill needs changing
       that it is considered more satisfactory to draft the
       instructions as though they were for a Bill and that what is
       drafted in response could then be divided into amendments for
       the Wheeler Bill.


                                                                          1
E.R

           4.      I have the following comments on yours in paragraph
      2   ofyour   note of 26 February.   The numbering of suggestions
      followsthat which I     added to your note of 20 February.


            5.     Suggestion 7 consists of three sets of amendments.
      In my note of 22 February I suggested an amendment to take
      account of the last set.     As respects the first, these would
      omit the words in parenthesis which explain to Counsel why the
      throwing of bananas is regarded as racially offensive.       Whilst
      such activity might be regarded as wasteful, it is far from
      jj^ediately apparent why it has any association with an ethnic
      minority.    That strained and curious association needs to be
      explained.    No explanation is contained in your first set of
      suggested amendments.


            6.     I am afraid that you second set of amendments and
      the comments in your note of 2 6 February miss the point.      The
      words in paragraph 3.8 to which you object had not been
      intended to be a reflection of your views about banana
      throwing but had been intended to explain why there was little
      or no prospect of success for a prosecution under section 18
      of the Public Order Act 1986 in respect of such activity.        If
      a person utters words or conducts himself in such a way that
      his viciousness towards a racial group is obvious and
      apparent, it is much easier for a prosecutor to discharge the
      burden of proving beyond reasonable doubt that such a person
      intended thereby to stir up racial hatred for the purposes of
      the offence to section 18(1)(a).      However, unless a prosecutor
      was also armed with some especially damaging admissions, it is
      the sheer silliness of banana throwing that would prevent a
      prosecutor from relying on it for the purposes of a
      prosecution under that section.      In an attempt to settle this
      issue I propose to substitute the following for the last two
      sentences of paragraph 3.8:


            "In the absence of other evidence it would be difficult
            to rely solely on such activity as showing an intention


                                                                            2
E.R

             to stir up racial hatred for the purposes of section
             18(1)(a) of the Public Order Act 1986 since it is
             difficult to argue that something so inherently silly
             indicates an intention to stir up hatred; similar
             arguments would defeat a prosecution under section
             18(1)(b).".


             7.     As respects suggestion 9, I remain of the view that
      the example of cigarettes is inappropriate to illustrate the
      point I was trying to make.       Since the majority of people do
             smoke, they would probably prefer not to have cigarettes
      thrown at them.       By contrast, even if a person did not intend
      to eat the sweet he is still unlikely to resent being thrown
      one.


             8.      Since I had offered to drop the phrase "those
      instructing Counsel" some of the comments in your note of
      2 6 January about suggestion 14 concern matters past.         However,
      the difficulties facing prosecutors in discharging the burden
      of proof is very much a legal matter.       The comments in
      paragraph 3.21 are my assessment of those difficulties and are
      included, in part, to forestall Counsel making the same point.
      ACPO may be optimistic, but Mr Evans (the third sentence of
      paragraph 2 of his note of 20 February) shares my pessimism
      and so might Counsel.       In the first sentence of paragraph 3.21
      I shall omit the words "Those instructing Counsel are aware
      that".       As respects the last two sentences of that paragraph,
      I shall take on board your suggestion.


              9.     I think there are difficulties in the proposal in
      paragraph 3 of your note of 2 6 January.      One possible scenario
      is that a defendant might produce a friend in court, allege
      that he was the intended recipient of some rather
      objectionable object that the defendant had thrown and get the
      friend to swear that he had no objection to such things being
      thrown at him.       The defendant would also allege that it was
      unfortunate that the object missed the intended recipient and


                                                                               3
E.R.

       hit someone else.     I am not suggesting that such a defence
       would always be successful in deceiving a court, although it
       might in some cases.     But one objection to providing such a
       defence in the Bill is that it might allow a defendant to
       delay the proceedings in the way described above by
       introducing what ought to be irrelevant issues.


            10.     I am also not sure that it is an advantage that your
       proposed defence would not work when there is no intended
       recipient.     The offence would then catch a person who
       indiscriminately throws paper darts.     Is this what you want?


            11.     Admittedly, similar objections could be raised in
       respect of the defence canvassed in my note of 22 February.
       This might suggest that, if that defence were to be pursued,
       the thing thrown should not be capable of causing offence to a
       reasonable person.     But this suggestion falls foul of the
       argument that the test of reasonableness involves uncertainty.
       For example, would the reasonable person object to a roll of
       lavatory paper being thrown?


            12.     Some of the difficulties are also probably present
       in the defence of implied consent since that must rest on the
       notion that someone could reasonably object to the thing
       thrown.


            13.     I would be grateful for your comments.   One
       possibility might be to explain the problem in the
       instructions and canvass all three possibilities pointing out
       the drawbacks in each.     This would be in the hope that Counsel
       might make some further suggestion that worked.       If we did
       this, we perhaps ought to indicate our own current preference.




                                                              R J CLAYTON
       1 March 1991                                Legal Adviser's Branch

                                                                         4
