4




                 THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                 Room 528
                 50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
                 Direct Line 0171 273 4046 Fax 4028


    Ann Marie Adlington                                             Your reference:
    Solicitors Business Unit
    Room 130                                                        Our reference:
    Municipal Buildings
    LIVERPOOL L69 2DH                                              Date:                July 1997




    HILLSBOROUGH


    As you know, I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of possible
    fresh evidence relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. I am writing to ask for your
    assistance as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group. (You have of course
    already spoken to Mr Bone).

    It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish whether there
    is any significant new evidence which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
    to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant
    evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome of any of the
    proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year. I
    attach my terms of reference.

    I have already seen the opinion of Mr Alun Jones QC and the supporting material provided in
    the form of Annexes A to G, including an affidavit from Mr Houldsworth and a statement
    from Dr Walker. I understand that these were the two principal witnesses upon which you
    rely as fresh evidence.

    If you know of any other evidence which was not available at the Inquiry conducted by Lord
    Taylor of Gosforth or at the Inquests, and which might have affected their outcome or the
    decisions of the authorities in relation to prosecution or police disciplinary proceedings, it
    would be helpful if you could let me have the information below. I would in any event be
    assisted if you could answer question 7 in relation to Mr Houldsworth’s and Dr Walker’s
    evidence.

            1.       Name of witness and address if known.

            2.       Brief summary of their fresh evidence.
        3.     Whether they
               a)   gave evidence at Lord Taylor’s Inquiry
               b)   gave evidence at the Inquest
               c)   made a statement to the police.

        4.     If all the answers to 3 are ‘no’, please say why, as far as you know, this
               witness did not give evidence to the Inquiry or Inquest, or make a
               statement.

        5.     If the answer to any of the questions in 3 is ‘yes’, please say why (so
               far as you know) they did not deal with the matter which you refer to in
               answer to question 2.

        6      Do you know of any documentary evidence (including photographs or
               video film) which is relevant but was not available to Lord Taylor’s
               Inquiry or to the Inquest? If so, please identify it and say where it may
               be found, how you think it is relevant, and why you believe it was not
               available.

       7.      In what way, if at all, do you think that the evidence that the witness
               can give, or the documentary evidence referred to in answer to
               question 6, could affect

               a)       the outcome of Lord Taylor’s Inquiry;
               b)      the verdict of the jury at the Inquest;
               c)      the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions not to take
                       criminal proceedings against any person in connection with the
                       disaster; or
               d)      the decision not to pursue disciplinary proceedings against any
                       police officer?

This information will help me during the preliminary stages of my work, and I should be
grateful if you would let me have it by 1 September. As my scrutiny of the evidence
proceeds I may wish to interview some witnesses directly. I am also willing to consider
interviewing individual witnesses at their request. These interviews will be private and I am
sure that it will be possible to arrange for them to take place at a convenient location either in
Liverpool or London.

The Secretariat to my scrutiny will be happy to discuss possible arrangements with you if you
wish. Please note that the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will
notify you of our permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.

I have sent similar letters to Mr Hicks and Mr Hammond.




LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
