          HOME OFFICE
          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
m                                      Direct line 01-273 2> o   c\
                                      Switchboard 01-273 3000
    38I

    G Kirkbride Esq                                      Your reference
    Director, Department of Road                         DR/LIH/DR 3D
    Grampian Regional Council                           ourreference
    Woodhill House                                      FEP/89 35 40 1
    Westburn Road                                       Date
    Aberdeen AB9 2LU                                    ^ July 1989




    Dear Mr Kirkbride

    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS

    Thank you for your letters of 2 May and 2 June to Mr Turney about
    the group organised by the County Surveyors' Society of sports
    ground safety.  I am sorry that the surge of correspondence which
    we received following the Hillsborough tragedy has meant that I
    have not been able to reply as quickly as I would have liked.

    As a general principle I think any forum which can bring together
    the common interests of those who administer the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act is to be welcomed. A common approach to safety based
    on experience and professional knowledge must, I think, lead to
    an overall improvement in safety and help secure a consistency of
    approach to problems.

    I am not in a position to advise you about police and fire
    authority agreement to the rules of procedure which you think
    local authorities should adopt but you might wish to consider
    whether your group should be linked in some way to other
    appointed officers and disciplines who have direct knowledge and
    experience of the safety considerations at sports grounds.  We
    generally encourage a team approach to safety certification as a
    way of securing co-operation between the certificating authority,
    police, fire and building control.  It makes sense therefore to
    ensure that the procedure rules fully take account of their
    interests and rights to be consulted.  In the wider context of
    spectator safety, ie from the event itself (eg motor racing) you
    might also wish to consider whether your rules should allow for
    liaison with Health and Safety Executive interests.

    I am not aware of any similar group to yours dealing with sports
    ground safety.  The Institute of Building Control organised
    seminars some time ago and the Institution of Structural
    Engineers has, I believe, a working group to consider and prepare
    guidelines for engineers on how the relevant principles of the
    guide to Safety at Sports Grounds might be applied.  The Sports
    Councils may have an interest, especially in new stadium design
    criteria.
The future direction on how best to secure safety at sports
grounds, including any legislation Changes, is now being
considered by the Hillsborough Inquiry.  I cannot predict what
the Inquiry's findings will be. You may therefore feel that it
would be preferable to defer reaching final decisions until the
Inquiry's findings are published.

I have consulted my counterpart in the Scottish Education
Department to whom you wrote on 11 May. He advises that the
Scottish local authority dimension should be taken up with the
Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, Roseberry House,
Haymarket Terrace, Edinburgh and would be grateful if you would
accept this letter as a reply to yours of 11 May.
                                        Yours sincerely




                                        D J Mould
