t




                                                   HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne’s Gate L o n d o n S W 1H 9AT
                                                      Direct line 01-213
                                                   Switchboard 01-213 3000


    O ur reference   POL/87   1027/1/2
    Your reference




    The Clerk to the Police Authority

    The Chief Officer of Police
                                                                             4 December 1987




    Dear. Sir


    HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 77/87

    FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS IN LEGAL PROCEEDINGS


      There-is -statutory authority in section 48 of the Police Act 1964 for
      payments to be made from the police fund to meet expenditure incurred
      by police officers in defending proceedings i^ tort.- Also, acting in
     •pursuance- of its general ^tatut^j^r duty to kaintaih an adequate, .and
      efficient: police force* far its area, the police, authority has
      discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers .in all kinds of
      legal ^proceedings where the officers have acted in .good faith in
     .pursu^nge of their duties, .or the; interests of the force as a whole
    'iare’’‘
           rinvoivad. r The-purpose of this circular is' to give guidance tb
      police authorities to help them in considering requests on. behalf of
    ;officers fio£ financial assistance.    This guidance has been discussed
      and agreed with the local authority and with the police staff
      associations.

    2.     The central principle which should guide consideration of
    individual-.cases is that, where a police authority considers that an
    officer?, has acted in good faith in pursuanc e of his ;duties ,or; that
    the interests' of a force as a whole jare involved, the •officer. Should,
    have the fcuppbrt.p,f the police authority to ensure that he has the
    services of a lawyer and that he should not be out of pocket.        The
    following paragraphs provide general guidance to the different
    classes of proceedings. Payments made to officers in accordance with
    this:guidance will be:eligible“for police grant.



                                                                                               1
 CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS    .

 Prosecution by the Crown Prosecution Service

3.   A n -officer who is the subject of a public prosecution for an
alleged offence committed while carrying out his duties as a police
officer is in the same position as any other defendant and must be
expected to bear the costs of his defence.    If he is acquitted, he
should,     like any other defendant,     look to the court for
reiiiibursement of his expenses.  If the costs are not paid, or not
paid in full from central funds, the police authority *are in a
position to decide, on -the full facts, whether or not to make a
payment to the officer or to the Police Federation if they have
provided the funding.     There may be cases where it is proper to
provide legal advice and/or legal representation even where the
officer is found guilty. This may arise for example in test cases
where the officer has been carrying out a practice hitherto
approved of but is found guilty as a result of that practice beincy
found unlawful by the court in the light of the circumstances ofl
that;particular case,                                  v.v -Mzm    m

.Private Prosecutions                                           -   *

4.   A police officer should be able to carry out his duties in the
confidence that, if he acts in good faith and exercises his
judgement reasonably, his police authority will support him.    If,
m a case where a member of the public brings a prosecution against
an officer, the authority is satisfied that the officer has acted
in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal advice
and/or representation.

^ W h e r e a court decides that a prosecution brought against an
.offxcer was, not brought in good faith, it may order the prosecutor
to pay the whole or any part of the costs incuirred by tliei defence;
again, if the officer is acquitted on indictment, his costs may be
met from central funds.    In either of these cases, the question of
the police authority providing financial support to the officer may
no^. arise.    However, where the costs of an acquitted officer are
n9t awarded by the court or awarded only in part, the police
authority should^ consider whether to reimburse /any costs not
covered, taking into accaunt the reasons, if any, given by the
court for failing to award all costs claimed.           ::J

CIVIL PROCEEDINGS

CiyiL,.,.Act ions— Against the   Chief   Officer   for   Wrongful Acts of
Constables •               -                                 — ""’
                                                                 T ’ 1
                                                                     -----

   ' Under section 48(1) of the Police Act 1964, the chief officer
°f a fores is liable in respect of torts committed by constables
under his direction and control (which includes special constables
and officers of other forces serving in the police area under
mutual aid arrangements)       in the performance or purported
performance of their functions. Under section 48(2) any damages or

                                                                        2
            costs awarded against the chief officer in such proceedings, any
            costs he incurs himself, and any sum paid :in./cc-iis^cfcion,, -with, the
            settlement of a claim, provided the settlement is approved by the
            police authority, must be paid out of the, police fimd, ..In,, such
            cases, therefore, the police authority’s discretion extends only to
           ,whether or not to approve a proposed settlement cf the cla,ia.


           Civil;Actions Against Individual Police Officers                    _

      ,: 7.   Alternatively, the plaintiff -may be awarded daaages agai.nfit an
     ; individual police officer, though he.. carmot. recover the....damages
        .twice over against the chief officer as ^ell* £ art ion 43(4)..of .the
    j Police Act 1964 specifically empowers a police authority J,^p such
         extent as they think fit" to pay cut of thQ police fund- ^ny damages
         or -costs awarded against an officer,, any costs he .incurs h.iiiself,
  „.:ii and any sums paid in connection with the settlement of . a sjaim.
     is This provision applies to actions against officers.■                the
         authority's own force, officers of another force serving th® police
         ajaaa under mutual aid arrangements, and special constables for the
         police area.    In considering whether to give, financial assistance
         the authority will wish to consider in particular whether the
         officer concerned acted in good faith and exercised his judgement
         reasonably. Where the court finds for the officer, hs way seek his
         costs from the plaintiff; should the costs not be awarded or
  .      awarded only in part, the police authority should consider whether
   •- to reimburse any costs not uovared,. taking into .account the
 i r t reasons, if any, given by the court for failing to award all costs
         claimed.                      '        ...                  •• . -
            8.   Joint actions naming both the chief officer and an individual
            police officer may be brought in some cases.      2r such cases it is
 rrg - important that any discussion of the merits and               quantum of the
 - ' P.roPosed settlement should involve allthe.,parties mimed in the
 ;         claim- '.'together with advisers even if - they era ■.■£epr©s<£ryfced by
 vi : different, advisers.                  :.     .      .V/     -v\.
 •:o rr-.;.'.         •- ' ...-•■■■i- r-...            '       ■ "
•. _-s-    ^ % i l Actions Under the Data Prdteqtion Act _qs.fi.4-   ?.>v .
                                                                          ■
                                                                          ;
                                                                          ■:       '
          '•   Under' sections 22 and 23 of the Data Protection vfect 198 4 an
        individual. who suffers damage as £• result of. th?^ iRaqcuratiyy.loss
        or unauthorised disclosure of pe?;aonal data is entitled to
        compensation from the data user. In th«? absence ■of aiiy case -law on
        these provisions, it is unclear whether the acts covered by
        sections 22 and 23 amount to torts, to which thu guidance in
        paragraphs 6 and 7 above applies. If not, sectiop 4:8.of          Police
 .     Act 1964. dees not appl/.       However, the position     is broaflly the
     " same.       Under section 3’8(3) (a)of" the If?84 Apt.   •sonste&l®*?. are
        treated as servants of the chief officer for the pui^po«oj? ,of the
        A c t , . A chief constable is therefore liable for the'‘acts of his
  jC officers falling within sections 22 arid 23 in -the -.same way as he is
v .r liable for their torts under sastion 48(1)         ' The petition Of non-
. % police officers is less clear but it ig.poss.ifc.le .that. in. some cases
        the chief constable might be regarded as having liability for their
        acts. It follows that it would be proper.for the policy ajo&fvority
                                                                                       3
to meet all costs, including any award of compensation, arising
from this liability.  It should be noted that the liability of the
“data user" under the Act is not vicarious but his personal
liability, Therefore his own care in having instituted a system of
ootaining, checking and recording data which would reasonably guard
against error and loss under section 23(3) of the Act should meet
his responsibility under section 22(3) and he should not be held
liable if one of his officers disregards the system established.

10.   Where compensation is sought from an individual officer, the
police authority will wish, in considering whether to meet the
costs which would otherwise fall on the officer, to take account of
the same matters as in exercising their power under section 48(4)
cf the Police Act 1964 (see paragraph 7) .       Police authorities
should apply the same broad principles and in particular, meet the
costs of any compensation awarded against a chief constable where a
non-police officer is at fault and the chief constable is. found tJj
have liability for the actions performed.                    —^    ^


Police Officers Bringing Civil Actions for Defamation

11,   There may be occasions when financial assistance is sought
from a police authority to enable an officer to bring or consider
bringing a civil action for defamation.          An authority has
discretion to give such assistance but it will be eligible for
police grant only if the following criteria are all met:-
      (a)   the defamation is serious;

      (b)   it relates to the actions of an officer acting or
      said to bs acting in the discharge of his duty;

      (c)   it has attracted public attention;

      ■{^) .to bring the action is considered to be in the
      interests of the force or of the police service as a
      whole; and

      C®)   the action stands a reasonable chance of success.

                  central. If only the reputation of the individual
officer is in question, he is in the same position as any other
ciazen^ and must be expected to seek his own remedy.         But an
allegation.against a particular officer may well reflect on the
reputation of-the whole force or be an example of wider allegations
against the force or a significant section of it.     In such cases
the police authority, provided the other criteria are satisfied,
siay reasonably be expected to help to defend the reputation of the
XQrC6 *.




                                                                  4
r




    INQUESTS, PUBLIC ENQUIRIES AND TRIBUNALS

    Legal Representation for Chief Officers

    12.  Any interested party may be legally represented at an 'Inquest
    but at his own expense since expenses are payable only to witnesses
    and jurors.   An interested p a r t y will normally be entitled to be
    legally represented at a public enquiry or other public tribunal.
    Where the interest of the force is affected, it will be appropriate
    for the police authority to provide at its expense for the chief
    officer to be legally represented on behalf of the fores.


    Legal Representation for Individual Officers

    13. Separate representation for individual officers wliOiis interest
    is involved may be necessary. For example, there will fc* occasions
    when (a) the chief officer's legal representative cannot reasonably
    be ©xpected to represent the separate interests of such officers
    and (b) the police authority considers that such interests should
    be represented.   In such cases the authority should give financial
    assistance to the officers.        In considering (b) above, the
    authority will wish in particular to assess whether the officers
    are at risk of being held to blame for actions in connect3(-ft with
    the death to which the inquest relates and whether any such finding
    might give rise to legal proceedings fcr the costs of which the
    police authority would be liable under section 43(1) of the Police
    Act 1964 or for which financial assistance might be appropriate
    within the terms of this circular.


    APPLICATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE

    14.   An officer wishing to seek financial assistance from his
    police authority should have the opportunity in advance of as well
    as on the conclusion of the proceedings to submit to the chief
    officer an application for financial assistance. The chief officer
    should put this, together with his own recommendation to the police
    authority for decision.   The officer should normally     given the
    opportunity by the police authority to make representations to them
    if he wishes to do so.

    15.   If it decides to give financial assistance, the authority
    should inform the officer concerned that, if the information on
    which they based their decision to grant the assistance is &hown in
    subsequent legal proceedings to be inaccurate cr incomplete., the
    authority will normally expect to recover the money unless it is
    satisfied that no culpable misrepresentation was involved and that
    to recover the money would involve the applicant in Ejob^tantial
    hardship.   On the other hand, if an authority refuses financial
    assistance and then discovers in the light of subsequent events
    that such assistance would have been warranted, then financial
    assistance should be granted in order to meet the reasonable costs
    incurred by the officer in seeking legal advice or assistance.


                                                                        5
Assistance from Police Federation Fuads

16. Under Regulation 19 of the Police Federation Regulations 19 69,
as amended, Federation funds may be used to defray legal charges
incurred by ^ a member in connection with criminal proceedings
brought against him for an offence under the road traffic
enactments (other than offences involving driving when impaired by
drink or drugs o r taking a vehicle without authority) , or for
offences of pausing the death or injury of any person, or for any
assault, or in connection with his action for libel or slander. An
officer^ seeking financial assistance in circumstances covered by
Regulation 19 phould seek such assistance from the police authority
in the first instance.   If the police authority does not consider
the request to fall within the terms of this circular, the
Federation may then consider the application within the terms of
Regulation 19.   If the officer receives legal assistance from the
Federation the terms of Home Office Circular No 2 6/1967 will
continue to apply.                                                ^

17.   General enquiries about the content of this circular may be
addressed to Mr Waghorn, Home Office, FI Division on (01) 213 4208.

                                             Yours faithfully




                                             /l\   .   -I   -




                                            M J ADDISON




                                                                 6
