                STATEMENT RELATING TO EVENTS AT HILLSBOROUGH 15/4/89

                       IN PARTICULAR BEHIND THE LEPPING ROAD STAND




I, MAXWELL ROSS of 1                                            am employed as a

Senior Officer in the II M Customs and Excise and wish to make the following

statement consisting of 6 (six) pages signed by me which is true to ny knowledge

and belief.   I request that it be forwarded to the inquiry with the HILLSBOROUGH

DISASTER under LORD CHIEF JUSTICE TAYLOR please.




                                                                       vU
                                                                         M C ROSS

                                                                          19.4.S9
                                           2   .
              EYE WITNESS ACCOUNT OF EVENTS AT LEPPING ROAD STAND 15/4/89

1   )      On 15/4/89 I travelled to SHEFFIELD to see the cup semi-final tie at

           HILLSBOROUGH.

2)         Traffic delays, road works and diversions caused ray late arrival into the

           area near the ground and inadequate near ground parking did not help.

3)         I parked some distance from the ground and joined a procession of mainly

           Nottingham Forest supporters shortly before half past two in a walk/jog

           to the ground.

           I was directed by a policeman to the LEFPING P.OAD end of the ground via

           the MAI'! STAND (SOUTH) only to be turned back and told I had to approach

           from the other side (i.e. NORTH STAND side) (at approx. 14.55 hours).

5)         A policeman at the ’COP end was not able to direct me claiming he was from

           the DONCASTER force and was not familiar with the area.

o)         Another directed me via the "roundabout" stating that the kick off had

           been delayed to allow all the crowd in.

7)         The roar from the crowd some few minutes later belied this statement.

8)         As I approachcd the LEPPING ROAD END I was met by a dozen ormorepolice

           proceeding away from the ground and a group of mounted police were leaving

           the turnstile area.   Approximately 10 - 12 mounted police were paraded

           in line to the right of the turnstiles.

9)         There was little activity in this area with a few fans at the turnstiles

           and some police standing by.

    10 )   The gate at the right of the turnstilewas.partly open.

    U)      I entered through turnstile ’F' and went initially to the right hand stair­

           way not seeing any clear directions and I was directed by a steward to

            the tunnel.

    12 )    No police were in evidence in the area between the tunnel and the turn­

            stiles at this time about 15.08 hours.
                                                                             "V
    13)     I hurried down the tunnel together with other late-c™0’-*    "    x
A single Merseyside steward stood within the tunnel who said the fans are

on the pitch and the players had gone off.

I had earlier heard a tannoy message for Liverpool fans to move away from

the entrances because there had been some crushing.

Movement in the tunnel was relatively free and no exceptional or expected

crushing at the ground end of the tunnel.

X was amazed on entering the terracing to find tne perimeter fence almost

covered with people endeavouring to clicb cut — soi;.e police assisting them

and others forcing than beck - sorae gesturing to spectators tc push back

- a difficult thing to do due to tightly packed bodies.

There v/as much anguished     screaming and shouting - mainly pleas to the

police tc restore order and help the injured.

Some pressure was released with fans bein'; hauled up into the stands or

helped sideways into adjacent pens.

Distressed and injured spectators forced their way back up to the tunnel

and one aan said sor.ie one nad died.

'j’his caused ouch consternation and many nans leit the terracing anu more

and more casualties were helped from the pen to lie on the concrete behind

 the stand.

 I assisted many back to the fresh air where the concourse soon filled up

 with semi-conscious casualties and others in varying states of distress.

 After one visit to the terracing I approached a senior police officer

 standing by the partly open gate near the turnstiles and pleaded with him

 to send some of his men down the tunnel to restore order and make easy

 egress from the terracing.    He turned away amd ignored my request.

 There was no police presence on that concourse until approximately 1530

 hours despite the mounting casualties and there was much relief when about

 five police eventually proceeded down the tunnel-returning at some speed

 with a prostrate body which was rushed to the waiting ambulance.               y/
                                                                        ' \   ; A '7 '" ’
25)      I again approached the senior police officer "guarding” the gate and told

         him that a fleet of ambulances would be needed immediately as the

         devastation within was horrific.   Again he made no reply.

26)      Eventually more police began to arrive at approx 15.40 hours and relief

         turned to understandable anger when it was seen that the police were not

         involving themselves v/ith resusitation and first aid or clearing a passage

         on the terrace to remove the casualties via the obvious exit - i.e. the

         tunnel.

27)      Most of the people   lying on the concrete behind the stand required medical

         or hospital attention which was not available.

28)      They were attended   by distraught friends and strangers who did their best

         to comfort and sustain.

29)      Eventually the concourse floor was cleared and some order wasestablished

         mainly by a tall nan who appeared to be an official steward but displayed

         no identification.    This would be about 1600 hours about the time

         Mr Dalgleish made his announcement to co-operate with the police.

30   )   A little earlier firemen had arrived probably from the blue concertina

          gates and were directed by fans towards the tunnel.

31)      I had seen fr/o ambulances on the field and two behind the V/est stand but

          no great flood had been   observed although manywere inevidence   later -up

          and down the main (A61) road about 1630 hours.



CONCLUSIONS



A)       There were no police presence inside the turnstiles at 1510 hours although

          I had seen a large group leaving the area earlier.

B)       The one steward at the tunnel was powerless to organise or direct the fans     /
          within.
