                                     rue iNuniuci



                                                                                                                    -27 APR 1989

       Related Papers                Subject




     Date first appeared
                             2!;APR
                                                         I/WRITTEN ANSWER ON

      Party :     ^ptSn/Lab/yb/OtEeT*


                 94 M £Department,
                         L p m r'f    iW tflsa!! 5°5th^: To as^ the Secretary of State for the Home
                                   if he has had discussions with the West Midlands Police over the
                         percentage of the costs of the inquiry being undertaken by its officers into the
                         Hillsborough disaster to be borne by central fan/ting     _______




     THIS FILE MUST BE RETURNED TO
     PARLIAMENTARY SECTION BY NOON ON                                                                       ■«i 8    t   I   £ u   £? ’




                      Date                                                          M inutes
to
                                   It is important to avoid acceptance at this stage of central
                                   Government responsibility for the police inquiries into Hillsborough.
(T
 ^A.            I'5   APR 8S       They.start with the responsibility of the South Yorkshire Police,
                                   whSfnlve done the work not only for themselves, but also for the
_WS0 O1          2X7U- '           judicial inquiry, but for their own close involvement in the .
                                   tragedy. If the costs are beyond South Yorkshire's ability to pay,
t-                XW V*            it is (as they now ask) for us to consider the case they put
                    1              forward for support from central funds. That will not be settled
)                2u>fu-            in a day or so (the scale of the cost is itself very unclear -
                                   Mr Dear's own estimate is up to £4m).
                       1,
                                     West Midlands haye no direct responsibility save at the request
                                     of the South Yorkshire force (or as Mr Dear sees it. the inquiry
                                     -itself) whether to establish the facts or potentially (as
                                     isf also agreed) to investigate any complaints under PACE-

                                      It would be helpful if the reply which I have agreed with
                                      Messrs Malone Lee. Whalley:and Watts:eould distinguish between the
                                      two especially given growing political concern in West Midlands.

                                                             ? As in revised draft 'B;.
                                                                                                      cc      Mr Moriarty
                                                                                                              HMCIC ^
                                                                                                              Mr Boys Smith
                                                                                     V fY fC jL               Mr Malone Lee
                                                                              Sfc     J A CHILCOT             Mr Norris
                                                                                      26 April 198?           Mr Addison
                                                                                                              Mr Soden
                                 3 4 3 3 9 -X B D P I2 3 2
                                                                                                              Mr Whalley
                                                                                                              hr
PAPT.TAMFynaRy CPESCTCW PGR WRITTEN ANSWER QW 2fi APRTT. 1QRQ




Mr Brace George (Walsall South): To ask the Secretary of State for the
  Heme Department, if he has had discussions with the West Midlands
  Police over the percentage of the costs of the inquiry being
  undertaken by its officers into the Hillsborough disaster to be borne
  by central funding.




DRAFT KEEEff


     I have been approached by the South Yorkshire Police Authority
about the possibility of special payment from central funds to them to
cover the costs of the police inquiries into the Hillsborough disaster.
We shall give those representations proper consideration, and reply to
them as soon as possible.   I have also heard tram, the West Midlands
Police Authority seeking clarification on the matter of responsibility
for the reimbursement of their costs; we shall reply as soon as
possible in the light of that consideration.
