 From:          N C Sanderson                 cc     Mrs McDougall   F2
                (NSANDERS)                           Miss Forrow
                F2 Division                          Mr Pyne         F2
                Room 529 QAG
                Ext 3141
                21 October 1994


 Mrs J Flaschner
 D Division


 SIR MALCOLM THORNTON MP: ADJOURNMENT DEBATE ON THE DEATH OF KEVIN
 WILLIAMS, WEDNESDAY 26 OCTOBER


 As I mentioned to you, I have now spoken to Gillian Radcliffe in
 the Press Office of South Yorkshire Police (0742-523150) for her
 assessment of the issues in the case. I set these out below, but
 in brief we agreed that it now looked as if this was essentially
 a Coroner's matter, and that therefore D Division would lead and
 Mr Baker would speak in the House. Gillian Radcliffe is sending
 by post today:

                the video tape of the Cook Report;

                a complaint about the fairness of the Cook Report made
                by the South Yorkshire Police to the ITC;

                the ITC adjudication, which has just been made, which
                dismisses the complaint, but accepts that there was
                some inaccuracies in the Cook Report.


 Background

 2.   The Cook Report, which was broadcast in June, alleged that
 there was evidence that Kevin Williams was alive at 3.50pm on the
 afternoon of the disaster.     This was significant because the
 inquest had not looked at events after 3.15pm, since the Coroner
 had taken the view that all the victims were clinically dead by
 this time.


 3.   The evidence in question was a statement made by Deborah
 Martin, a special constable in the South Yorkshire Police.     In
 her first statement she said that about 3.50pm Kevin Williams sat
 up in the mortuary and called for his mother. Because this did
 not fit in with any other evidence, including a video recording
 of the mortuary, West Yorkshire Police, who were undertaking the
 inquiry into the disaster, interviewed Deborah Martin a second
 time. This resulted in a second statement which did not support
 the evidence in the first statement.       Both statements were
 available to the inquest.



* NCS-879.BAB
4.   Deborah Martin has subsequently said that she was put under
pressure to make the second statement, but this does not appear
to be a significant part of the case.   The police believe that
Deborah Martin was confused and upset at the time she made her
first statement, and on the face of it, it was perfectly
reasonable of West Yorkshire to try to reconcile the conflict of
her evidence with other evidence.


5.   The Cook Report went on to suggest to Sir Malcolm Thornton,
during the programme, that Deborah Martin's evidence was grounds
for re-opening the inquest, and the MP agreed.


6.   Following the programme South Yorkshire made a complaint
about inaccuracy and bias to the Independent Television
Commission. The burden of the complaint was that the programme
had used selectively the wide range of material which they had
given to it, including the video of the mortuary which did not
support Deborah Martin's account.


7.   The ITC responded to the complaint last week, rejecting it,
but accepting that there was some errors of fact in the
programme. South Yorkshire Police suggest that the MP had held
back from seeking his adjournment debate until the ITC finding
was known.  Sir Malcolm's involvement stems from the fact that
Kevin Williams' mother is his constituent.


8.   All this suggests that the debate will focus on the call for
a re-opening of the inquest, rather than on allegations of police
impropriety. It is significant that the ITC apparently accepted
South Yorkshire's suggestion that the attempt by Roger Cook in
the programme to "doorstep" Superintendent Duckenfield (the
superintendent in charge of the police at Hillsborough) was
irrelevant to the matters in the report.


9.   You will, nevertheless, clearly need some background
material for use if necessary by Mr Baker on the Police
Complaints Authority inquiry and on the reason why discipline
proceedings were not taken forward.   There is material on our
files, and I would be grateful if Mrs McDouqall would prepare a
note for you on her return on Monday.   If by any chance she is
not available Mr Pyne (2433) will be able to help.        As I
mentioned, I am on leave next week.




                               N C SANDERSON

NCS-879.BAB
                     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

BACKGROUND NOTE


1    On 15 April 1989, 95 fans of the Liverpool Football Club
were crushed to death at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.
The police, having been unable to control fans arriving late for
the match without tickets, many of them drunk and intent on
forcing an entrance, had ordered a gate opened to admit them to
the terraces.   The late arrivals rushed down a tunnel straight
ahead giving access to the ground creating a crowd movement which
crushed those at the front of the crowd to death.

2    In conducting the subsequent inquiry, Lord Justice Taylor
asked the West Midlands Constabulary to make investigations on
his behalf. Subsequently, further inquiries had to be made and
a number of statements taken (many under caution) to determine
whether criminal or disciplinary proceedings should be brought
against a police officer, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
Sheffield City Council or their advisers.

3    The Police Complaints Authority decided, when considering
the result of these investigations, that two officers of the
South Yorkshire Constabulary should answer to disciplinary
charges of neglect of duty. The senior of these officers, Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield subsequently resigned on grounds of
ill health, and the PCA accepted that the remaining officer,
Superintendent Murray, should not be required to answer charges
in the absence of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.




GIM-M084.GIM                    1
