                        t/l/n

                                115 JAN 1998

                                  -^72?

                                          '   a®
product code 917-0003
                                                                    H o m e O ffic e
                                                                   QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                   LONDON SW1H 9AT


Claire Curtis-Thomas MP                   Our Ref:  PW /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /8 0
House of Commons                                    PO 2 2 7 2 8 /9 7
LONDON                                    Your Ref: Hillsborough/1.9/TR/01
SW 1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 9 December 1997 to Jack Straw in support of
recent letters sent to him by Mr Hicks, of the Hillsborough Family Support
Group, and Mr Moneypenney, of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party, about
the scrutiny into the Hillsborough Disaster currently being carried out by
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

The Home Secretary has consulted Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on the points
raised in both letters. The Judge indicated that he has received the full co­
operation of South Yorkshire Police throughout his scrutiny, and he has been
given full access to the material held by the force. He further indicated that he
has seen no sign that the police are deliberately obstructing requests for
information from other parties, and Richard Wells, Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire, has assured the Home Secretary that the force has made every
effort to respond to all requests for information.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is satisfied that all material which should be available
for his examination has been available to him, and that he has been able to
investigate fully the issues raised by the Family Support Group and others.

The timetable for the scrutiny remains a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
The Home Secretary indicated in his statement to the House on 3 0 June that
although it was hoped the judge would be able to produce his report by the end
of the year, this was a judgement which only Lord Justice Stuart-Smith could
make in the light of the representations he received. In the event, the number of
representations was such that he was unable to complete his report within his
original timescale. However, he expects to be in a position to present his report
to the Home Secretary shortlv.




          V         y            ALUN MICHAEL        V /



                                        /
Claire Curtis-Thomas MP                        Our Ref:  PW /97 5 /2 1 8 0 /8 0
House of Commons                                          2 2 7 2 8 /9 7
LONDON                                         Your Ref: Hillsborough/1.9/TR/01
SW 1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 9 December to Jack Straw in support of recent
letters sent to him by Mr Hicks, of the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and
Mr Moneypenney, of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party, about the scrutiny
into the Hillsborough Disaster currently being carried out by Lord Justice Stuart-
Smith.

The Home Secretary has consulted Lord Justice Stuart-Smith on the points
raised in both letters. The Judge indicated that he has received the full co­
operation of South Yorkshire Police throughout his scrutiny, and he has been
given full access to the material held by the force. He further indicated that he
has seen no sign that the police are deliberately obstructing requests for
information from other parties, and Richard Wells, Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire, has assured the Home Secretary that the force has made every effort
to respond to all requests for information.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is satisfied that all material which should be available
for his examination has been available to him, and that he has been able to
investigate fully the issues raised by the Family Support Group and others.

The timetable for the scrutiny remains a matter for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
The Home Secretary indicated in his statement to the House on 30 June that
although it was hoped the judge would be able to produce his report by the end
of the year, this was a judgement which only Lord Justice Stuart-Smith could
make in the light of the representations he received. In the event, the number of
representations was such that he was unable to complete his report within his
original timescale. However, he expects to be in a position to present his report
to the Home Secretary shortly.




                                 ALUN MICHAEL
                 Minister's Case - Draft Reply |

Divisional       PW/97 5/2180/80
Reference:
Private Office   22728/97
Reference:

Notes For        Claire Curtis-Thomas writes in support of
Minister:
                 recent letters to the Home Secretary from
                 Trevor Hicks of the Hillsborough Family
                 Support Group, and Colin Moneypenney of the
                 Hillsborough Disaster Working Party.

                 Both letters referred to problems the victims'
                 families claimed to be having in obtaining
                 documentation from South Yorkshire Police,
                 and requested the timescale for the scrutiny be
                 increased in order for full representations to be
                 made. The Home Secretary replied to both
                 letters on 4 December (copies enclosed).

                 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was unable to
                 complete his report before the end of the year
                 as he had intended, and he is now expected to
                 do so before the end of January.        ______

Enclosures:



Copy To:



Contact          Mike Ward
Details:         OPPU
                 Room 528
                 QAG
                                                      Q U E E N A N N E ’S G AT E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT

                                                                                       0 4 DEC

     Trevor Hicks Esq
     Chairman
     Hillsborough Family Support Group
     Fern Hill Barn
     Newhouse Lane
     Long Preston
     Skipton
     BD23 4QU




C



     Thank you for your letter of 9 November about the difficulties which you say
     have been experienced in obtaining material from South Yorkshire Police and
     others and the need, therefore, to extend the timescale for Lord Justice Stuart-
     Smith s scrutiny.

    As you know, I asked for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's advice on the issues which
    you raised. Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, has also
    written to me after the contents of your letter were disclosed to him bv the
    media.                                                                 1


     I should make it clear that, having appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to
     conduct this scrutiny, the management of the scrutiny is entirely a matter for the
    Judge. Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it
    would be possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale
    c u. ‘mf*telY a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-
    Smith that if he reached the conclusion that more time was needed to complete
    his work, this would certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice
    Stuart-Smith has indicated to me that he hopes to be able to keep to his original
    timescale for completion of the report. I understand that he has now written to
    you and other interested parties to confirm this.

    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he has been given full access
    to the material held by South Yorkshire Police and that the force has co-operated
    throughout his scrutiny. He has not seen any sign that the police are
    deliberately obstructing requests for information from other parties. He has also
    expressed surprise that difficulties should have been encountered in obtaining
 hospital records, (which are held by the hospital, and not the police), if the
 request was made by a properly authorised representative of the victim's family
 In his letter to me, Richard Wells has indicated that the force has made every
effort to respond to requests for information within the constraints of the
Coroners' Rules and considerations of witness confidentiality. He states that no
family is waiting for all or part of a body file to be released, although the force is
processing requests for photographs from two families having already supplied
laser copies.

From what I have been told by Richard Wells and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it
appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material which should be
available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him,
and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised by the
Family Support Group and others.

The Judge has indicated that he would have arranged for the archive of material
to be removed from the South Yorkshire Police if there had been any doubt as to
its continuing integrity there, but that this was not his view. He does not,
therefore, consider it justifiable to incur the considerable logistical difficulties and
costs involved in such an operation.

You have also written to me about the scrutiny's terms of reference. I will
consider the points you have raised and reply as soon as possible.




                                   JACK STRAW
                                                    Q U E E N A N N E ’ S GAT E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT


                                                                                     0 4 DEH tor

    Colin Moneypenney Esq
    Clerk to the Hillsborough Disaster
    Working Party
    Liverpool City Council
    PO Box 88
    Municipal Buildings
    Dale Street
    Liverpool
    L69 2DH




C

    Thank you for your letter of 14 November on behalf of Hillsborough Disaster
    Working Party in support of the Family Support Group's request for the
    timescale of the scrutiny to be extended.

    Although I indicated when announcing the scrutiny that we hoped it would be
    possible to complete the scrutiny by the end of the year, the timescale is
    ultimately a matter for the Judge to decide. I have told Lord Justice Stuart-
    Smith that if he decides that more time is needed to complete his work, this
    would certainly be within his discretion. However, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    has indicated to me that he expects to keep to his original timescale for
    completion of the report.

    Trevor Hick's letter expressed concern about access to information held by the
    South Yorkshire Police. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has also assured me that he
    has been given full access to the material held by the force and that the force
    has co-operated throughout his scrutiny. From what I have been told by the
    Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith it
    appears that, for the purposes of the scrutiny, all the material which should be
    available for examination by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has been available to him,
    and that the scrutiny has been able to investigate fully the issues raised by the
    Family Support Group and others.

    The terms of reference which I have given Lord Justice Stuart-Smith for the
    Scrutiny will allow him to establish conclusively whether any material evidence
    was overlooked in the consideration of the causes of the disaster or the
consideration of criminal or other proceedings. The Judge will also be able to
recommend any other action which should be taken in the public interest. His
terms of reference are, therefore, very wide indeed and I am confident that they
will allow him to carry out a full scrutiny of the evidence which has been
submitted by the families and others.

As you know, the Judge spent three days in Liverpool meeting the families of
those who died and listening to their concerns. He has said that he found these
meetings fruitful and constructive, and that they will help him to write his report.
I do, of course, understand the distress caused by the Judge's comment to
Mr Phil Hammond. The Judge has said on the record that he deeply regrets this
remark, which he made off-the-cuff and without any intention to offend or for it
to be taken seriously. He has made clear that the behaviour of the fans is not
the subject of the Scrutiny.

I am satisfied that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will produce a thorough report in
which the families and the public can have confidence. As I have indicated
before, I will make public the advice given by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in his
report, and will take whatever action is needed if he suggests material evidence
about the disaster has been overlooked.




                                                            7




                                  JACK STRAW
                                                                           Puo[<\t SlmolfaO
                                Claire Curtis-Thomas, MBA BSc CEng FIMechE
                                                 MP for Crosby

                                    Elledge House, 13, Crosby Road South,

                                     *r
                                         Waterloo, Liverpool L22 1RG

                             Telephone:0151 928 7250           Fax:0151 928 9325
                                                                                   X
Rt Hon Jack Straw MP.,
Home Secretary,
Home Office,
50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
                                             IV)         W
LONDON
SW1H 9AT




Our ref.Hillsborough/1 9/TR/01                                  9 December 1997
(Please quote this reference number in all correspondence)




Dear Jack,

HILLSBOROUGH

I am writing in support o f letters already written to you by the Hillsborough Family
Support Group (9 Nov) and the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party set up by
Liverpool City Council (14 Nov).

In view o f the delays referred to in these letters and your stated desire to ensure a full
and independent scrutiny o f all the evidence, it seems to me vital that a) more time
must, if necessary be given to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny, b) there must be
an insistence that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has immediate access to all the available
evidence, particularly from the South Yorkshire Police.

If this scrutiny is not seen by the relatives to have had the time and the access to the
evidence that it requires, it will fail to fulfil its primary purpose.

Yours sincerely,


                                                                       aaAiaoau
                                                                           i66l    I

Claire Curtis-Thomas                                                   AaisiDaa nddo
