Ws, 11. 3/hillsbl9 .dm


From:   D J Mould                       cc   Ms' Craig
        G2 Division                          Ms Rex
        X3099                                Ms Nicholson
                                             Mr Yates
        3 November 1989                      Mr Chilcot
                                             Mr Hammond
                                             Mr Moriarty
                                             Mr Boys Smith
                                             HMCIC
                                             Mr Turney
                                             HMCIFS
                                             Mr Bolton
                                             Mr Goddard
                                             Mr Mower
                                             Mr Whalley
                                             Mr Clayton
                                             Mr Lidington
                                             Mr Yeo
                                                                   n
Miss Dent
Private Office



SAFETY AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS:   HILLSBOROUGH - CORRESPONDENCE FROM
MR EDEY

You asked for advice and a draft reply intended for PS signature.

2.   You may recall that this series of correspondence ^dates
back to Mr Edey1s published letter in The Times commenting on
the Hillsborough Inquiry1s interim recommendations and the Home
Secretary's responsibility, as he saw it, to oversee local
authorities. This culminated with him making application last
month for a judicial review. The latest position on this is^that
his application was refused on 25 October. We understand it is
still possible for him to appeal against refusal.

3,   The draft letter attached answers the points_ raised ^by
Mr Edey as far as possible.   We do not have exhaustive details
of safety certificates (general or special) or prohibition
notices issued by local authorities. I believe the Home Office
originally requested copies of the former in order to assist in
monitoring the impact of designation on football clubs because
of their expressed fears on the cost of certification and its
effect on authorised ground capacities.        Copies of safety
certificates and amendments to them are still sent to u s .^ They
have been useful from time to time and we have not tried to
dissuade local authorities from continuing the practice. However
the details we hold are by no means exhaustive. Although copies
of prohibition notices are sent to us from time to time they are
unsolicited.    There is no statutory requirement on_ local
authorities to copy either safety certificates or prohibition
notices to this Department.
E.
     %.   Both Ministers and Private Office have afforded a generous
     allocation of time to Mr Edey and his correspondence. In my view
     therefore it is perhaps now the right time to wean him away from
     Private Office and direct him towards the Division responsible
     for the subject in question. I suggest that Mr Edey now receives
     an official reply under my signature or that of Mr Bolton.
     I have spoken to Mr Edey and advised that he can expect a reply
     to be sent today (3.11) or Monday. Would you let me know if this
     is acceptable please?




                                              D J MOULD



     FEP/89 35/48/109



     Enc
                                                FILE NUMBER ..FEP/89 35/48/109.
DRAFT LETTER

ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE




TO                              ENCLOSURES            COPIES TO BE SENT TO


Mr R Edey
Lower Flat
Field House North
West Street
HARROW
Middlesex HA1 3ER



                                               (FULL ADDRESSES, IF
(FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                          NECESSARY)


                    LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ..? G2 Division.......
                                                        (NAME OF SIGNATORY)



                    Dear Mr Edey


                    Thank you    for your    letter    of   2 3 October   to the Home
                    Secretary about football ground safety.


                    The Home Office circulars sent to you on 19 October did
                    not include those giving guidance to Part III of the Fire
                    Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987
                    Act) copies of which are enclosed.          As you will see Part
                    III of the 1987 Act came into force on 1 January 1989.
                    Part IV of that Act came into force as from 1 June 1988.


                    The circulars already in your possession together with
                    those   enclosed with this    letter complete the guidance
                    issued by the Home Office to local authorities on the
                    operation of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the
                    1975 Act)   and Parts    II and III of the 1987 Act.          The
                    Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide), of
which you are already aware, also contains guidance to
local authorities on sports grounds safety.


The regulations made by Statutory Instrument 1976/1263
were revoked by the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations
1987 (SI 1987/1941) a copy of which is enclosed.


The ground used by Torquay United Football Club is not
designated under the 1975 Act.       I understand that home
games of Maidstone United Football Club are played at
Dartford football ground which is designated under the
1975 Act as is the ground used by Scarborough United.


There is no statutory duty upon local authorities to send
to the Home Office copies of notices issued under section
10 of the 1975 Act or to copy safety certificates as
requested   in Home   Office   Circular   7/1986.   I am not
therefore able to provide the details requested in the
last paragraph of your letter.


                               Yours sincerely
