                                                                                                   4L&CC
SIR CECIL CLOTHIER, KCB, QC                  POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY
Chairman
                                                                          10 Great George Street
                                                                              London SW1P 3AE

                                                                      Telephone: 01-JJ5   273 6400



           Peter Wright Esq CBE
           Chief Constable
           South Yorkshire Police
           Snig Hill
           SHEFFIELD
           S3 8LY                                                             18 April 1989




           I write to confirm the conversation I had last night with Mr Hayes about the
           investigation of the Hillsborough disaster. May I first express my sympathy
           with you and your officers in the great misfortune which has befallen you.

           Mr Hayes and I first discussed the relevance of Section 88 of the Police and
           Criminal Evidence Act 1984. On learning from him th at Mr Geoffrey Dear was
           to work with Lord Justice Taylor (an understanding which is confirmed by the
           Home Office), I expressed the view th a t the need to have a civilian presence
           from this Authority was greatly lessened because th at would be provided by
           Lord Justice Taylor and his colleagues. I could therefore understand th at you
           might not feel any necessity to refer the m atter to us under Section 88.

           However it is possible, indeed probable, th at a complaint or complaints will be
           received hereafter from the public calling in question the very m atters or some
           of them into which Mr Dear will be enquiring on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor.
           Such complaints will pursuant to law have to be referred to us if they allege
           th at death or serious bodily injury resulted from police conduct. And we for
           our p art would be bound to agree to supervise them.

           In that event, the practical and sensible course, it seems to me, would be for
           you to appoint Mr Dear to be the investigating officer for the statutory
           purposes of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 and for me to liaise
           with Lord Justice Taylor (with whom I am of course personally acquainted) to
           ensure that the necessary public reassurance is available. I personally would
           then fulfil the role of supervising officer pursuant to the Act.

           Of course any complaints which were on the face of them unrelated to the
           disaster but merely such as often occur wherever a crowd is gathered, could be
           dealt with in the ordinary way by your Complaints Department.




                                              -   1   -
     I will be glad to hear from you as soon as possible whether you feel th at these
     provisional arrangements would be satisfactory. The m atter is one of some
     urgency because on Wednesday next, the 26 April, our Annual Report is due to
     be released and a t the accompanying press conference I am very likely to be
     asked, as I was on the Today programme this morning, what part the Authority
     would be obliged to play in these disastrous events.




Mr Chilcot
F2 Division                            -   2   -


All Members
SEOs
