                 Association of Chief Police Officers
                      of England, Wales and Northern Ireland                     - 8 1UN1990
                         GENERAL PURPOSES COMMITTEE               [   * 2 3
                                                                                           K v Sw cW x
                                                                                           Hr
Chairman:                                           From:       Hon Secretary:
C SMITH Esq CVO QPM B Soc Sc                                    J S EVANS LL.B FBIM
Chief Constable                                                 Chief Constable
Thames Valley Police                                            Devon and Cornwall Constabulary
                                                                Headquarters Middlemoor
                                                                Exeter EX2 7HQ
                                                                Telephone 0392 52101
 CC/GP/SO/PA
                                                                Staff Officer : ext. 359
                                                                Fax number : ext. 860
    June 1990


 J.L. Go^erard,
 F8 Division'
 Home Office
 Qu e^^Anne ’s Gate
 L o n ^ R SW1H 9AT



                                     'tc>    GT& "ZZrOxsULtS.                        £%
                          *v\^\




                       LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR *S FINAL REPORT:                                (fe
                  RECOMMENDATIONS FOR HEW OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

 I write in response to your letter of 26 February 1990 concerning the above
 subject and have pleasure in enclosing a copy letter from Assistant Chief
 Constable, Malcolm GEORGE, of the Greater Manchester Police in respect of
 four recommendations.

 This composite reply has been formulated following circulation to all chief
 constables   in  England,  Wales  and  Northern  Ireland as well    as  the
 Superintendents' Association.

 I trust this information will be of some help.




                                     f Constable
                                      Secretary
o
                                                                                 2028



                                                                          GMG/JD/TAYLOR
                                                                 11 April 1990




      Dear Sir,


    ^ fcjQRD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S         FINAL   REPORT:   RECOMMENDATIONS    FOR    NEW
    " o f f e n c e s AND PENALTIES


       I write on behalf of Mr. Anderton, in my capacity as Secretary of
       the ACPO General Purposes Sub-Committee on Hooliganism at Sporting
       Events.
            0

       As was previously agreed, I circulated the correspondence from Mr.
       John Goddard at the Home Office, to ail^Chie^ConstablesiEEnjafiand.
    ' agftl.ea«AO%^^hfi.r.n»Ireland4 as well as the ^ S ^ r i n t e n d e n | | '
       ^ s ociatibnaS4nd invited their observations      on the proposed
       offences.   The majority of those responses has been received and I
       have prepared a synopsis of same which I forward to you in your
       capacity as Secretary of the ACPO General Purposes Sub-Committee
       for further attention.

       Briefly there are four recommendations

       Recommendation 70 deals with action to prevent sales of tickets by
       ticket touts; Recommendation 71 deals with three specific public
       order offences; Recommendation 72 considers the use of attendance
       centre; and Recommendation 73 the use of electronic monitoring as
       deterrents.

       RECOMMENDATION 70

       "Consideration should be given to creating an offence of selling
       tickets for and on the day of a football match without authority
       from the Home Club to do so
  Touting in general, is discussed in paragraph 273.9 of the Final
  Report and reflects the concern expressed in the ACPO submission
  (penned by Mr. David Phillips) on the subject of ticket touts.
  The general observation made in paragraph 278 regarding a loose
  interpretation of existing legislation to control ticket touts is
  generally accepted.. Furthermore there is general support for a
  substantive offence to deal with the problem.

  Three variations of offences are outlined in paragraph 279 of the
  Report viz.

                  ?ticfiets^rf6^^ndri5n;7^T'r'day---i. of. ‘a,- football                                    match
^"without -author ity from' the h o m e 'club to do so ./?

   ii)  To sell tickets within a specified radius of the ground on
   the day of a match.

     iii) To sell tickets for a football match at more than face value.
     The ACPO, through the Hooliganism Sub-Committee, has endorsed the
    precursor to all-ticket fixtures as outlined in paragraph 271-2.
    However when a fixture has been designated "all-ticket", the
^ypositive action proposed to deal with ticket touts can only serve
^ ^ t o dissuade non-ticket holders from attending fixtures on a
     speculative basis. This is a desirable result.

  The pragmatism in the responses from all forces 1eant^ ^ h eavy ■fciasG^
                i|:st|?.siiggesytfiti^ with some qualification. There is
  minority .^conditional^ support for the second suggestion and,
  whilst empathy was expressed for the third suggestion the onerous
  burden of proof, coupled with the probable hostility of the •
  prospective     purchaser,         effectively    forestalled  serious
  consideration of same.

  The consensus view is that the first suggestion is preferred and
  offers a straightforward offence is which more easily capable of
  proof.  The second suggestion received minimal support and the
  third received only adverse criticism of perceived impractical
  method of obtaining evidence and enforcement.          A significant
  comment centred on the need to encompass not only the sale but
  also the offering for sale, displaying, auctioning or inviting
  tender for the sale of any ticket. 'IHe‘^'need'rwas " also ■identified*
  g o r ^ r p f i w e r r o f : ’a r ^ s ^ ^ d fep d w e r 'lo £ r s e iz u r e ^ ,fQ r ^ ^ l ^ e ' o f f i c e r " I w
  ftK eim easureT is'"jtOL-be’- - " t r u ly j e ff e c tiv e

 . The matter of authority of the home club elicited suggestions that
 / the matter needed to be in writing. Leaving aside matters of
/ forgery of such written authority,      a more pragmatic approach
   would be for all clubs to undertake not to give permission for any
   person to sell tickets on the day of a fixture. That measure could
   include football club outlets, which given the minimal percentage
j of all-ticket fixtures vis a vis the number of football fixtures
* generally, is not an unreasonable suggestion.
   Additional comment concerned   the need for clubs to demonstrate
   responsible attitudes towards the allocation of tickets, including
 . those to players and officers. It may be advisable for warnings
 / about ticket touts to be printed on tickets. There may have to be
/ an allowance for the collection of pre-paid tickets on the day of
   the match.      One Force, with vast experience of national rugby
  |matches emphasized the benefits of return ticket procedure whereby
  ?supporters    are refunded the full face value of unused tickets to
   offset   the temptation to sell on the day         of a fixture.
   Significant minority comment opined that the procedure should bee
   expanded to cover other mass gatherings, such as pop concerts and
   tennis tournaments.

    Any estimate of implications for police resources must remain
    speculative, ^^'fey^gmav/w'ellthe'no'further demands made^ on police,
   ||esources% than currently/Jersist s-*r'jjjfTouts have already adapted
    the rigorous attentions of the service, using,             for example,
    observers to warn of police activity and runners who supply agents
    with small quantities of tickets from a nearby "bank". There has
    also been a widespread use of cellular telephones for the same
    purpose.      Possible further expansion could include the use of a
    advance credit sales, though whether a supporter will pay an
^ ^ n k n o w n person without immediate receipt of the goods is a matter
^^>f conjecture.

  It is accepted that the most rigorous application of police
  resources will not totally eradicate the problem of ticket touts.
  The effect of this legislation, however,      can only serve to
  discourage ticket touts from operating,     especially close to
  stadiS, make the tasks of illegal ticket sales more onerous and
  encourage a more responsible attitude from clubs and supporters
  alike.


  RECOMMENDATION 71

  Each of the following activities at a designated sports           ground
  should be a made a specific offence:

   i)     throwing a missile

  ii)     chanting obscene or racial abuse

   iii)   going on the pitch without   reasonable excuse.
 There was a minority view that the provisions of the present
 Public Order Act are sufficient for policing needs. There was also
 minority       comment,     against    Lord    Justice    Taylor's   personal
 preference (paragraph 299), that a general public disorder offence
 as recommended by Lord Justice Popplewell, suitably phrased to
 encompass elements of the above, was more easy to detect and
 prove. tejSeyertheless ,t;;even:some supporters of. the former proposal {
j o i ned .the. .majority'-.in endorsing^tlfe^cfeation of specific offences1 ^
 gs probably the most effective response to misbehaviour.             ^
 It must not be forgotten, however, that these recommendations are
 ’’tailored" towards the eventual removal of perimeter fencing and a
 conditioning of supporters towards a more responsible attitude.
                               the:;Vremx>yaliof? perimeter^.fencing, albeit a *
^desirable'/long term view, is not on the horizon at present               The'
 creation of such offences will only be effective if capable of
 realistic interpretation and proof. Work is in hand to endeavour
 to streamline the arrest procedure, so as to discourage the use of
 ejections'.      Any perceived lack of efficacy of these offences will
 be inevitably reflected by resorting to the ejection procedure.

 The simple, straightforward phraseology lends itself to ease of
 proof   and   detection  save   for  the   caveat  of   extracting
 perpjgKator(s) from a massed crowd. The reaction of crowds cannot
 be rSJpistically pre-determined. An adverse reaction can be offset
 however, by the use of the police officers overriding discretion.
 This, combined with the expertise in the use of CCTV, post-match
 arrests, etc., should provide the necessary flexible and effective
 approach.

 There may be merit in amending the phraseology of the outline
 offences. F*or example use of the term "launch" instead of "throw"
 a missile can include the use of catapults and hand-held rockets.
 The- third offence of pitch invasion may not need the rider
 "without reasonable excuse". The absolute offence is more readily
 proved.  Moreover the need was identified that a power of arrest
 is an integral part of effective implementation.

 The demands on police resources for implementation of these
 offences remains an unknown quantity, fehey .may m ake, no greater^
R e mands;.than.-,^currently^exists,;< ^ The problem will need to be
 monitored against the backcloth of Lord Justice Taylor's Final
 comment in paragraph 301, "....The Police will in this as in many
 other    situations have    to   exercise    sensible discretion and
 j udgement.


 RECOMMENDATION 72


 Consideration should be given to extending the Courts powers to
 make attendance centre orders for football related offences on
 occasions of designated football matches. The provision should be
 capable of imposition on an offender aged 21 or over and subject
    to a maximum of 72 hours in the case of an offender aged 17 or
    over.

  With the demise of imposed national football membership schemes,
  now that the provisions of Part 1 of the Football Spectators Act
  1989 are not to be implemented, it is probable that exclusion

/ orders will continue on force. The efficacy oi the present scheme
  of exclusion orders is to be raised at a meeting of the NFIU
  Steering Committee.       The observations       of forces   are not   a
  reflection of the present system of exclusion orders and are made
  with the understanding that court powers allied to exclusion
  orders to make attendance centre orders will require amendment
  before they encompass the appropriate age group and offences of
   football violence.
 ^ ^ g ^ ffi^gen^ralI^3^rffytHatcrthe? use of attendance centres, as y
  ^Beo&enSedV:"'' appeared1^ a n r effective'^ "response      to  footballv<
^ hop 1 iganism. 'A%iinority view perceived a need for more effective
   monitoring to ensure maximum benefit.
  jgfoffmajority viewr is• that ; the- implications for manpower resources
  jgill probably reflect an increase./* Generally, attendance centres
   are opened on a regular basis, e.g. alternate Saturdays and are
    staffed by off duty police officers. Football fixtures are

•  generally held every Saturday and there are some Sunday and
   weekday matches.      It is probable that demands will
   throughout the season, nearly eight months of the year! There are
                                                                    double

   clear implications for staffing levels.           Because many of the
   reportees fail to attend, it will be requisite for immediate
   attention to be given to such non-compliance by police officers to
   negate attendance at fixtures.        In turn, it may well be necessary
   for 'court attendance by the police, usually in duty time, to
   substantiate the offence.

     Whilst support for this proposal was endorsed by     a majority of
     forces ; @CSlly^af"majlJrity*‘enV^^                        demands ^
    ^ff police resources.#


    RECOMMENDATION 73


    Consideration should be given to the use of electronic monitoring
    (tagging)   in   the   sentencing  of   offenders  convicted   of
    football-related offences.

    |^ere:;was- no- outright support for this, suggestion.   A minority/
    <view rejected the suggestion./’ The vast majority proffered a
     cautious view reflecting a need to be satisfied that technology is
     sufficient for the purpose; that further conclusive research is
     necessary; and even questioning the expense involved.    There was
     some expression that tagging is not an effective deterrent.

    The schemes are not implemented by the police but by private
    (security) companies from their own control rooms.      ^was?mooted^
    €Kat;_a; delay, of say four, hoursL_between, violation and the matter^
Hieing reported to the police would obviate the deterrent effect as
 the perpetrator could visit a match and return home before the
'police   were  apprised.   Should  such   violation   be  reported
 immediately, then the same demands on the police for enquiry after
 non-attendance at attendance centres is equally yalid.

All in all, the suggestion, at the present time is not supported.

 These views reflect the responses of ffintlgthe. thirty three Forces/
||hich responded to the enquiry with additional comment from the
^Superintendents' Association.   I trust the synopsis will be of
 some use to you in your deliberations.




                             Yours sincerely,


                           Assistant Chief Constable
                         Secretary - ACPO G.P. Sub-Committee
                           on Hooliganism at Sporting Events




 J.S.Evans Esq., LLB. FBIM
 Chief Constable,
 Devon and Cornwall Constabulary,
 Middlemooj;.
 EXETER
