                                                                       ■08 OCT      ?p.9$
E.R
      19-10.JS                                                10 OCT 1289 11
                                                                          jOtSl

      From:     J L Goddard                                  Ms   Nicholson
               .F8 Division                                  Ms   Rex
                ext 3314                                     Mr   Chilcot
                                                             Mr   Boys Smith
                 6 October 1989                              Mr   Turney
                                                             Mr   Mower
                                                             Mr   Hale
                                                             Mr   Smith
                                                             Mr   Lidington




      Mr Storr       :


      policing,football;i; ;;:mLEs    v Holland ii octoberi989           ■


      The Home Secretary has asked for background briefing on the
      policing arrangements in hand for the Wales v Holland World
      Cup qualifying watch to be played next Wednesday, 11 October
      in Wrexham.


      2.      Co-operation front the Dutch police has been invaluable.
      The Dutch TREVI permanent football correspondent who is also
      head of their small national football intelligence unit
      travelled to the UK last week to meet British Transport Police
      and attend a pre-match meeting in Wrexham.       Following the
      request made by the Home Secretary to the Dutch government, 5
      Dutch police *spotters' will be in Wrexham from Monday to
      Thursday.                                                                -.      ;v -r




      3.      A capacity crowd of 20,000 is not likely, with a home        ,
      crowd of no more than 10,000 expected.       Information received
      from Holland indicates that the match is raising little
      enthusiasm there.       Some 3,000   tickets are being sold by the
      Dutch Football Association but, additionally,      some 200 fans
      are expected to travel without tickets.       North Wales Police
      intend to prevent ticketless fans entering the ground, may be
      by stopping them at some distance from it.       There will be a
strong police presence at the ground:   over 450 officers from
the local force, 14 mounted officers from    the Greater
Manchester Police and the Merseyside police helicopter.


4.   Representatives from Mr Anderton's ACPO Sub-Committee on
Hooliganism in Sporting Events will attend to monitor the
situation, as will Superintendent Appleby of NFIU.




                               J L GODDARD
