                                                                  i ' t L : 01 "1 S i i 0 5 ) 3               P. 001

                                                                                                                0
                                                                                 C&fa jri, 'Co




                  /vlY TRANSMISSION
(
                   Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
        Attorney General's Chambers, 9 Buckingham Gate
                                    London SW1E 6JP

                           TEL:       0171 828 1721/1581
                           FAX:       0171 828 0593

    to:                             Pom !          ^f/ ______
    ORGANISATION: _________          iL o         C jfn .__________
    FACSIMILE NO:                    <#7-3          c?   73   q


    FROM:                  S T E P H E N YVOOLER

    SUPPLEMENTARY MESSAGE: ______________________




    PATE:   tA A l          TIME:      /J v K ,          No. O F PACES:                       ^ __________
                                                                                       (including this one)
    Hurd copy to follow:    VS32NO
                                                                                        t. U U J




                                                                          ANNEXD

                                   HILLSBOROUGH


    The disaster at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 and the handling of its
    afterm ath by the authorities continues to cause dissatisfaction am ongst the
    relatives of many of the deceased who have formed the Hillsborough Family
    Support Group. They do not appear to have any clear objectives and their
    dissatisfaction focuses on the fact th at individual police officers have not, in
    their view, been called adequately to account for their negligence/incompetence
    in allowing the disaster to occur, perceived insensitive and inadequate
    response to the tragic events combined with a belief that there h as been a
    substantial “cover-up" notably in relation to the Inquest. There is also concern
    about the state of the civil law which enabled certain police officers whose
    health was adversely affected to secure compensation w hilst leaving the
    families whose experience was more ’rem ote’ w ithout compensation.

    The activity of the Hillsborough Family Support Group increased m arkedly
^   after the "Hillsborough" TV docum entary dram a broadcast in December and
    they have m ade calls for a further public inquiry, a reopening of the crim inal
    investigation and a fresh Inquest. The latter affects the Attorney General m ost
    directly but he also has an interest in the second by virtue of his
    superintendence of th e Crown Prosecution Service.

    The Inquest in relation to the Hillsborough disaster concerned th e deaths of a
    total of 95 people and w as conducted against the background of a full public
    inquiry conducted by Lord Ju stice Taylor (as he then was). The position was
    further complicated as the result of the interim Taylor Report because the DPP
    advised th a t there should be a criminal investigation into police conduct. That
    was undertaken by the West Midlands Police. The Coroner therefore decided
    th a t the Inquest should proceed in three phases:

    (i)     Inquests on the deceased were formally opened on or about 19 April
            1989 and th en adjourned. This is quite normal.
                                                      1
    (ii)    Between 1 May and 4 May 1 9 |§ )th e Coroner held a series of "mini-
            Inquests" covering the death of each victim. Lord Ju stice Taylor had
            delivered his interim report in August 1989 which dealt w ith events at
            Hillsborough (but not on the wider issues relating to safety a t sports
            grounds) and the criminal investigation was in progress. It w as clear in
            May 1990 th a t it was likely to be some time before the DPP reached any
            decisions.

    (iii)   The evidence taken at the "mini-inquests" was heard by th e jury. The
            Inquest was then adjourned until November 1990 when evidence relating
            to the incident as a whole was heard. The ju ry returned verdicts of
            "accidental Death".
In deciding to proceed by way of "mini-inquests" the Coroner appears to have
been motivated by an appreciation of the desire of families to know the details
of the fate of their loved ones. He decided to hear evidence in relation to each
deceased confined to the statutory questions of "who" the deceased was and
"when" and ’where" he m et his death. He indicated th at he would postpone all
wider investigation to the further question of "how" the deceased came by their
deaths until after the decision by th e DPP on w hether to initiate crim inal
proceedings.

During the "mini-inquests" the Coroner took evidence from the pathologist and
the balance of the remaining evidence in two parts. First, a sum m ary was
received from a police officer of evidence of eye w itnesses of the movements of
the deceased on the day of the disaster, the sightings m ade of them at the time
of the fatal crush, the finding of their bodies on the pitch, any attem pts a t
resuscitation m ade, the taking of their bodies to the tem porary m ortuary in the
gym and the certification of death. Generally, he took no direct oral evidence.
Second, a police officer took the ju ry through all the docum entary evidence
relating to the individual such as sightings of them on photographs and videos
recovered from the media plus positions m arked on plans by various
witnesses.

The Coroner proceeded for the purposes of considering availability of verdicts
on the basis of pathological evidence which indicated th a t all of those who
direct would alm ost certainly have perished by 3 .15pm. He did not however
decline to receive evidence relating to m atters arising after 3 ,15pm. Indeed, he
w as careful to ensure th a t all evidence about w hat happened to individual
deceased persons was drawn together and presented to the jury.

The form of these "mini-inquests" w as unorthodox and does not appear to
comply with Rule 37 of the Coroner’s Rules. Rule 37 requires th a t before
docum entary evidence is p ut before an Inquest the evidence should be
sum m arised and the consent of the interested parties sought. However, such
an irregularity does not, of itself, render a fresh Inquest necessary in the
interests of Ju stice b ut it is one of the factors to be considered in m aking a
decision on the application.

There have been three formal applications u nder Section 13 of the Coroners
Act 1988 and th e question of a fresh Inquest h as been raised in m ore general
term s on a num ber of occasions. Certain of the families obtained leave to
bring judicial review proceedings and there was a full hearing before th e
Divisional Court. Judicial review refused in November 1993 and the judgm ent
of the Directional Court echoed m any of the points which h ad influenced the
Law Officers’ decisions.

The m ain planks of the applications under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988
and the judicial review application were the "mini-inquest'' procedure adopted
by the Coroner and his decision not to leave "lack of care" to th e ju iy as a
possible verdict. The Divisional Court endorsed the decision of th e Coroner to
proceed by way of "mini-inquest" and his handling of the so called "3.15pm
cut-of point".
As to the verdict of "lack of care” the Divisional Court held that th at would not
have been appropriate in the present case as the verdict was concerned with
the failure to provide care In the form of food, clothing, shelter etc and not with
carelessness. The Coroner was right not to treat the Inquest as a public
enquiry into the responses of the emergency services to the disaster - th at had
all effectively been covered in the public enquiry conducted by Lord Taylor.

So far as the 3.15pm cut-off part was concerned, the court focused on the
purpose of ordering a new Inquest to conduct a further exam ination of the last
m inutes of the deceaseds' lives and doubted th at anything would be learned
and th at the process would be a very harrowing one. The Court also
em phasised th a t 4 l/z years had already passed since the tragedy had occurred
and th at it would be wrong to ask w itnesses to come along some five years
later to try to cast th eir m inds back to events they m ust be trying to forget.

In the light of the above judgm ent, the Attorney General stated in an
Adjournment Debate tabled by Sir Malcolm Thornton MP on 26 October 1994
th a t it "will require really cogent and persuasive argum ents if they are now to
result in an order by the High Court th a t there should be a fresh Inquest".

Special m ention should be made of the case of Kevin Williams, The first
Section 13 application by his parents was m ade in Jan u ary 1992 followed by
a further request in April 1992. On th a t latter occasion it w as m ade in
conjunction with five other applicants. This was carefully considered,
especially in relation to Kevin Williams, and consent refused in A ugust 1992.
The application in relation to Kevin Williams w as renewed in Ja n u a ry 1996 b u t
declined. This h as proved the m ost unsatisfactory because th e evidential
position was confused at the Inquest and h as subsequently become even more
confused. New evidence has been p u t forward on at least three occasions
which h as confused th e m atter further. In particular, there has been evidence
suggesting th a t Kevin Williams displayed sighs of life w hilst receiving attention
on the pitch and in the m ortuary uttered sounds which was interpreted as
words (ie after 3 .15pm). The pathological evidence - and the Coroner took the
trouble to obtain a second opinion - was unequivocal th at he could not have
been alive a t the stage when those events occurred. Most im portantly, the
uncertainties flowing from the evidence and the changing positions of
witnesses do not appear to have any bearing on any issue. The case of Kevin
Williams has however been the focus of the attention of those cam paigning for
a fresh Inquest.

Following the HV dram a docum entary referred to above, num erous
representations were received b u t no actual request under Section 13 of the
Coroners Act 1988. LSLO officials viewed the video which contained no
evidence or inform ation which would have affected the issues relevant to the
Section 13 applications which had already been considered. Consideration
was also given to a substantial bundle of docum ents (and accom panying video
tapes) provided Uf th e Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in response to a list
of questions p u t to him by Home Office officials reflecting points m ade in the
dram a docum entary. All those points related to the conduct of th e police, in
relation to their short-com ings in the policing of the event as a whole or their
failure to response quickly and effectively to the disaster and none had any
bearing on issues which arose in consideration of the Section 13 applications.
                   . . . v ,\.T s,t   'JL           T E L - O i ' l   8 - ^   0 5 5 3      P. 005




    Against th a t background the present position of the Law Officers rem ains th a t
    there is no basis for reconsideration of the decisions already taken b u t th a t if
    relatives or others were to make a fresh application under Section 13 based on
    further evidence, th a t would be considered carefully in the u su al way. That
    rem ains the position.




(
