                                              HOME OFFICE
                                       Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                              Direct line: 01-273 3743
                                             Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference:    POL/89 850/4/8
                  LS/G17 8/LTB/AB
Your reference:




   L T Barnfield Esq LLB
   Solicitor to the West
    Midlands Police Authority
   Civic House
   Great Charles Street
   Birmingham
   B3 3HN                                    13 June 1989




   HILLSBOROUGH: COST OF INVESTIGATIONS BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
   Thank you for your letter of 8 June about the power to meet the
   costs of the investigations by West Midlands police into the
   Hillsborough disaster.
   We agree that the assistance being given by your force to South
   Yorkshire police is probably not mutual aid under Section 14 of the
   Police Act 1964 and that this assistance is not covered by the
   Police Act.   However, in the absence of any statutory provision,
   liability for the costs of the police investigations seems to us to
   rest with the body who instigated those investigations.
   On this basis we have suggested that the South Yorkshire Police
   Authority should reimburse the additional costs incurred by your
   authority in investigating the Hillsborough tragedy.       In other
   types of investigations by one force on behalf of another, costs
   are met by the force which requested assistance initially.

   I accept that one difficulty facing us at present is the reluctance
   of the South Yorkshire Police Authority to accept liability.      I
   hope, however, that we can find a solution to this when Lord
   Ferrers meets a delegation from the South Yorkshire Police
Authority on 20 June.    We will write to you again as soon as
possible after that.
We are very anxious for the question of costs to be settled as soon
as possible.   I agree with you that recourse to the courts should
be avoided s it would clearly be better to sort the matter out in
the further discussions to which I have referred.



                                                            V




                                         M J ADDISON
                                                                                  {WtO<£>c&
WMPfl
                                                              9 Jun 89 10:23 No. 004 P7T>2



                                WEST MIDLANDS POLICE AUTHORITY

   L .TBARNFIELD LL.B                                    L egal & V aluation
   Solicitor to the Authority
                                                         S e r v ic e s D e p a r tm e n t
   My Reference         LS/G178/LTB/AB                   Civic House
                                                         Great Charles Street
                                                         Birmingham B3 3HN
   Your Reference                                        Telephone 021*200-8300

                                                         8th June, 1989




        ■&<>*>   W                £®Vi |
    R l SBOROUOH : POWER TO MEET COSTS

   Thank you for your letter of 1st June, 1989* which I received on my return from
   leave.

   At the meeting between the West Midlands Police Authority and Lord Ferrers on
   25th Hay, you will recall that a number of points were raised but I feel that 1
   should begin by returning to the central issue in this matter, namely, the
   status of Hr. Dear's involvement from which all other difficulties arise.

   You will know that I take the view that Mr. Dear is involved either under
   Setion 14 of the Police Act, 196*4, under the "mutual aid" provisions or under
   the public inquiry provisions of the Home Office.

   If Mr. Dear's involvement stems from Section 14, then he is necessarily under
   the direction and control of the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. If his
   involvement is tinder the public Inquiry provisions, then he is under the
   direction and control of Lord Justice Taylor.

   Mr Dear has made the point throughout that he would not have agreed to become
   involved if this was to be viewed as a case of "mutual aid". In his telephone
   conversations with Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Constabulary prior to
   agreeing to take part in this matter, he went to some trouble to ensure that he
   would be acting under the direction and control of Lord Justice Taylor and he
   has confirmed this with Lord Justice Taylor on a number of occasions. He has
   also obtained confirmation from the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that the
   involvement of his Force in this inquiry is not under the provisions of "mutual
   aid", and the Clerk to the West Midlands Police Authority has spoken to
   officers of the South Yorkshire Police Authority and received & note of their
   meeting with you on 18th May and a letter from the Clerk and Financial Adviser
   to the South Yorkshire Police Authority of 7th June all of which indicate that
   that Authority does not view Mr. Dear's involvement as coming within the scope
   of "mutual aid" but under Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.


                                                          Cont/
     >ftL                                                9 Jun 89 10:23 No.004 P.03




 8th June, 1989                         -2-




 You yourself acknowledged at the meeting on the 25th May (and I understand in
 your meeting with South Yorkshire on 18th May) that the provisions of Section
 14 do not apply. You stated that the involvement of the West Midlands Police *
 Force was "something akin to mutual aid" but, as I said to you, X know of no
 provision which embraces that particular phrase.

 You will be aware that Section 4 of the 1964 Act imposes a duty on Police
 Authorities to secure an adequate and efficient Police Force for their areas.
 That provision does not empower the West Midlands Police Authority to incur
   'tenditure for the provision of services for the benefit of either the South
^prkshire Police Authority or the Home Office public inquiry.

 I set this out at some length because it leaves the Chief Constable of the West
 Midlands with considerable practical problems.

 The South Yorkshire Police Authority does not accept that Section 14 or any
 other "mutual aid*’ provisions apply (whatever they might be) and declines to
 pay any bills in respect of the involvement of the West Midlands Forces The
 West Midlands Police Authority has no power to pay such bills: The Home Office
 denies any responsibility for such bills and suggests that the West Midlands
 Police Authority pays them (albeit that such action would be ultra vires) and
 then asks South Yorkshire for reimbursement.

 Perhaps the point can best be illustrated by taking a particular example - the
 lease of the office block which Mr. Dear has had to occupy in Sheffield in
 order to conduct his enquiries and to be seen to be independent of the South
 Yorkshire Police Force.

 For the reasons set out above, the South Yorkshire Police Authority, the West
 Midlands Police Authority, and the Home Office are all declining to enter into
 the lease. Mr. Dear has necessarily incurred the cost and 1 agree that the
 Police Force cannot now deny liability for the costs incurred - albeit that
 such liability arises out of the request of the Home Office.

 To that extent, the advice given by your Legal Adviser's Branch Is correct, but
 it does not address the question of how Mr. Dear gets reimbursed when none of
 the other parties involved accepts liability.

 If the Home Office continues to maintain its position in this matter, then it
 seems that the only way forward is to ask for a writ to be served so that all
 parties can be joined in and the courts can decide upon this issue, Z find
 that solution unpalatable in all the circumstances and one which I believe can
 and should be avoided if Mr. Dear's account of the discussions with the Home
 Office and Lord Justice Taylor are correct. (X, of course, believe that they
 are and no one has yet to deny that what he stated took place is true).



                                                    Cont/...
          dflL                                                     9 Jun 89 10:23 No 004 P.04




1


    8th June, 1989



                            . « , .h    ▼ gmgf acif you to place this letter before
    In light of the above, I feel t      whether they disagree with any of the
    your Legal Adviser's Branch and see "hethe^                  t0 hearing from you to
    submissions I wake. If they do n ,          reimbursed in full by the Home
    the effect that any costs incurred will be           orocessing of the accounts
    Office and that you will                          Authority? ?f Jour Legal
    with the Treasurer to the West Midlands Police A u t n o ^ y ^ rhapg the individual
    A_- User's Branch disagree in any inspect              the matter and, hopefully,
    f i n n e d could telephone « .0 tta t we                                     for end
    " s o l v e i t over the telephone *»     u   ln a n goolJ fa ith in connection
     S S T S /S S S                             ^ . S l i S e t p ossib le d ste.


     iis^rjarra.’ss
                            %


                                  Solicitor to the Authority




       M J Addison
       Hone Office
       Queen Anne's Gate
