INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH               The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate
                                            London SW1H 9AT
                                            01-273 2577/3602/2370


Louis Blom-Cooper Esq QC
1 Salisbury Square
LONDON
EC4Y 8AE

                                            Date
                                             14 September 1989




                 /

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


I gave Lord Justice Taylor an account of our conversation on 6
September about the complex issues concerning perimeter fences
and their effect on audience participation in sporting events.   I
mentioned to him, in particular, the points you suggested about
problems arising outside rather than inside the ground, the
attitude of youngsters to authority, and the suggestion that for
the duration of matches the grounds should be put into the total
control of the police.  I also put to him your point about the
difference between small and large grounds and crowds, with
particular reference to the arguments about all seater stadia.   I
mentioned to him that you would quite like to have a discussion
with him about this at some point.

Lord Justice Taylor was grateful for your thoughts.  He would be
quite happy to have a discussion at some point, but wondered if
you would feel able (and have the time) to put some of your
thoughts down on paper for him first. As you know, he finds this
the most convenient way of assembling the evidence and material
for Part II of his Inquiry, at least at this stage.  If you felt
you could do that, I am sure he would find it most helpful.  If
you would like to have another word about this, or if I myself
can be of any help, do please get in touch.

Kind regards.

                                                          /


                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry
