 From: M rs Sue McDougall                                     cc Mr Maclean
       Operational Policing                                      Mr Boys Smith
       Policy Unit                                               Mr Pugh
       Room 527, QAG                                             Mr Granatt
       * 273 - 2621                                              Mr Rock
       17 March 1997                                             Miss Whetstone




Home Secretary

HILLSBOROUGH: CORRESPONDENCE FROM VICTIMS’ FAMILIES

I enclose a draft reply to Mrs R Robinson who was among the families o f the
Hillsborough victims that you met at the House o f Commons following the
adjournment debate on Hillsborough.

2. You asked to answer personally any correspondence which we received from
relatives o f the Hillsborough victims following the broadcast o f the television drama.




                                                     Sue McDougall
 Mrs R Robinson




 Thank you for your faxed letter of 7 March enclosing a copy o f one dated 24
 December about the tragic events at Hillsborough and the calls for the inquiry to be
 reopened. I am sorry that you did not receive a reply to your earlier letter which I am
afraid we have been unable to trace.


I would like to say first o f all how saddened I was by this terrible disaster. In the
House o f Commons I gave an undertaking to consider carefully the representations
that have been made to reopen the public inquiry. I emphasised that I would not take
the decision to reopen the inquiry lightly but would need to be convinced that it would
be in the public interest to do so.


I explained that in coming to a decision I would consider whether there is any new
evidence, and, if so, whether that evidence appeared to be o f such significance that
had it been put before Lord Taylor or the coroner, either the outcome o f the Taylor
inquiry or the verdict o f the jury would have been different.


I will reach a decision on any further action to be taken as soon as I have been able to
consider all the issues. Meanwhile I would like you to know that my thoughts will be
with you and all the bereaved families.
         7th March 1997


      Dear Mr Howard


      I wrote to you on 24th December re: Hillsborough. I have received no reply, nor indeed an
      acknowledgement o f my letter.

     I am most concerned about this state o f affairs and would appreciate a response. I enclose a
     copy o f the letter I sent you in case it has been mislaid.

     I look forward to a swift response.


     Mrs R Robinson (Mrs)




? MA R    ’97   15:43                                                0151   951   3934     P A G E .002
o//0j/ijd7    14:47      0151-351-3334
                                                            HSE PEPSOMMEL
                                                                                                        PAGE




     24th December 1996


     Dear Mr Howard,



•
      I am writing as one o f the families who you were kind enough to see in the House of
     Commons. May I say, I felt you were very sincere in what you said to us. I thank you for this,
     police'^ 'dent^ myse*f to y°» as       ^dy who.first spoke to you regarding police investigating


     I took careful note o f your speech in the house, when you rightly said we had already had four
     enquiries. You said at one point, that all the evidence was available to all the bodies concerned
     during those enquiries. Our argument is, that although it was available it wasn't all used in
     those enquiries. The police carefully selected what was used, and did not bring all the evidence
     forward^ Likewise with the coroners inquest, He said to me on a local radio phone in; he had
     thousands o f witnesses to call on, but he selected the witnesses to be called, ( possibly under
     police pressure), and most o f the witnesses were pro-police. One particular witness (the so
     called land lord) who wasn't a land lord at all, was found to be a complete liar, and the jury
     were told to dismiss his evidence a t a later date, A few fans were caJled to. give their evidence,
    mainly young lads (my sons friend amongst them) they were systematically torn apart by a "
    team o f barristers, as if they were on trial, many were in tears, as they felt they had let the
    victims down. This was supposed to be a inquest, not a trial. I knew o f many professional
    people, who swore statements to the police, but were never called to give evidence at any of
    the enquiries.

   Talking about the inquest, yet again, the cut off time o f 3.15 was totally inappropriate,
   therefore invalidating the inquests. How can an inquest be legal, when many o f the victims
   were still alive up to 4 pm (evidence can be supplied)
   Talking about the disaster itself, how can the police justify stopping ambulances and
   paramedics to reach dying people. The police said they were fighting yes - fighting for their
   lives, why were they denied help ?

   Whilst this was going on, lines o f police officers were on the pitch doing nothing - or
   according to them separating the supporters. It was the supporters who saved lives, and
   sprang into action immediately to help. How dare the Sun newspaper say otherwise,but then
   the evidence for those reports came from the police..

   .Are you also aware that when some o f the perimeter gates burst open under pressure, the
   police offers pushed the people back in again, and locked them in. How many died because of
   this ? One man, pleading for help as his young son died in his arms, was ignored.

   As the disaster unfolded, the police realising their complete lack o f control, immediately began
   to shift the blame. Alcohol tests were taken on all of the victims, even children. Why weren't
 the police tested for alcohol? It might have explained their incompetence. Many were known
 to be in the hospitality suite, and one particular senior officer was thought to have a drink
 problem. (Check this out) In a car accident, who do they breathalise, the driver or the victim?
 Later on, about 5 p.m. many o f the people searching for their loved ones (knowing they were
 dead in the gym) having been told this by fans who had carried them there, were sent on a wild
 goose chase to hospitals, mortuaries etc.; this gave the police time to get their 'stories straight,
 and to make sure nothing derogatory was put in their notebooks. Our loved ones were just
 laid on the floor without dignity. Why were they not sent to hospital, or the new health centre?
Why was a disaster plan not put into action? Could it be that it would have uncovered the
truth. Within minutes o f identifying my sons body, my husband and I were interrogated by the
police. We had committed no crime, neither had my son. The only kindness shown to us on
that terrible night was from a social worker, and the ordinary citizens o f Sheffield. How can
you call this British Justice, it makes me ashamed to be British. In what other occupation can
people be so negligent, as to cause the death o f 96 people, and be allowed to retire to avoid
disciplinary action, plus to get their full pension and walk into another job.My son was a 17
year old hard working apprentice,he had never been in trouble, and we loved him dearly along
with our four other lovely children. His death was not an accident, and I will never accept it
was. My son was in the care o f the South Yorkshire police, and through recklessness they
failed in their duty o f care to my son, and the other 95 victims.

I would like you to acknowledge you have read this letter, because if you read it, you cannot
possibly say there is to be no further enquiry. I do have faith in you, because you came across
as a very sincere gentleman. There have been many miscarriages o f justice during the last
decade, mainly caused by police perverting the course o f justice, this is just one more. Please
see that it is put right

               I look forward to your reply


                                                       Mrs R Robinson
