                                                                       H erries Road,
                                                                       Sheffield S5 7AU
         N o r t h e /r n. .G.e n e r a l
            h o s p i t a l   n   h   s   t r u s t                    Telephone
                                                                       (0114)243 4343

          JW/JB
                          /                                            Minicom
                                                                       (0114)271 5896
          2 September 1997                                             Facsimile
                                                                       (0114) 256 0472
          Mr C F Bone
          Secretary to the Scrutiny
          The Hillsborough Scrutiny
          Room 528
          St A n n e 's Gate
          LONDON
          SW1H 9AT

          Dear Sir

             am a Consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine at                                      the
          Northern General Hospital NHS Trust, Sheffield, and was                                     the
          Consultant who co-ordinated the hospital's response to                                      the
          Hillsborough incident on 15 April 1989.

          I have received correspondence from Dr Ed Walker, copy attached,
          requesting access to the medical records of all patients who
          attended at the hospital on the day of the tragedy and you will
          see from my response that I feel unable, at the present time, to
          accede to this request.   You will also note I am uneasy about
          giving Dr Walker access to all patient records when he was not
          involved in the care of many of these patients.

           I am writing to advise you of this correspondence and also to
           stress that neither myself or the Trust wishes to place any
           impediment int he way of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith1s scrutiny and
           indeed on the contrary I would be more than willing to assist in
           whatever way I can, having previously reviewed all these cases
           in anticipation that they might be needed by Lord Justice
           Taylor's inquiry and thereafter the Coroner's inquests.

           I am unclear at this stage what constitutes the "fresh evidence"
           referred to in Dr Walker's letter and whether individual patient
           medical records will be of any significance, however it would
           greatly assist both mine and the Tru s t 's position to have some
           formal indication about the requirement for access by Lord
           Justice Stuart-Smith to confidential patient records.    If there
           is an independent medical expert assisting the Scrutiny, I would
           be happy to liaise directly with him/her.

           Please let me know if I can by of any further assistance.

           Yours sincerely




           J WARDROPE
           CONSULTANT IN ACCIDENT AND EMERGENCY MEDICINE

           encs

PD 499                                    A N A T IO N A L H E A L T H SERVICE T R U S T HO SPITA L
 D r . E d W alker

                                                                           D ew sb u r y T O 17




 5 August 1997

  Mr. James Wardope,
 Jionsultant, Accident & Emergency Dept.,
^Brorthem General Hospital,
  Sheffield S5 7AU.

 Dear Mr. Wardrope,

 It seems I may be asked to contribute in some way to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's scrutiny of tlie fresh
 evidence surrounding the Hillsborough football stadium disaster of tke 15tk of April 1989. L should
 tkerefore like to arrange an appointment in order to view, and make salient copies of, tke medical records
 of all patients wko arrived at tke Nortkem General Hospital from this site on that day. It would be
 kelpful if tke records could be arranged into tkose tkat died wkilst in tke kospital, and tkose tkat were
 disckarged alive, but if tkis is not possible it would be easy to organise tkis myself.

 If I am called upon, it would certainly be useful to kave seen tke notes of tkose patients that I tended.
 Obvoously I should not like to have to tell Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that I had been refused access any
 medical record.

  Please let me know if it will be necessary to obtain next-of-kin permission, and I shall do so. I shall
  telephone you in the next few days to arrange the details.


  Yours sincerely,




  D r. E d W alker
