                                   cc   Mr Storr
                                        Ms Snow
                                        Ms Spencer
                                        Mr Yates
                                        Mr Angel
                                        Mr Boys Smith
                                        Mr Cdgb^ll
                                        Miss Edwards
                                        Mr Fulton
                                        Mr Goddard
                                        Miss Goose
                                        Mr Moorey
                                        Mr Simmonds
                                        Mr J B Taylor




Mr Rhodes
 *
Taylor Report:   New Offences


As you may know from Mr Jones, at yesterday's Home Secretary's
morning meeting Ministers concluded that the Taylor offences
were, on reflection, matters best dealt with in Government
legislation rather than to be left to the uncertainties of
Private Members' Bill procedures.  I was invited to explore
with the business managers the possibility of preparing a
Government Bill to enact the Taylor offences, to be introduced
if space should unexpectedly appear late in the timetable for
the 1990-91 Session.

2. By way of background, the business managers are planning
on the basis that all the major Bills next session should be
through by mid-July, with a limited spill-over requirement
represented by one or two non-critical items which could be
dropped or might be enacted swiftly by agreement if necessary.
Despite strenuous efforts by the Lord President to curtail the
size of next Session's legislative programme the forthcoming
programme is not appreciably lighter than the current session.
You may also be aware of the continuing dialogue with the
Lord President over the scope of next session's
Criminal Justice Bill. Against this backcloth, I raised with
Mrs Bailey (QL Secretariat) the latest proposal for a short
Bill on the Taylor offences to be worked up in readiness for
any opening in next session's programme. Understandably, the
proposal did not receive an enthusiastic welcome and, to be
fair, it does seem unlikely at this stage that a Bill on
Taylor could be accommodated in next Session's programme.

3. Despite these reservations (and on the assumption that
Ministers will wish to pursue the possibility of a short Bill
next Session) Mrs Bailey suggested that the best approach
might be for the Home Secretary to seek any outstanding policy
clearances and for him to suggest to the Lord President that
E.R.
   the issue should be reviewed early next year to see whether
   there might be an opportunity to introduce the Bill at short
   notice.  If you are content with this approach, a draft letter
   would need to be prepared, for issue from the Home Secretary
   to the Lord President (as Chairman of QL) along these lines.
   H clearance would, of course, also be required, in order to
   expedite the drafting of instructions.

   4.  Finally, Ministers had, as you know, earlier concluded
   that the Taylor offences were not suitable for inclusion in
   the forthcoming Criminal Justice Bill but might well be
   candidates for the Criminal Law Bill now planned for 1991/92.
   If we are to progress the Taylor recommendations to a quicker
   timetable than earlier envisaged I would suggest that the
   letter to the Lord President should list some of the benefits
   to be secured by moving at this pace.




                                             B E KINNEY
                                             Parliamentary Clerk




   Private Office
   1 August 1990
